1

INTRODUCTION
This translation of the Scriptures uses a number of
words and names that may be unfamiliar to some.
THE NAME OF THE ALMIGHTY
The Name of the Creator, YHWH known as the
'tetragrammaton' is rendered using the ancient
Hebrew letters: yod, hay, waw, hay in the Dead Sea
Scrolls. The practice of copying the Scriptures into
modern Hebrew was applied by the scribes, while the
Name of YHWH was rendered in the Paleo Hebrew
script – HWHY. This English translation uses the same
script throughout. It is believed to be the form used by
HWHY Himself when He gave the Commandments in
stone
to
Mosheh.
THE NAME OF HA'MASHIAḤ
The Name of the Messiah which means 'Yah is
salvation' is spelled in Hebrew: yod, hay, waw, shin,
ayin - spoken and spelled similar to Yahoshua, the
successor to Mosheh and is also rendered in the Paleo
Hebrew Script - [FWHY throughout the Renewed
Covenant.
FOOTNOTES
In this translation you will find no comments or
footnotes! It is vitally important that if you do not
understand a certain issue from Scripture that you ask
HWHY to teach you through the Ruaḥ ha'Qodesh (see
1 Jn 2:27, 1 Co 2:13) He is your teacher - not man.
THE PRONUNCIATION OF NAMES
All the names throughout this translation have been
transliterated to give an accurate pronunciation in the
Hebrew language. The following table gives the vocal
sounds necessary for correct pronunciation.
2

PRONUNCIATION GUIDE
a - äh in ärm
ḇ - bh v as in vet
e - eh as in elm
ḏ - dh th as in them
i - ee as in ēel
ĕ- ey as in eight
o - oh as in on
ḡ - gh The ‘ḡ’ is pronounced as
u - oo as in üno
a soft aspirated g sound.
ḥ - (ch) The 'ḥ' and 'ḵ' are pronounced as
ḵ - (kh) the 'ch' in the German composer
Bach, or the Scottish Loch, like a
guttural, aspirated h sound.

OTHER USE OF LANGUAGE
The Torah commands not to speak the names of false
mighty ones (Exo 23:13, Jos 23:7, Psa 16:4), and in
an effort to reduce the number of English words
derived from pagan deities or pagan titles, especially
when pertaining to His Bĕn and His people, YAH
Scriptures contains a number of Hebrew words, also
reflecting the Hebrew origin of Scripture. As these
terms will be foreign to many, a GLOSSARY is
included to familiarize the user with these new words.

To purchase a copy or to download the free android
application go to YahScriptures.com
For questions or concerns please email
info@yahscriptures.com
Revision 6
1st Edition – 2023

3

MATMONIM
(APOCRYPHA)
Title
1st AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH
2nd AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH
ḤANOḴ
THE WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM
WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU
RE’UḆĔN
SHIM’ON
LĔWI
YAHUḎAH
DAN
NAPHTALI
GAḎ
ASHĔR
YISSASḴAR
ZEḆULUN
YOSĔPH
BINYAMIN
YOḆELIM
YASHAR
TEHILLIM ADDITIONS
ḤAḴMAH
WISDOM / SIRACH
YAHUḎITH
TOḆIYAH
BARUḴ
LETTER OF YIRMEYAHU
PRAYER OF MENASHSHEH
AZARYAH
DANI’ĔL ADDITIONS
SHOSHANNAH
HAḎASSAH
1 ESDRAS
2 ESDRAS
MAQQAḆIM 1
MAQQAḆIM 2
BOOK OF YOḤANAN
BOOK OF KALIEDY

Name
ADAM AND EVE 1
ADAM AND EVE 2
ENOCH
THE WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM
WRITINGS OF ELIJAH
REUBEN
SIMEON
LEVI
JUDAH
DAN
NAPHTALI
GAD
ASHER
ISSACHAR
ZEBULUN
JOSPEH
BENJAMIN
JUBILEES
JASHER
ADDITIONS TO PSALMS
WISDOM OF SOLOMON
ECCLESIASTICUS
JUDITH
TOBIT
BARUCH
LETTER OF JEREMIAH
PRAYER OF MANASSEH
PRAYER OF AZARYAH
BEL AND THE DRAGON
SUSANNA
ADDITIONS TO ESTHER
1 EZRA
2 EZRA
1 MACCABEES
2 MACCABEES
BOOK OF JOHN
BOOK OF NATSARIM

Glossary Weights and Measurements

4

Page
5
96
132
239
337
354
360
365
378
392
397
403
408
413
418
424
436
443
589
1057
1067
1108
1219
1255
1267
1289
1295
1297
1302
1306
1311
1320
1358
1428
1509
1565
1578

Hebrew Aleph-Bet Timeline Maps

ADAM AND EVE 1

THE FIRST BOOK OF AḎAM
AND ḤAWWAH
‫ ספר אדם וחוה א‬A hWXW mdA Rps

1 On the third day, Elohim planted the garden in the
east of the earth, on the border of the world in the
eastward direction toward and beyond the rising sun.
There one finds nothing but water that encompasses
the whole world and reaches to the borders of the
shamayim.
2 And to the north of the garden there is a sea of
water, clear and pure to the taste, unlike anything else;
so that, through the clearness one may look into the
depths of the earth.
3 And when a man washes himself in it, he becomes
perfectly clean and perfectly white, even if he were
dark.
4 And Elohim created that sea of His own good
pleasure, for He knew what would come of the man He
would make; so that after he had left the garden,
because of his transgression, men should be born in
the earth. Among them are righteous ones who will die,
whose souls Elohim would raise at the last day when
all of them will return to their flesh, bathe in the water
of that sea, and repent of their sins.
5 But when Elohim caused Aḏam to go out of the
garden. He did not place him on the border of it
northward. This was so that he and Ḥawwah would not
be able to go near to the sea of water where they could
wash themselves in it and be cleansed from their sins
and erase the transgression they had committed. So
that they be no longer reminded of it in the thought of
their punishment.
6 As to the southern side of the garden, Elohim did
not want Aḏam to live there either, because, when the
wind blew from the north, it would bring to him, on that
southern side, the delicious smell of the trees of the
garden.
5

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

So Elohim did not put Aḏam there. This was so that
he would not be able to smell the sweet smell of those
trees and forget his transgression, and find consolation
for what he had done by taking delight in the smell of
the trees and yet not be cleansed from his
transgression.
8 Also, because Elohim is merciful and of great pity,
and governs all things in a way that He alone knows.
He made our father Aḏam to live in the western border
of the garden because on that side the land is very
wide.
9 And Elohim commanded him to live there in a cave
in a rock. This was the Cave of Treasures, which is
below the garden.
7

2 But when our father Aḏam, and Ḥawwah, went out
of the garden, they walked the ground on their feet, not
knowing where they were going.
2 And when they came to the opening of the gate of
the garden and saw the land spread before them
widely, covered with stones large and small, and with
sand, they feared and trembled, and fell on their faces
from the fear that came over them and they were as
though they were dead.
3 Until this time they had been in the garden land,
beautifully planted with all manner of trees and they
now saw themselves in a strange land, which they did
not know and had never seen.
4 When they were in the garden they were filled with
the grace of a bright nature, and they had hearts not
turned toward earthly things.
5 Therefore Elohim had pity on them; and when He
saw them fallen before the gate of the garden, He sent
His Word to our father Aḏam, and to Ḥawwah, and
raised them from their fallen state.

3 Elohim said to Aḏam, “I have ordained days and
years on this earth, and you and your descendants
shall live and walk in them until the days and years are
fulfilled. Then I shall send the Word that created you
6

ADAM AND EVE 1

and against which you have transgressed the Word
that made you come out of the garden and that raised
you when you were fallen.
2 Yes, this is the Word that will again save you when
the five and a half days are fulfilled.”
3 But when Aḏam heard these words from Elohim,
and of the great five and a half days, he did not
understand the meaning of them.
4 For Aḏam was thinking there would be only five and
a half days for him until the end of the world.
5 And Aḏam cried and prayed to Elohim to explain it
to him.
6 Then Elohim in his mercy for Aḏam who was made
after His own image and likeness explained to him that
these were 5,000 and 500 years and how the One
would then come and save him and his descendants.
7 But before that, Elohim had made this Covenant
with our father, Aḏam, in the same terms before he
came out of the garden, when he was by the tree
where Ḥawwah took of the fruit and gave it to him to
eat.
8 Because, when our father, Aḏam, came out of the
garden he passed by that tree and saw how Elohim
had changed the appearance of it into another form
and how it had shriveled.
9 And as Aḏam went to it he feared, trembled, and
fell down. But Elohim in His mercy lifted him up and
then made this Covenant with him.
10 Also, when Aḏam was by the gate of the garden he
saw the keruḇ with a sword of flashing fire in his hand,
and the keruḇ grew angry and frowned at him. Both
Aḏam and Ḥawwah became afraid of the keruḇ and
thought he meant to put them to death. So they fell on
their faces, trembling with fear.
11 But he had pity on them, and showed them mercy.
And turning from them went up to the shamayim, and
prayed unto HWHY, and said,
12 “HWHY, You sent me to watch at the gate of the
garden, with a sword of fire.
7

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But when Your servants, Aḏam and Ḥawwah, saw
me, they fell on their faces, and were as dead. O HWHY,
what shall we do to Your servants?”
14 Then Elohim had pity on them, and showed them
mercy, and sent His Messenger to keep the garden.
15 And the Word of HWHY came to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
and raised them up.
16 And HWHY said to Aḏam, “I told you that at the end
of the five and a half days I will send My Word and
save you.
17 Therefore, strengthen your heart and stay in the
Cave of Treasures, of which I have spoken to you
before.”
18 And when Aḏam heard this Word from Elohim he
was comforted with that which Elohim had told him. For
He had told him how He would save him.
13

4 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah cried for having come out of
the garden, which was their first home.
2 And indeed, when Aḏam looked at his flesh he saw
that it was altered, and he cried bitterly, he and
Ḥawwah cried, over what they had done. And they
walked and went gently down into the Cave of
Treasures.
3 And as they came to it, Aḏam cried over himself
and said to Ḥawwah, “Look at this cave that is to be
our prison in this world, and a place of punishment!
4 What is it compared with the garden? What is its
narrowness compared with the space of the other?
5 What is this rock compared of those groves? What
is the gloom of this cave, compared with the light of the
garden?
6 What is this overhanging ledge of rock that shelters
us compared with the mercy of HWHY that
overshadowed us?
7 What is the soil of this cave compared with the
garden land? Does this earth, scattered with stones,
compared to that garden planted with delicious fruit
trees?”
8

ADAM AND EVE 1

And Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Look at your eyes, and
at mine, which before beheld messengers praising in
the shamayim without ceasing.
9 Now we do not see as we did; our eyes have
become of flesh; they cannot see like they saw before.”
10 Aḏam said again to Ḥawwah, “What is our body
today, compared to what it was in former days, when
we lived in the garden?”
11 After this, Aḏam did not want to enter the cave
under the overhanging rock. He never wanted to enter
it again.
12 But he bowed to Elohim’s Commands; and said to
himself, “Unless I enter the cave, I shall again be a
transgressor.”
8

5 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah entered the cave, and
stood praying, in their own tongue, unknown to us, but
which they knew well.
2 And as they prayed, Aḏam raised his eyes and saw
the rock and the roof of the cave that covered him
overhead. This prevented him from seeing either the
shamayim or Elohim’s creatures. So he cried and beat
his chest hard, until he dropped, and was as dead.
3 And Ḥawwah sat crying; for she believed he was
dead.
4 Then she got up, spread her hands toward Elohim,
appealing to Him for mercy and pity, and said, “O
Elohim, forgive me my sin, the sin which I committed,
and don’t remember it against me.
5 For I alone caused Your servant to fall from the
garden into this condemned land; from light into this
darkness; and from the house of joy into this prison.
6 O Elohim, look at this Your servant fallen in this
manner, and bring him back to life, that he may cry and
repent of his transgression which he committed
through me.
7 Don’t take away his soul at this time; but let him live
so that he may stand after the measure of his
repentance, and do Your Will, as before his death.
9

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But if You do not bring him back to life, then, O
Elohim, take away my own soul, so that I will be like
him, and leave me not in this dungeon, alone; for I
could not stand alone in this world, without him.
9 For You, O Elohim, caused him to fall asleep, and
took a bone from his side, and placed the flesh back in
its place by Your divine power.
10 And You took me, the bone, and made me, a
woman, bright like him, with heart, reason, and
speech; and flesh like to his own; and You made me
after the likeness of his looks, by Your mercy and
power.
11 O HWHY, He and I are one, and You, O Elohim, are
our Creator, You are He who made us both in one day.
12 Therefore, O Elohim, give him life so that he may
be with me in this strange land while we live in it due
to our transgression.
13 But if You will not give him life, then take me, even
me, like him; that we both may die the same day.”
14 And Ḥawwah cried bitterly, and fell on our father,
Aḏam, because of her great sorrow.
8

6 But Elohim looked at them, for they had killed
themselves through great grief.
2 And He decided to raise them and comfort them.
3 Therefore, He sent His Word to them that they
should stand and be raised immediately.
4 And HWHY said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah, “You
transgressed of your own free will, until you came out
of the garden in which I had placed you.
5 Of your own free will have you transgressed
through your desire for divinity, greatness, and an
exalted state, such as I have; therefore I deprived you
of the bright nature which you had then, and I made
you come out of the garden to this land, rough and full
of trouble.
6 If
only you had not transgressed My
Commandment and had kept My Torah, and had not
eaten of the fruit of the tree which I told you not to come
10

ADAM AND EVE 1

near! And there were fruit trees in the garden better
than that one.
7 But the wicked Satan did not keep his faith and had
no good intent towards Me, and although I had created
him, he considered Me to be useless, and he sought
the Almighty for himself. For this I hurled him down
from the shamayim so that he could not remain in his
first estate. It was he who made the tree appear
pleasant to your eyes until you ate of it by believing his
words.
8 Thus have you transgressed My Commandment,
and therefore I have brought on you all these sorrows.
9 For I am Elohim the Creator, who, when I created
My creatures, did not intend to destroy them. But after
they had greatly roused My anger, I punished them
with grievous plagues until they repent.
10 But, if on the contrary they still continue hardened
in their transgression they shall be under a curse
forever.”

7 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah heard these words from
Elohim, they cried and sobbed even more, but they
strengthened their hearts in Elohim because they now
felt that HWHY was to them like a father and a mother;
and for this very reason, they cried before Him, and
sought mercy from Him.
2 Then Elohim had pity on them, and said: “O Aḏam,
I have made My Covenant with you, and I will not turn
from it; neither will I let you return to the garden, until
My Covenant of the great five and a half days is
fulfilled.”
3 Then Aḏam said to Elohim, “O HWHY, You created
us, and made us fit to be in the garden; and before I
transgressed, You made all beasts come to me, that I
should name them.
4 Your Grace was then on me; and I named every
one according to Your mind; and You made them all
subject to me.
5 But now, O HWHY Elohim, that I have transgressed
Your Commandment, all beasts will rise against me
11

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

and will devour me, and Ḥawwah Your handmaid; and
will cut off our life from the face of the earth.
6 I therefore beg You, O Elohim, that since You have
made us come out of the garden, and have made us
be in a strange land, You will not let the beasts hurt
us.”
7 When HWHY heard these words from Aḏam, He had
pity on him, and felt that He had truly said that the
beasts of the field would rise and devour him and
Ḥawwah, because He, HWHY, was angry with the two
of them because of their transgressions.
8 Then Elohim commanded the beasts, and the
birds, and all that moves on the earth, to come to Aḏam
and to be familiar with him, and not to trouble him and
Ḥawwah; nor any of the good and righteous among
their offspring.
9 Then all the beasts paid homage to Aḏam,
according to the Commandment of Elohim except the
serpent, against which Elohim was angry. It did not
come to Aḏam, with the beasts.

8 Then Aḏam cried and said, “O Elohim, when we
lived in the garden, and our hearts were lifted up, we
saw the messengers that sang praises in the
shamayim, but now we can’t see like we once saw. No.
When we entered the cave all creation became hidden
from us.”
2 Then HWHY Elohim said to Aḏam, “When you were
under subjection to Me, you had a bright nature within
you and for that reason could you see distant things.
But after you transgressed your bright nature was
taken out of you and it was not left in you to see distant
things, but only things near to you, as is the ability of
the flesh, for it is brutish.”
3 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah had heard these words
from Elohim, they went their way, praising and
worshipping Him with a sorrowful heart.
4 And Elohim ceased communing with them.
12

ADAM AND EVE 1

9 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah came out of the Cave of
Treasures, and came near to the garden gate. There
they stood and looked at it and cried for having gone
away from it.
2 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah went south of the gate of
the garden to the side of it and found there the water
that watered the garden, which came from the root of
the Tree of Ḥai, and they saw that the water was split
from there into four rivers over the earth.
3 Then they came near to that water and looked at it
and saw that it was the water that came up from under
the root of the Tree of Ḥai in the garden.
4 And Aḏam cried and wailed, and beat his chest for
being cut out from the garden; and said to Ḥawwah:
5 “Why have you brought so many of these plagues
and punishments on me, on yourself, and on our
descendants?”
6 And Ḥawwah said to him, “What is it you have seen
that has caused you to cry and to speak to me in this
manner?”
7 And he said to Ḥawwah, “Do you not see this water
that watered the trees of the garden, and flowed out
from there that was with us in the garden?
8 And when we were in the garden we did not care
about it, but since we came to this strange land we love
it and turn it to use for our body.”
9 But when Ḥawwah heard these words from him she
cried; and from the soreness of their crying they fell
into that water. They would have put an end to
themselves in it. As never again to return and behold
the creation for when they looked at the work of
creation, they felt they must put an end to themselves.

10 Then Elohim, merciful and gracious, looked at
them as they were lying in the water, and close to
death, and He sent a messenger who brought them
out of the water and laid them on the seashore as
dead.
13

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then the messenger went up to Elohim and said,
“O Elohim, Your creatures have breathed their last
breath.”
3 Then Elohim sent His Word to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
who raised them from their death.
4 And Aḏam said, after he was raised, “O Elohim,
while we were in the garden we did not require or care
about this water, but since we came to this land we
cannot do without it.”
5 Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “While you were under
My Command and were a bright messenger you did
not experience this water.
6 But now that you have transgressed My
Commandment, you can not do without water to wash
your body and make it grow, for it is now like that of
beasts, and is in want of water.”
7 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah heard these words from
Elohim, they cried a bitter cry; and Aḏam entreated
Elohim to let him return into the garden and look at it a
second time.
8 But Elohim said to Aḏam, “I have made you a
promise; when that promise is fulfilled, I will bring you
back into the garden, you and your righteous
descendants.”
9 And Elohim ceased to commune with Aḏam.
2

11 Aḏam and Ḥawwah then felt themselves burning
with thirst, and heat, and sorrow.
2 And Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “We shall not drink of
this water even if we were to die. O Ḥawwah, when this
water comes into our inner parts it will increase our
punishments and that of our descendants.”
3 Both Aḏam and Ḥawwah then went away from the
water, and drank none of it at all but came and entered
the Cave of Treasures.
4 But when in it Aḏam could not see Ḥawwah he only
heard the noise she made. Neither could she see
Aḏam, but heard the noise he made.
14

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Aḏam cried in deep affliction, and beat his
chest, and got up and said to Ḥawwah, “Where are
you?”
6 And she said unto him, “Look, I am standing here
in this darkness.”
7 He then said to her, “Remember the bright nature
in which we lived, while we abode in the garden!
8 O Ḥawwah! Remember the glory that rested on us
in the garden. O Ḥawwah! remember the trees that
overshadowed us in the garden while we moved
among them.
9 O Ḥawwah! Remember that while we were in the
garden, we knew neither night nor day. Think of the
Tree of Ḥai, from below which flowed the water, and
that shed splendor over us! Remember, O Ḥawwah,
the garden-land, and the brightness of it!
10 Think, oh think of that garden in which was no
darkness, while we lived in it.
11 But no sooner did we come into this Cave of
Treasures than darkness surrounded us all around
until we can no longer see each other, and all the
pleasure of this life has come to an end.”
5

12 Then Aḏam beat his chest, he and Ḥawwah, and
they mourned the whole night until the first light of
dawn, and they sighed over the length of the night in
the eighth month.
2 And Aḏam beat himself, and threw himself on the
ground in the cave, from bitter grief, and because of
the darkness and lay there as dead.
3 But Ḥawwah heard the noise he made in falling on
the ground. And she felt about for him with her hands
and found him like a corpse.
4 Then she was afraid, speechless, and she
remained by him.
5 But the merciful HWHY looked on the death of Aḏam,
and on Ḥawwah’s silence from fear of the darkness.
6 And the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and raised
him from his death, and opened Ḥawwah’s mouth that
she might speak.
15

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Aḏam stood up in the cave and said, “O
Elohim, why has light departed from us and darkness
covered us? Why did You leave us in this extensive
darkness? Why do You plague us like this?
8 And this darkness, O HWHY, where was it before it
covered us? It is because of this that we cannot see
each other.
9 For so long as we were in the garden we neither
saw nor even knew what darkness was. I was not
hidden from Ḥawwah, neither was she hidden from
me, until now that she cannot see me and no darkness
came over us to separate us from each other.
10 But she and I were both in one bright light. I saw
her and she saw me. Yet now since we came into this
cave darkness has covered us and separated us from
each other so that I do not see her, and she does not
see me.
11 O HWHY, will You then plague us with this
darkness?”
7

13 Then when Elohim, who is merciful and full of pity,
heard Aḏam’s voice, He said to him:
2 “O Aḏam, so long as the good messenger was
obedient to Me, a bright light rested on him and on his
hosts.
3 But when he transgressed My Commandment, I
dispossessed him of that bright nature, and he became
dark.
4 And when he was in the shamayim, in the realms
of light, he knew nothing of darkness.
5 But he transgressed, and I made him fall from the
shamayim onto the earth; and it was this darkness that
came over him.
6 And, O Aḏam, while in My garden and obedient to
Me that bright light rest also on you.
7 But when I heard of your transgression, I took from
you that bright light. Yet, of My mercy, I did not turn
you into darkness but I made your body a body of flesh
over which I spread this skin in order that it may bear
cold and heat.
16

ADAM AND EVE 1

If I had let My wrath fall heavily on you, I should
have destroyed you and had I turned you into darkness
it would have been as if I had killed you.
9 But in My mercy, I have made you as you are when
you transgressed My Commandment, O Aḏam, I drove
you from the garden, and made you come forth into
this land and commanded you to live in this cave and
darkness covered you, as it did over him who
transgressed My Commandment.
10 Thus, O Aḏam, has this night deceived you. It is not
to last forever but is only of twelve hours when it is over
daylight will return.
11 Do not sigh or be moved and do not say in your
heart that this darkness is long and drags on wearily.
Do not say in your heart that I plague you with it.
12 Strengthen your heart and be not afraid. This
darkness is not a punishment. Aḏam, I have made the
day and have placed the sun in it to give light in order
that you and your children should do your work.
13 For I knew you would sin and transgress and come
out into this land. Yet I wouldn’t force you nor be heard
over you, nor shut up, nor doom you through your fall,
nor through your coming out from light into darkness,
nor yet through your coming from the garden into this
land.
14 For I made you of the light and I willed to bring out
children of light from you that were like you.
15 But you did not keep My Commandment one day
until I had finished the creation and baraḵ everything
in it.
16 Then, concerning the tree, I commanded you not to
eat of it. Yet I knew that Satan, who deceived himself,
would also deceive you.
17 So I made known to you by means of the tree, not
to come near him. And I told you not to eat of the fruit
thereof, nor to taste of it, nor yet to sit under it, nor to
yield to it.
18 Had I not spoken to you, O Aḏam, concerning the
tree and had I left you without a Commandment and
8

17

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

you had sinned it would have been an offence on My
part, for not having given you any order you would turn
around and blame Me for it.
19 But I Commanded you, and warned you, and you
fell. So that My creatures cannot blame Me; but the
blame rests on them alone.
20 And, O Aḏam, I have made the day so that you and
your descendants can work and toil in it. And I have
made the night for them to rest in it from their work and
for the beasts of the field to go forth by night and look
for their food.
21 But little of darkness now remains, O Aḏam, and
daylight will soon appear.”

14 Then Aḏam said to Elohim: “O HWHY, take my soul
and let me not see this gloom any more, or remove me
to some place where there is no darkness.”
2 But HWHY Elohim said to Aḏam, “I say to you,
indeed, this darkness will pass from you every day, I
have determined for you until the fulfillment of My
Covenant when I will save you and bring you back
again into the garden and into the house of light you
long for, in which there is no darkness. I will bring you
to it in the reign of the shamayim.”
3 Again Elohim said to Aḏam, “All this misery that you
have been made to take on yourself because of your
transgression will not free you from the hand of Satan
and it will not save you.
4 But I will. When my Bĕn shall come down from the
shamayim and shall become flesh of your
descendants, and take on Himself the infirmity from
which you suffer then the darkness that covered you in
this cave shall cover Him in the grave, when He is the
flesh of your descendants.
5 And He, who is without years, shall be subject to
the reckoning of years of times of months, and of days,
and He shall be reckoned as one of the sons of men in
order to save you.”
6 And Elohim ceased to commune with Aḏam.
18

ADAM AND EVE 1

15 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah cried and were
sorrowful because of Elohim’s word to them, that they
should not return to the garden until the fulfillment of
the days decreed on them, but mostly because Elohim
had told them that His Bĕn should suffer for their
deliverance.

16 After this, Aḏam and Ḥawwah continued to stand
in the cave, praying and crying, until the morning
dawned on them.
2 And when they saw the light returned to them they
refrained from being afraid and strengthened their
hearts.
3 Then Aḏam came out of the cave. And when he
came to the mouth of it and stood and turned his face
towards the east and saw the sunrise in glowing rays
and felt the heat thereof on his body, he was afraid of
it and thought in his heart that this flame came forth to
plague him.
4 He then cried and beat his chest and he fell on the
ground on his face and made his appeal saying:
5 “O HWHY, plague me not, neither consume me, nor
yet take away my life from the earth.”
6 For he thought the sun was Elohim.
7 Because while he was in the garden and heard the
voice of Elohim and the sound He made in the garden,
and feared Him, Aḏam never saw the brilliant light of
the sun, neither did its flaming heat touch his body.
8 Therefore he was afraid of the sun when flaming
rays of it reached him. He thought Elohim meant to
plague him with it all the days He had decreed for him.
9 For Aḏam also said in his thoughts, that Elohim did
not plague them with darkness but He had caused this
sun to rise and to plague them with burning heat.
10 But while he was thinking like this in his heart the
Word of Elohim came to him and said:
11 “Aḏam, get up on your feet. This sun is not Elohim,
but it has been created to give light by day that I spoke
19

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

to you about in the cave saying, ‘The dawn would
come, and there would be light by day.’
12 But I am Elohim who comforted you in the night.”
13 And Elohim ceased to commune with Aḏam.

17 Then, Aḏam and Ḥawwah came out at the mouth
of the cave and went toward the garden.
2 But as they went near the western gate, from which
Satan came when he deceived Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
they found the serpent that became Satan coming at
the gate, and it was sorrowfully licking the dust, and
wiggling on its breast on the ground because of the
curse that fell on it from Elohim.
3 Before the curse the serpent was the most exalted
of all beasts, now it was changed and become slippery
and the meanest of them all, and it crept on its breast
and went on its belly.
4 Before, it was the fairest of all beasts. It had been
changed and became the most ugly of them all.
Instead of feeding on the best food, now it turned to
eat the dust. Instead of living as before, in the best
places, now it lived in the dust.
5 It had been the most beautiful of all beasts, and all
stood speechless at its beauty, it was now abhorred of
them.
6 And, again, whereas it lived in a beautiful home, to
which all other animals came from everywhere; and
where it drank, they drank also of the same; now, after
it had become venomous, by reason of Elohim’s curse,
all beasts fled from its home and would not drink of the
water it drank, but fled from it.

18 When the accursed serpent saw Aḏam and
Ḥawwah it swelled its head, stood on its tail, and with
eyes blood-red, it acted like it would kill them.
2 It made straight for Ḥawwah and ran after her while
Aḏam stood by and yelled because he had no stick in
his hand with which to hit the serpent, and did not know
how to put it to death.
20

ADAM AND EVE 1

But with a heart burning for Ḥawwah, Aḏam
approached the serpent and held it by the tail. When it
turned towards him and said to him:
4 “O Aḏam, because of you and Ḥawwah I am
slippery, and go on my belly.” Then with its great
strength it threw down Aḏam and Ḥawwah and
squeezed them, and tried to kill them.
5 But Elohim sent a messenger who threw the
serpent away from them, and raised them up.
6 Then the Word of Elohim came to the serpent, and
said to it, “The first time I made you slick, and made
you to go on your belly but I did not deprive you of
speech.
7 This time, however, you will be mute, and you and
your race will speak no more because, the first time My
creatures were ruined because of you, and this time
you tried to kill them.”
8 Then the serpent was struck mute, and it was no
longer able to speak.
9 And a wind blew down from the shamayim by the
command of Elohim and carried away the serpent from
Aḏam and Ḥawwah and threw it on the seashore
where it landed in India.
3

19 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah cried before Elohim. And
Aḏam said to Him:
2 “O HWHY, when I was in the cave I said this to You,
HWHY, the beasts of the field would rise and devour me
and cut off my life from the earth.”
3 Then Aḏam, because of what had happened to
him, beat his chest and fell on the ground like a corpse.
Then the Word of Elohim came to him, who raised him,
and said to him,
4 “O Aḏam, not one of these beasts will be able to
hurt you because I have made the beasts and other
moving things come to you in the cave. I did not let the
serpent come with them because it might have risen
against you and made you tremble and the fear of it
should fall into your hearts.
21

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

I knew that the accursed one is wicked; therefore I
would not let it come near you with the other beasts.
6 But now strengthen your heart and fear not. I am
with you to the end of the days I have determined for
you.”
5

20 Then Aḏam cried and said, “O Elohim, take us
away to some other place, where the serpent can not
come near us again and rise against us. For I fear that
it might find your handmaid Ḥawwah alone and kill her,
for its eyes are hideous and evil.”
2 But Elohim said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah, “Don’t be
afraid. From now on, I will not let it come near you. I
have driven it away from you and from this mountain. I
will not leave in it the ability to hurt you.”
3 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah worshipped before
Elohim and gave Him thanks and praised Him for
having delivered them from death.

21 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah went in search of the
garden.
2 And the heat beat like a flame on their faces and
they sweated from the heat. And they cried before
HWHY.
3 But the place where they cried was close to a high
mountain top that faced the western gate of the
garden.
4 Then Aḏam threw himself down from the top of that
mountain. His face was torn and his flesh was ripped
and he lost much of his blood and was close to death.
5 Meanwhile Ḥawwah remained standing on the
mountain crying over him lying as he was.
6 And she said, “I don’t wish to live after him, for all
that he did to himself was because of me.”
7 Then she threw herself after him; and was torn and
ripped by stones and remained lying as dead.
8 But the merciful Elohim, who looks over His
creatures, looked at Aḏam and Ḥawwah as they lay
dead, and He sent His Word to them and raised them.
22

ADAM AND EVE 1

And said to Aḏam, “O Aḏam, all this misery, which
you have brought on yourself, will have no affect on My
ruling, neither will it alter the Covenant of the five
thousand and five hundred (5,500) years.”
9

22 Then Aḏam said to Elohim, “I dry up in the heat, I
am faint from walking, and I don’t want to be in this
world. And I don’t know when You will let me rest and
take me out of it.”
2 Then HWHY Elohim said to him, “O Aḏam, it cannot
be now, not until you have ended your days. Then I
shall bring you out of this miserable land.”
3 And Aḏam said to Elohim, “While I was in the
garden I knew neither heat, nor fatigue, neither
transience, nor trembling, nor fear; but now since I
came to this land, all this affliction has come over me.”
4 Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “So long as you were
keeping My Commandment, My Light and My Grace
rested on you. But when you transgressed My
Commandment, sorrow and misery came to you in this
land.”
5 And Aḏam cried and said, “O HWHY, do not cut me
off for this, neither punish me with heavy plagues, nor
yet repay me according to my sin; for we, of our own
will, transgressed Your Commandment and ignored
Your Torah and tried to become elohiym like You when
Satan the enemy deceived us.”
6 Then Elohim said again to Aḏam, “Because you
have endured fear and trembling in this land of fatigue
and suffering, treading and walking about, going on
this mountain, and dying from it, I will take all this on
Myself in order to save you.”

23 Then Aḏam cried more and said, “O Elohim, have
mercy on me and do not take on Yourself that which I
will do.”
2 But Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam and
Ḥawwah.
3 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood on their feet and
Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Strengthen yourself, and I
23

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

also will strengthen myself.” And she strengthened
herself as Aḏam told her.
4 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah took stones and placed
them in the shape of an altar and they took leaves from
the trees outside the garden, with which they wiped
from the face of the rock the blood they had spilled.
5 But that which had dropped on the sand they took
together with the dust with which it was mixed and
offered it on the altar as an offering to Elohim.
6 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood under the altar and
cried, praying to Elohim, “Forgive us our offense and
our sin, and look at us with Your eye of mercy. For
when we were in the garden our praises and our
hymns went up before You without ceasing.
7 But when we came into this strange land, pure
praise was no longer ours, nor righteous prayer, nor
understanding hearts, nor sweet thoughts, nor wise
judgment, nor long discernment, nor upright feelings,
neither was our bright nature left within us. But our
body is changed from the likeness in which it was at
first when we were created.
8 Yet now look at our blood which is offered on these
stones and accept it at our hands as if it were the
praise we used to sing to you at first when we were in
the garden.”
9 And Aḏam began to make more requests of
Elohim.

24 Then the merciful Elohim, who is good and a lover
of men, looked at Aḏam and Ḥawwah and at their
blood, which they had held up as an offering to Him
without an order from Him for so doing. But He
wondered at them and accepted their offering.
2 And Elohim sent from His presence a bright fire that
consumed their offering.
3 He smelled the sweet savor of their offering and
showed them mercy.
4 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and said
to him, “O Aḏam, as you have shed your blood so will
my Bĕn shed His own blood when He becomes flesh
24

ADAM AND EVE 1

of your descendants. And as you died, O Aḏam, so
also will He die. And as you built an altar, so also will I
make for you an altar of the earth. And as you offered
your blood on it, so also will I offer My Bĕn’s blood on
an altar on the earth.
5 And as you appealed for forgiveness through that
blood, so also will I make His blood forgiveness of sins
and erase transgressions in it.
6 And now, behold, I have accepted your offering, O
Aḏam, but the days of the Covenant in which I have
bound you are not fulfilled. When they are fulfilled, then
will I bring you back into the garden.
7 Now, therefore, strengthen your heart. And when
sorrow comes over you make Me an offering and I will
be favorable to you.”

25 But Elohim knew that Aḏam believed he would
frequently kill himself and make an offering to Him of
his blood.
2 Therefore He said to him, “Aḏam, don’t ever kill
yourself like this again, by throwing yourself down from
that mountain.”
3 But Aḏam said to Elohim, “I was thinking to put an
end to myself right now for having transgressed Your
Commandments and for my having come out of the
beautiful garden and for the bright light which You
have taken from me, and for the praises which poured
out from my mouth without ceasing, and for the light
that covered me.
4 Yet because of Your goodness, O Elohim, You did
not get rid of me altogether, but You have been
favorable to me every time I die and You bring me to
life.
5 And thereby it will be made known that You are a
merciful Elohim who does not want anyone to perish,
who would love it if no one should fall, and who does
not condemn any one cruelly, badly, or by total
destruction.”
6 Then Aḏam remained silent.
25

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And the Word of Elohim came to him and baraḵ him
and comforted him and covenanted with him that He
would save him at the end of the days determined for
him.
8 This, then, was the first offering Aḏam made to
Elohim and so it became his custom to do.
7

26 Then Aḏam took Ḥawwah and they began to
return to the Cave of Treasures where they lived. But
when they got closer to it and saw it from a distance,
heavy sorrow fell on Aḏam and Ḥawwah when they
looked at it.
2 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “When we were on
the mountain we were comforted by the Word of
Elohim that talked with us and the light that came from
the east shown over us.
3 But now the Word of Elohim is hidden from us and
the light that shined over us has changed so much that
it has disappeared and let darkness and sorrow cover
us.
4 And we are forced to enter this cave that is like a
prison, in which darkness covers us so that we are
separated from each other. You cannot see me. I
cannot see you.”
5 When Aḏam had said these words, they cried and
spread their hands before Elohim because they were
full of sorrow.
6 And they prayed to Elohim to bring the sun for them
to shine on them so that darkness would not return to
them and that they wouldn’t have to go under this
covering of rock. They wanted to die rather than see
the darkness.
7 Then Elohim looked at Aḏam and Ḥawwah and at
their great sorrow and all they had done with a fervent
heart because of all the trouble they were in. When
compared to their former state of well-being, all the
misery that came over them did so in this strange land.
8 Therefore Elohim was neither angry with them nor
impatient, but He was patient and long-suffering
toward them, as toward the children He had created.
26

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and said
to him, “Aḏam, regarding the sun, if I were to take it
and bring it to you, days, hours, years and months
would all stop and the Covenant I have made with you,
would never be fulfilled.
10 And you would be deserted and stuck in a perpetual
plague and you would never be saved.
11 Yes, rather, bear up long, and calm your soul while
you live night and day until the fulfillment of the days
and the time of My Covenant has come.
12 Then I shall come and save you, Aḏam. I do not
wish for you to be afflicted.
13 And when I look at all the good things that you lived
in before, and why you came out of them, then I am
willing to show you mercy.
14 But I cannot alter the Covenant that has gone out
of My mouth, otherwise I would have brought you back
into the garden.
15 However, when the Covenant is fulfilled then I will
show you and your descendants mercy, and bring you
into a land of gladness where there is neither sorrow
nor suffering but abiding joy and gladness, and light
that never fails, and praises that never cease, and a
beautiful garden that shall never pass away.”
16 And Elohim said again to Aḏam, “Be patient and
enter the cave because of the darkness of which you
were afraid shall only be twelve hours long. When it is
over, light will come up.”
17 Then when Aḏam heard these words from Elohim,
he and Ḥawwah worshipped before Him, and their
hearts were comforted. They returned into the cave
after their custom, while tears flowed from their eyes,
sorrow and wailing came from their hearts and they
wished their soul would leave their body.
18 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood praying until the
darkness of night covered them and Aḏam was hidden
from Ḥawwah and she from him.
19 And they remained standing in prayer.
9

27

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

27 Satan, the hater of all that is good, saw how they
continued in prayer, and how Elohim communed with
them, and comforted them, and how He had accepted
their offering. Then Satan made a phantasm.
2 He began by transforming his hosts. In his hands
was a shining, glimmering fire, and they were in a huge
light.
3 Then, he placed his throne near the mouth of the
cave, because he could not enter it due to their
prayers. And he shown light into the cave until the cave
glistened over Aḏam and Ḥawwah while his hosts
began to sing praises.
4 Satan did this so that when Aḏam saw the light he
would think to himself that it was a light of the
shamayim and that Satan’s hosts were messengers
and that Elohim had sent them to watch at the cave,
and give him light in the darkness.
5 Satan planned that when Aḏam came out of the
cave and saw them and Aḏam and Ḥawwah bowed to
Satan, then he would overcome Aḏam and humble him
before Elohim a second time.
6 When, therefore, Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw the light,
thinking it was real, they strengthened their hearts.
Then, as they were trembling, Aḏam said to Ḥawwah:
7 “Look at that great light, and at those many songs
of praise, and at that host standing outside who won’t
come into our cave. Why don’t they tell us what they
want or where they are from or what the meaning of
this light is or what those praises are or why they have
been sent to this place, and why they won’t come in?
8 If they were from Elohim, they would come into the
cave with us and would tell us why they were sent.”
9 Then Aḏam stood up and prayed to Elohim with a
burning heart and said:
10 “O HWHY, is there in the world another elohim
besides You who created messengers and filled them
with light, and sent them to keep us, who would come
with them?
28

ADAM AND EVE 1

But, look, we see these hosts that stand at the
mouth of the cave. They are in a great light and they
sing loud praises. If they are of some other elohiym
than You, tell me, and if they are sent by You, inform
me of the reason for which You have sent them.”
12 No sooner had Aḏam said this, than a messenger
from Elohim appeared to him in the cave, who said to
him, “O Aḏam, fear not. This is Satan and his hosts.
He wishes to deceive you as he deceived you at first.
For the first time, he was hidden in the serpent, but this
time he is come to you in the likeness of a messenger
of light in order that, when you worshipped him, he
might enslave you in the very presence of Elohim.”
13 Then the messenger went from Aḏam and seized
Satan at the opening of the cave, and stripped him of
the false image he had assumed and brought him in
his own hideous form to Aḏam and Ḥawwah who were
afraid of him when they saw him.
14 And the messenger said to Aḏam, “This hideous
form has been his ever since Elohim made him fall
from the shamayim. He could not have come near you
in it. Therefore, he transformed himself into a
messenger of light.”
15 Then the messenger drove Satan and his hosts
away from Aḏam and Ḥawwah and said to them, “Fear
not. Elohim who created you will strengthen you.”
16 And the messenger left them.
17 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah remained standing in the
cave and no consolation came to them as they were
divided in their thoughts.
18 And when it was morning they prayed and then
went out to seek the garden, for their hearts were
seeking it, and they could get no consolation for having
left it.
11

28 But when the crafty Satan saw that they were
going to the garden he gathered together his host and
came in appearance on a cloud, intent on deceiving
them.
29

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But when Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw him in a vision,
they thought they were messengers of Elohim come to
comfort them about having left the garden, or to bring
them back again into it.
3 And Aḏam spread his hands before Elohim,
begged Him to make him understand what they were.
4 Then Satan, the hater of all that is good, said to
Aḏam, “O Aḏam, I am a messenger of the great
Elohim, and behold the hosts that surround me.
5 Elohim has sent us to take you and bring you to the
northern border of the garden to the shore of the clear
sea, and bathe you and Ḥawwah in it, and raise you to
your former joy, that you return to the garden once
again.”
6 These words sank into the heart of Aḏam and
Ḥawwah.
7 Yet Elohim withheld His Word from Aḏam, and did
not make him understand at once but waited to see his
strength and whether he would be overcome as
Ḥawwah was when in the garden, or whether he would
win this battle.
8 Then Satan called to Aḏam and Ḥawwah and said,
“Behold, we go to the sea of water,” and they began to
go.
9 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah followed them at little
distance.
10 But when they came to the mountain to the north of
the garden which was a very high mountain without
any steps to the top of it, the Devil came near to Aḏam
and Ḥawwah, and made them go up to the top in reality
and not in a vision, because he wished to throw them
down and kill them, and to wipe their names from the
earth, so that this earth should belong to him and his
hosts alone.
2

29 But when the merciful Elohim saw that Satan
wished to kill Aḏam with his many tricks, and saw that
Aḏam was meek and without guile, Elohim spoke to
Satan in a loud voice, and cursed him.
30

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then he and his hosts fled, and Aḏam and Ḥawwah
remained standing on the top of the mountain, from
there they saw below them the wide world, high above
which they were. But they saw none of the host which
time after time were by them.
3 They cried, both Aḏam and Ḥawwah, before
Elohim, and begged for forgiveness of Him.
4 Then the Word from Elohim came to Aḏam, and
said to him, “You must know and understand
concerning this Satan, that he seeks to deceive you
and your descendants after you.”
5 And Aḏam cried before HWHY Elohim, and begged
and prayed to Him to give him something from the
garden, as a token to him, wherein to be comforted.
6 And Elohim considered Aḏam’s thought, and sent
the messenger Miḵa’ĕl as far as the sea that reaches
India, to take from there golden rods and bring them to
Aḏam.
7 This Elohim did in His wisdom in order that these
golden rods, being with Aḏam in the cave, should
shine forth with light in the night around him, and put
an end to his fear of the darkness.
8 Then the messenger Miḵa’ĕl went down by
Elohim’s order, took golden rods, as Elohim had
commanded him, and brought them to Elohim.
2

30 After these things, Elohim commanded the
messenger Gaḇri’ĕl to go down to the garden and say
to the keruḇ who kept it, “Behold, Elohim has
commanded me to come into the garden, and to take
from it sweet smelling incense and give it to Aḏam.”
2 Then the messenger Gaḇri’ĕl went down by
Elohim’s order to the garden and told the keruḇ as
Elohim had commanded him.
3 The keruḇ then said, “This is acceptable.” And
Gaḇri’ĕl went in and took the incense.
4 Then Elohim commanded his messenger Rapha’ĕl
to go down to the garden, and speak to the keruḇ about
some myrrh to give to Aḏam.
31

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And the messenger Rapha’ĕl went down and told
the keruḇ as Elohim had commanded him, and the
keruḇ said, “This is acceptable.” Then Rapha’ĕl went
in and took the myrrh.
6 The golden rods were from the Indian sea, where
there are precious stones. The incense was from the
eastern border of the garden, and the myrrh from the
western border, from where bitterness came over
Aḏam.
7 And the messengers brought these things to
Elohim, by the Tree of Ḥai, in the garden.
8 Then Elohim said to the messengers, “Dip them in
the spring of water, then take them and sprinkle their
water over Aḏam and Ḥawwah, that they should be a
little comforted in their sorrow, and give them to Aḏam
and Ḥawwah.
9 And
the messengers did as Elohim had
commanded them, and they gave all those things to
Aḏam and Ḥawwah on the top of the mountain on
which Satan had placed them, when he sought to
make an end of them.
10 And when Aḏam saw the golden rods, the incense
and the myrrh, he rejoiced and cried because he
thought that the gold was a token of the reign from
where he had come and the incense was a token of
the bright light which had been taken from him, and
that the myrrh was a token of the sorrow which he was
in.
5

31 After these things happened, Elohim said to
Aḏam, “You asked Me for something from the garden
to be comforted with, and I have given you these three
tokens as a consolation to you so that you trust in Me
and in My Covenant with you.
2 For my Bĕn will come and save you and when He
is in the flesh, sovereigns shall bring Him gold,
incense, and myrrh. Gold is a token of My reign,
incense is a token of My divinity, and myrrh is a token
of My Bĕn’s suffering and of My Bĕn’s death.
32

ADAM AND EVE 1

But, Aḏam, put these by you in the cave, the gold
so that it may shine light over you by night, the incense
so that you smell its sweet savor, and the myrrh to
comfort you in your sorrow.”
4 When Aḏam heard these words from Elohim, he
worshipped before Him. He and Ḥawwah worshipped
Him and gave Him thanks because He had dealt
mercifully with them.
5 Then Elohim commanded the three messengers,
Miḵa’ĕl, Gaḇri’ĕl and Rapha’ĕl each to bring what he
had brought and give it to Aḏam. And they did so, one
by one.
6 And Elohim commanded Suriy’ĕl and Salathi’ĕl to
bear up Aḏam and Ḥawwah, and bring them down
from the top of the high mountain, and to take them to
the Cave of Treasures.
7 There they laid the gold on the south side of the
cave, the incense on the eastern side, and the myrrh
on the western side. For the mouth of the cave was on
the north side.
8 The messengers then comforted Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and departed.
9 The gold was seventy rods. The incense was
twelve pounds, and the myrrh was three pounds.
10 These remained by Aḏam in the Cave of
Treasures, in the House of Treasures; therefore was it
called ‘Cave of Concealment.’ And it was called the
‘Cave of Treasures,’ by reason of the bodies of
righteous men that were in it.
11 Elohim gave these three things to Aḏam on the third
day after he had come out of the garden as a sign of
the three days [FWHY should remain in the heart of the
earth.
12 And these three things, as they continued with
Aḏam in the cave, gave him light by night, and by day
they gave him a little relief from his sorrow.
3

32 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah remained in the Cave of
Treasures until the seventh day. They neither ate of
the fruit of the earth, nor drank water.
33

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And on the eighth day, when it dawned, Aḏam said
to Ḥawwah, “Ḥawwah, we prayed Elohim to give us
something from the garden and He sent his
messengers who brought us what we had desired.
3 But now, get up, and let us go to the sea of water
we saw at first, and let us stand in it and pray that
Elohim will again be favorable to us and take us back
to the garden, or give us something, or that He will give
us comfort in some other land than this one we are in.”
4 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah came out of the cave and
went and stood on the border of the sea in which they
had thrown themselves before.
5 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah: “Come, go down into
this place, and do not come out until the end of thirty
days, when I shall come to you. And pray to Elohim
with burning heart and a sweet voice to forgive us.
6 And I will go to another place, and go down into it
and do like you.”
7 Then Ḥawwah went down into the water as Aḏam
had commanded her. Aḏam also went down into the
water, and they stood praying, and besought HWHY to
forgive them their offense and to restore them to their
former state.
8 And they stood like that praying until the end of the
thirty-five days.
2

33 But Satan, the hater of all that is good, sought
them in the cave, but did not find them although he
searched diligently for them.
2 But he found them standing in the water praying
and thought within himself, “Aḏam and Ḥawwah are
standing like that in that water praying to Elohim to
forgive them their transgression, and to restore them
to their former state, and to take them from under my
hand.
3 But I will deceive them so that they shall come out
of the water, and not fulfill their vow.”
4 Then the hater of all that is good, did not go to
Aḏam, but he went to Ḥawwah, and took the form of a
34

ADAM AND EVE 1

messenger of Elohim, praising and rejoicing, and he
said to her:
“Peace be to you! Be glad and rejoice! Elohim is
favorable to you and He sent me to Aḏam. I have
brought him the glad tidings of deliverance and of his
being filled with bright light as he was at first.
5

And Aḏam, in his joy for his restoration, has sent
me to you so that you would come with me in order that
I might crown you with light like him.
6

And he said to me, ‘Speak to Ḥawwah; if she does
not come with you, tell her of the sign when we were
on the top of the mountain, how Elohim sent his
messengers who took us and brought us to the Cave
of Treasures; and laid the gold on the southern side,
incense on the eastern side, and myrrh on the western
side.’ Now come to him.”
7

When Ḥawwah heard these words from him, she
rejoiced much. And thinking Satan’s appearance was
real; she came out of the sea.
8

He went first and she followed him until they came
to Aḏam. Then Satan hid himself from her and she saw
him no more.
9

She then came and stood before Aḏam, who was
standing by the water and she rejoiced in Elohim’s
forgiveness.
10

And as she called to him, he turned around and
found her there and cried when he saw her and beat
his chest from the bitterness of his grief. He sank into
the water.
11

But Elohim looked at him and at his misery and that
he was about to breathe his last breath. And the Word
of Elohim came from the shamayim, raised him out of
the water, and said to him, “Go up the high bank to
Ḥawwah.” And when he came up to Ḥawwah he said
to her, “Who told you to come here?”
12

Then she told him the discourse of the messenger
who had appeared to her and had given her a sign.
13

35

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But Aḏam grieved, and explained to her that it was
Satan. He then took her and they both returned to the
cave.
15 These things happened to them the second time
they went down to the water seven days after their
coming out of the garden.
16 They fasted in the water thirty-five days. It was
altogether forty-two days since they had left the
garden.
14

34 On the morning of the forty-third day, they came
out of the cave, sorrowful and crying. Their bodies
were lean, and they were parched from hunger and
thirst, from fasting and praying, and from their heavy
sorrow because of their transgression.
2 And when they had come out of the cave they went
up the mountain to the west of the garden.
3 There they stood and prayed and asked Elohim to
grant them forgiveness of their sins.
4 And after their prayers Aḏam began to beg Elohim,
saying, “O HWHY, my Elohim, and my Creator, You
Commanded the four elements to be gathered
together, and they were gathered together by Your
order.
5 Then You spread Your hand and created me out of
one element, that of dust of the earth. You brought me
into the garden at the third hour, on a sixth day, and
informed me of it in the cave.
6 Then, at first, I knew neither night nor day, because
I had a bright nature so that the light in which I lived
ever left me to know night or day.
7 Then, again, O HWHY, in that third hour in which You
created me, You brought to me all beasts, and lions,
and ostriches, and fowls of the air, and all things that
move in the earth, which You had created at the first
hour before me of the sixth day.
8 And Your will was that I should name them all, one
by one, with a suitable name. But You gave me
understanding and knowledge and a pure heart and a
36

ADAM AND EVE 1

right mind from you, that I should name them after Your
own mind regarding the naming of them.
9 O Elohim, You made them obedient to me and
ordered that not one of them break from my control
according to Your Commandment and to the dominion
which You had given me over them. But now they are
all estranged from me.
10 Then it was in that third hour of sixth day, in which
You created me, and Commanded me concerning the
tree, to which I was neither to go near, nor to eat from;
because You said to me in the garden, ‘When you eat
of it, from death you shall die.’
11 But if You had punished me as You said, with
death, I should have died that very moment.
12 When You Commanded me regarding the tree, that
I was neither to approach nor to eat of it, Ḥawwah was
not with me. You had not yet created her, neither had
You yet taken her out of my side, so had she yet heard
this order from you.
13 Then, at the end of the third hour of that sixth day,
O HWHY, You caused a sleep to come over me, and I
slept, and was overwhelmed in sleep.
14 Then You took a rib out of my side and You created
her after my own likeness and image. Then I awoke
and when I saw her and knew who she was, I said,
‘This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. From
now on she shall be called woman.’
15 It was of Your good will, O Elohim, that You brought
a sleep over me and that You quickly drew Ḥawwah
out of my side until she was fully out, so that I did not
see how she was made, neither could I witness. O
HWHY, Your goodness and glory are awful and great.
16 And of Your goodwill, O HWHY, You made us both
with bodies of a bright nature, and You made the two
of us one. You gave us Your grace and filled us with
praises of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh that we should be
neither hungry nor thirsty nor know what sorrow is, nor
know faintness of heart, neither suffering, fasting nor
weariness.
37

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But now, O Elohim, since we transgressed Your
Commandment and broke Your Torah, You have
brought us out into a strange land, and have caused
suffering, faintness, hunger and thirst to come over us.
18 Now, therefore, O Elohim, we pray you, give us
something to eat from the garden, to satisfy our hunger
with it, and something wherewith to quench our thirst.
19 For, behold, many days, O Elohim, we have tasted
nothing and drunk nothing, and our flesh has dried up
and our strength is wasted. Sleep is gone from our
eyes from faintness and crying.
20 Then, O Elohim, we dare not gather anything from
the fruit of trees, from fear of You. For when we
transgress the first time You spared us and did not
make us die.
21 But now, we thought in our hearts that if we eat the
fruit of the trees without Elohim’s order He will destroy
us this time and will remove us from the earth.
22 And if we drink of this water without Elohim’s order
He will make an end of us and root us up at once.
23 Now, therefore, O Elohim, I have come to this place
with Ḥawwah, and we beg You to give us some fruit
from the garden so that we may be satisfied with it.
24 For we desire the fruit that is on the earth and all
else that we lack in it.”
17

35 Then Elohim looked again at Aḏam and his crying
and groaning, and the Word of Elohim came to him,
and said to him:
2 “Aḏam, when you were in My garden, you knew
neither eating nor drinking, faintness nor suffering,
leanness of flesh, nor change; neither did sleep depart
from your eyes. But since you transgressed and came
into this strange land all these trials have come over
you.”

36 Then Elohim commanded the keruḇ, who guarded
the gate of the garden with a sword of fire in his hand,
to take some of the fruit of the fig-tree and to give it to
Aḏam.
38

ADAM AND EVE 1

The keruḇ obeyed the Command of HWHY Elohim
and went into the garden and brought two figs on two
twigs, each fig hanging to its leaf. They were from two
of the trees among which Aḏam and Ḥawwah hid
themselves when Elohim went to walk in the garden
and the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and Ḥawwah
and said to them, “Aḏam! Aḏam! Where are you?”
3 And Aḏam answered, “O Elohim, here I am. When
I heard the sound of You and Your voice, I hid myself,
because I am naked.”
4 Then the keruḇ took two figs and brought them to
Aḏam and Ḥawwah. But he threw the figs to them from
a distance because they would not come near the
keruḇ, for their flesh that could not come near the fire.
5 At first, messengers trembled at the presence of
Aḏam and were afraid of him. But now Aḏam trembled
before the messengers and was afraid of them.
6 Then Aḏam came closer and took one fig, and
Ḥawwah also came in turn and took the other.
7 And as they took them up in their hands they looked
at them and knew they were from the trees among
which they had hidden themselves.
2

37 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Do you not see
these figs and their leaves with which we covered
ourselves when we were stripped of our bright nature?
But now, we do not know what misery and suffering
may come to us from eating them.
2 Now, therefore, Ḥawwah, let us restrain ourselves
and not eat them. Let us ask Elohim to give us of the
fruit of the Tree of Ḥai.”
3 So Aḏam and Ḥawwah restrained themselves and
did not eat these figs.
4 But Aḏam began to pray to Elohim and to beg Him
to give him of the fruit of the Tree of Ḥai, saying: “O
Elohim, when we transgressed Your Commandment at
the sixth hour of sixth day, we were stripped of the
bright nature we had, and did not continue in the
garden after our transgression more than three hours.
39

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But in the evening You made us come out of it. O
Elohim, we transgressed against You one hour and all
these trials and sorrows have come over us until this
day.
6 And those days together with this the forty-third
days do not redeem that one hour in which we
transgressed!
7 O Elohim, look at us with an eye of pity, and do not
avenge us according to our transgression of Your
Commandment in Your presence.
8 O Elohim, give us of the fruit of the Tree of Ḥai that
we may eat it and live and turn not to see sufferings
and other trouble in this earth, for You are Elohim.
9 When we transgressed Your Commandment You
made us come out of the garden and sent a keruḇ to
keep the Tree of Ḥai so that we should not eat thereof
and live and know nothing of faintness after we
transgressed.
10 But now, O HWHY, behold, we have endured all
these days and have borne sufferings. Make these
forty-three days an equivalent for the one hour in which
we transgressed.”
5

38 After these things the Word of Elohim came to
Aḏam, and said to him:
2 “Aḏam, as to the fruit on the Tree of Ḥai that you
have asked for, I will not give it to you now, but only
when the 5,500 years are fulfilled. At that time I will
give you fruit from the Tree of Ḥai and you will eat and
live forever, both you and Ḥawwah, and also your
righteous descendants.
3 But these forty-three days cannot make amends for
the hour in which you transgressed My
Commandment.
4 Aḏam, I gave you the fruit of the fig-tree in which
you hid yourself for you to eat. So, you and Ḥawwah
go and eat it.
5 I will not deny your request; neither will I disappoint
your hope. Therefore, endure until the fulfillment of the
Covenant I made with you.”
40

ADAM AND EVE 1
6

And Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam.

39 Then Aḏam returned to Ḥawwah and said to her,
“Get up, and take a fig for yourself, and I will take the
other; and let us go to our cave.”
2 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah each took a fig and went
toward the cave. The time was about the setting of the
sun and their thoughts made them long to eat of the
fruit.
3 But Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “I am afraid to eat of
this fig. I do not know what may come over me from it.”
4 So Aḏam cried and stood praying before Elohim
saying, “Satisfy my hunger, without my having to eat
this fig because after I have eaten it, what will it profit
me? And what shall I desire and ask of you, O Elohim,
when it is gone?”
5 And he said again, “I am afraid to eat of it; for I do
not know what will befall me through it.”

40 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and said
to him, “Aḏam, why didn’t you have this trepidation, or
this will to fast, or this care before now? And why didn’t
you have this fear before you transgressed?
2 But when you came to live in this strange land your
animal body could not survive on earth without earthly
food to strengthen it and to restore its powers.”
3 And Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam.

41 Then Aḏam took the fig and laid it on the golden
rods. Ḥawwah also took her fig and put it on the
incense.
2 And the weight of each fig was that of a
watermelon; for the fruit of the garden was much larger
than the fruit of this land.
3 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah remained standing and
fasting the entirety of that night until the morning
dawned.
4 When the sun rose they were still praying, but after
they had finished praying Aḏam said to Ḥawwah:
41

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

“Ḥawwah, come, let us go to the border of the
garden looking south to the place from where the river
flows and is parted into four heads. There we will pray
to Elohim and ask Him to give us some of the Water of
Ḥai to drink.
6 For Elohim has not fed us with the Tree of Ḥai in
order that we may not live. Therefore, we will ask him
to give us some of the Water of Ḥai to quench our thirst
with it, rather than with a drink of water of this land.”
7 When Ḥawwah heard these words from Aḏam she
agreed, and they both got up and came to the southern
border of the garden, at the edge of the river of water
a short distance from the garden.
8 And they stood and prayed before HWHY, and asked
Him to look at them and for this one time to forgive
them, and to grant them their request.
9 After this prayer from both of them, Aḏam began to
pray with his voice before Elohim, and said;
10 “O HWHY, when I was in the garden and saw the
water that flowed from under the Tree of Ḥai, my heart
did not desire, neither did my body require to drink of
it. I did not know thirst, because I was living, and above
that which I am now.
11 So that in order to live I did not require any Food of
Ḥai nor did I need to drink of the Water of Ḥai.
12 But now, O Elohim, I am dead and my flesh is
parched with thirst. Give me of the Water of Ḥai that I
may drink of it and live.
13 O Elohim, through Your mercy save me from these
plagues and trials, and bring me into another land
different from this. Let me live in Your garden.”
5

42 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and said
to him:
2 “Aḏam, you said, ‘Bring me into a land where there
is rest.’ Another land than this will not bring you rest. It
is the reign of the shamayim alone where there is rest.
3 But you cannot enter into it at present, but only after
your judgment is past and fulfilled.
42

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then will I make you go up into the reign of the
shamayim, you and your righteous descendants; and I
will give you and them the rest you ask for now.
5 And if you said, ‘Give me of the Water of Ḥai that I
may drink and live,’ it cannot be this day, but on the
day that My Bĕn shall descend into Gĕy-Hinnom, and
break the gates of brass, and crush into pieces the
reigns of iron.
6 Then I will, through mercy, save your soul and the
souls of the righteous, and thus give them rest in My
garden. That shall be when the end of the world is
come.
7 And the Water of Ḥai you seek will not be granted
you this day, but on the day that My Bĕn shall shed His
blood on your head in the land of Golgotha.
8 For blood of My Bĕn shall be the Water of Ḥai unto
thee, at that time, and not to thee alone, but unto all
those of thy seed who shall believe in Me; that it be
unto them for rest forever.”
9 The HWHY said again to Aḏam, “Aḏam, when you
were in the garden these trials did not come to you.
10 But since you transgressed My Commandment, all
these sufferings have covered you.
11 Now, also, your flesh requires food and drink. So
drink then of that water that flows by you on the face
of the earth.”
12 Then Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam.
13 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah worshipped HWHY, and
returned from the river of water to the cave. It was noon
when they drew near to the cave, they saw a large fire
by it.
4

43 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah were afraid, and stood
still. And Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “What is that fire by
our cave? We have done nothing in it to cause this fire.
2 We neither have bread to bake, nor broth to cook
there. We have never known anything like this fire, and
we do not know what to call it.
3 But ever since Elohim sent the keruḇ with a sword
of fire that flashed in his hand and had lightning coming
43

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

from it we fell down and were like corpses from fear
and we have not seen the like.
4 But now, Ḥawwah, look, this is the same fire that
was in the keruḇ’s hand, which Elohim has sent to
keep the cave in which we live.
5 O Ḥawwah, it is because Elohim is angry with us
and will drive us from it.
6 Ḥawwah,
we
have
transgressed
His
Commandment again in that cave, so that He had sent
this fire to burn around it and prevent us from going
into it.
7 If this is really the case, Ḥawwah, where shall we
live? And where shall we flee to be away from the face
of HWHY? Since, like it is with the garden, He will not
let us live in it, and He has deprived us of the good
things of it. But He has placed us in this cave, in which
we have endured darkness, tests and hardships until
at last we have found comfort in it.
8 But now that He has brought us out into another
land, who knows what may happen in it? And who
knows but that the darkness of that land may be far
greater than the darkness of this land?
9 Who knows what may happen in that land by day
or by night? And who knows whether it will be far or
near, Ḥawwah? Do you think it will please Elohim to
put us far from the garden, Ḥawwah? Where will
Elohim put us to prevent us from beholding Him,
because we have transgressed His Commandment,
and because we have made requests of Him all the
time?
10 Ḥawwah, if Elohim will bring us into a strange land
other than this, in which we find consolation, it must be
to put our souls to death, and blot out our name from
the face of the earth.
11 O Ḥawwah, if we are further alienated from the
garden and from Elohim, where shall we find Him
again, and ask Him to give us gold, incense, myrrh,
and some fruit of the fig-tree?
44

ADAM AND EVE 1

Where shall we find Him to comfort us a second
time? Where shall we find Him so that He may think of
us regarding the Covenant He has made on our
behalf?”
13 Then Aḏam said nothing else more. And they kept
looking, he and Ḥawwah, towards the cave, and at the
fire that flared up around it.
14 But that fire was from Satan. For he had gathered
trees and dry grasses, and had carried and brought
them to the cave, and had set fire to them, in order to
consume the cave and what was in it.
15 So that Aḏam and Ḥawwah should be left in sorrow,
and he should cut off their trust in Elohim, and make
them deny Him.
16 But by the mercy of Elohim he could not burn the
cave because Elohim sent His messenger to the cave
to guard it from this fire, until it went out.
17 And this fire lasted from noon until the break of the
next day. That was the forty-fifth day.
12

44 Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood, looking at the fire and
were unable to come near the cave from their fear of
the fire.
2 And Satan kept on bringing trees and throwing
them into the fire until the flames of the fire rose up
very high and covered the entire cave, thinking in his
mind, to consume the cave with the great fire. But the
messenger of HWHY was guarding it.
3 But he could not curse Satan nor wound him by
word because he had no authority over him, neither did
he attempt to do so with words from his mouth.
4 Therefore the messenger tolerated him without
uttering a bad word against him, until the Word of
Elohim came to Satan saying, “Go away from here at
once before you deceive My servants, for this time you
seek to destroy them.
5 Were it not for My mercy I would have destroyed
you and your hosts from off the earth. But I have had
patience with you until the end of the world.”
45

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Satan fled from before HWHY. But the fire went
on burning around the cave like a coal-fire the entire
day. This was the forty-sixth day that Aḏam and
Ḥawwah had spent since they came out of the garden.
7 And when Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw that the heat of
the fire had began to cool down, they started to walk
toward the cave to get into it as they usually did but
they could not because of the heat of the fire.
8 Then they both began crying because the fire
separated them from the cave, and the fire came
toward them, burning, and they were afraid.
9 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “See this fire of which
we have a portion within us. It formerly obeyed us, but
it no longer does so now, for we have violated the
boundaries of creation and changed our condition and
our nature has been altered. But the fire is not changed
in its nature, nor altered from its creation. Therefore it
now has power over us and when we come near it, it
scorches our flesh.”
6

45 Then Aḏam rose and prayed to Elohim, saying,
“This fire has separated us from the cave in which You
have Commanded us to live; and now, we cannot go
into it.”
2 Then Elohim heard Aḏam, and sent him His Word,
that said:
3 “Aḏam, see this fire! It is different from the flame
and heat from the garden of delights and the good
things in it!
4 When you were under My control all creatures
yielded to you, but after you transgressed My
Commandment they all rose up over you.”
5 Elohim said again to him, “Aḏam, see how Satan
has exalted you! He has deprived you of the Almighty
and of an exalted state like Me, and has not kept his
word to you but has ended up to become your enemy.
He is the one who made this fire in which he meant to
burn you and Ḥawwah.
46

ADAM AND EVE 1

Aḏam, why has he not kept his agreement with you
even one day, but has deprived you of the glory that
was on you when you obeyed his command?
7 Aḏam, do you think that he loved you when he
made this agreement with you? Do you think that he
loved you and wished to raise you on high?
8 No, Aḏam, he did not do anything out of love for
you. He wished to force you to come out of light and
into darkness, and from an exalted state to
degradation, and from glory to this humble state, from
joy to sorrow, and from rest to hunger and fainting.”
9 Elohim also said to Aḏam, “See this fire kindled by
Satan around your cave? See this curious thing that
surrounds you? Know that it will surround both you and
your descendants when you obey his command and
he will plague you with fire and you will go down into
Gĕy-Hinnom after you are dead.
10 Then, you will experience the burning of his fire that
will surround you and your descendants. You will not
be delivered from it until My Bĕn’s coming. Just as you
cannot go into your cave right now because of the
great fire around it, a way for you will not be made for
you until My Word comes on the day My Covenant is
fulfilled.
11 There is no way for you at present to come from
this life to rest until He who is My Word comes. Then
He will make a way for you, and you shall have rest.”
Then Elohim called to the fire that burned around the
cave with His Word, that it split itself in half until Aḏam
passed through it. Then the fire parted itself by
Elohim’s order and a way was made for Aḏam.
12 And Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam.
6

46 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah began again to come
into the cave. And when they came to the passage in
the midst of the fire, Satan blew into the fire like a
whirlwind and caused the burning coal-fire to cover
Aḏam and Ḥawwah so that their bodies were singed
and the coal-fire burned their skin.
47

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Aḏam and Ḥawwah screamed from the burning of
the fire, and said, “O HWHY, save us! Do not leave us
to be consumed and plagued by this burning fire. Do
not require us as the payment for having transgressed
Your Commandment.”
3 Then Elohim looked at their bodies on which Satan
had caused fire to burn. Elohim sent His messenger
that held back the burning fire. But the wounds
remained on their bodies.
4 Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “See Satan’s love for
you. He pretended to give you the Almighty and
greatness, and now look, he burns you with fire and
seeks to destroy you from off the earth.
5 Then look at Me, Aḏam. I created you, and how
many times have I delivered you out of his hand? If not,
wouldn’t he have destroyed you?”
6 Elohim spoke again, this time to Ḥawwah and said,
“He promised you in the garden, saying, ‘As soon as
you eat from the tree, your eyes will be opened, and
you shall become like elohiym, knowing good and evil.’
But look! He has burned your bodies with fire and has
made you taste the taste of fire, in exchange for the
taste of the garden. He has made you see the burning
of fire, and the evil of it, and the power it has over you.
7 Your eyes have seen the good he has taken from
you, and in truth he has opened your eyes. You have
seen the garden in which you were with Me, and you
have also seen the evil that has come over you from
Satan. But as to the Almighty he cannot give it to you,
nor fulfill his promise to you. He was bitter against you
and your descendants, that will come after you.”
8 And Elohim withdrew His Word from them.
2

47 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah came into the cave, still
trembling because of the fire that had scorched them.
So Aḏam said to Ḥawwah:
2 “Look, in this world the fire burns our flesh. How will
it be when we are dead and Satan shall punish our
souls? Is not our deliverance far off unless Elohim
comes in His mercy and fulfills His promise to us?”
48

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stepped into the cave
beraḵah themselves for coming into it once more. For
they thought that they would never enter it, when they
saw the fire around it.
4 But as the sun was setting the fire was still burning
and coming closer to Aḏam and Ḥawwah in the cave,
so that they could not sleep in it. After the sunset they
went out of the cave. This was the forty-seventh day
after they came out of the garden.
5 Aḏam and Ḥawwah then came under the top of hill
by the garden to sleep, as they were accustomed.
6 And they stood and prayed Elohim to forgive them
their sins, and then fell asleep under the top of the
mountain.
7 But Satan, the hater of all that is good, thought to
himself: “Elohim has promised deliverance to Aḏam by
covenant, and promised that He would deliver him
from all the hardships that have befallen him, but
Elohim has not promised me by covenant, and will not
deliver me out of my hardships. He has promised
Aḏam that He should make him and his descendants
live in the reign that I once lived in. I will kill Aḏam.
8 The earth shall be rid of him. The earth shall be left
to me alone. When he is dead he will not have any
descendants left to inherit the reign and it will remain
my own realm. Elohim will then be wanting me, and He
will restore it to me and my host.
3

48 After this Satan called to his hosts, all of which
came to him, and said to him:
2 “Our master, what will you do?”
3 Then he said to them, “This Aḏam, whom Elohim
created out of the dust, is the one who has taken our
reign from us. Come, let us gather together and kill
him. Hurl a rock at him and at Ḥawwah, and crush
them under it.”
4 When Satan’s hosts heard these words they came
to the part of the mountain where Aḏam and Ḥawwah
were asleep.
49

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Satan and his host took a huge rock, broad
and smooth, and without blemish. He thought to
himself, “If there should be a hole in the rock, when it
fell on them the hole in the rock might align over them
so they would escape and not die.”
5

He then said to his hosts, “Take up this stone and
drop it flat on them so that it doesn’t roll off them to
somewhere else. And when you have hurled it at them
get away from there quickly.”
6

And they did as he told them. But as the rock fell
down from the mountain toward Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
Elohim Commanded the rock to become a covering
over them so that it did them no harm. And so it was
by Elohim’s order.
7

But when the rock fell, the whole earth quaked
because of it, and was shaken from the size of the
rock.
8

And as it quaked and shook Aḏam and Ḥawwah
awoke from sleep and found themselves under a
covering of rock. But they didn’t know what had
happened because when they fell asleep they were
under the sky and not under a covering, and when they
saw it they were afraid.
9

Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “How has the
mountain bent itself and the earth quaked and shaken
on our account? And why has this rock spread itself
over us like a tent?
10

Does Elohim intend to plague us and to shut us up
in this prison? Or will He close the earth over us?
11

He is angry with us for our having come out of the
cave without His permission and for our having done
so of our own accord without asking Him when we left
the cave and came to this place.”
12

Then Ḥawwah said, “Aḏam, if indeed the earth
shook for our sake and this rock formed a tent over us
because of our transgression we will be sorry, because
our punishment will be long.
13

50

ADAM AND EVE 1

But get up and pray to Elohim to let us know
concerning this, and what this rock is that is spread
over us like a tent.”
15 Then Aḏam stood up and prayed before HWHY to let
Him know what had brought about this difficult time.
And Aḏam stood praying like that until the morning.
14

49 Then the Word of Elohim came and said:
“O Aḏam, who counseled you when you came out
of the cave to come to this place?”
3 And Aḏam said to Elohim, “HWHY, we came to this
place because of the heat of the fire that came over us
inside the cave.”
4 Then HWHY Elohim said to Aḏam, “Aḏam, you dread
the heat of fire for one night, but how will it be when
you live in Gĕy-Hinnom?
5 But Aḏam, do not be afraid and do not believe that
I have placed this covering of rock over you to plague
you.
6 It came from Satan, who had promised you the
Almighty and majesty. It is he who threw down this rock
to kill you under it, and Ḥawwah with you, and in this
way to prevent you from living on the earth.
7 But, as that rock was falling down on you I was
merciful. I Commanded it to form a tent over you, and
the rock under you to lower itself.
8 And this sign, O Aḏam, will happen to My Bĕn at
His coming on earth: Satan will raise the people of the
Yahuḏim to put My Bĕn to death and they will lay Him
in a rock, and seal a large stone over Him, and He shall
remain within that rock three days and three nights.
9 But on the third day He shall rise again, and it shall
be deliverance to you, O Aḏam, and to your
descendants, so that you will believe in Me. But, Aḏam,
I will not bring you from under this rock until three days
and three nights have passed.”
10 And Elohim withdrew His Word from Aḏam.
11 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah lived under the rock three
days and three nights, as Elohim had told them.
2

51

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And Elohim did so to them because they had left
their cave and had come to this same place without
Elohim’s permission.
13 But, after three days and three nights, Elohim
created an opening in the covering of rock and allowed
them to get out from under it. Their flesh was dried up,
and their eyes and hearts were troubled from crying
and sorrow.
12

50 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah went out and came into
the Cave of Treasures and stood praying in it the entire
day until the evening.
2 And this took place at the end of the fifty days after
they had left the garden.
3 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah rose again and prayed to
Elohim in the cave the whole of that night, and begged
for mercy from Him.
4 And when the day dawned, Aḏam said to Ḥawwah,
“Come! Let us go and do some work for our bodies.”
5 So they went out of the cave, and came to the
northern border of the garden, and they looked for
something to cover their bodies with. But they found
nothing, and did not know how to do the work. But their
bodies were stained, and they could not speak from
cold and heat.
6 Then Aḏam stood and asked Elohim to show him
something with which to cover their bodies.
7 Then came the Word of Elohim and said to him, “O
Aḏam, take Ḥawwah and come to the seashore where
you fasted before. There you will find skins of sheep
that were left after lions ate the carcasses. Take them
and make garments for yourselves, and clothe
yourselves with them.”

51 When Aḏam heard these words from Elohim, he
took Ḥawwah and went from the northern side of the
garden to the south of it, by the river of water where
they once fasted.
52

ADAM AND EVE 1

But as they were on their way, and before they
arrived, Satan, the wicked one, had heard the Word of
Elohim communing with Aḏam respecting his covering.
3 It distressed him, and he hurried to the place where
the sheepskins were, with the intention of taking them
and throwing them into the sea or of burning them so
that Aḏam and Ḥawwah would not find them.
4 But as he was about to take them, the Word of
Elohim came from the shamayim and bound him by
the side of those skins until Aḏam and Ḥawwah came
near him. But as they got closer to him they were afraid
of him and of his hideous appearance.
5 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and said to them, “This is he who was hidden
in the serpent, who deceived you, and stripped from
you your garment of light and glory.
6 This is he who promised you majesty and divinity.
Where is the beauty that was on him? Where is his
divinity? Where is his light? Where is the glory that
rested on him?
7 Now his form is hideous. He has become
abominable among messengers, and he has come to
be called Satan.
8 Aḏam, he wished to steal from you this earthly
garment of sheepskins so that he could destroy it and
not let you be covered with it.
9 What is his beauty that you should have followed
him? And what have you gained by obeying him? See
his evil works and then look at Me, your Creator. Look
at the good deeds I do for you.
10 I bound him until you came and saw him and his
weakness and that no power is left with him.”
11 And Elohim released him from his bonds.
2

52 After this Aḏam and Ḥawwah said no more, but
cried before Elohim because of their creation, and their
bodies that required an earthly covering.
2 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Ḥawwah, this is the
skin of beasts with which we shall be covered, but
when we put it on we shall be wearing a sign of death
53

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

on our bodies. Just as the owners of these skins have
died and have decomposed, so also shall we die and
pass away.”
3 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah took the skins and went
back to the Cave of Treasures. When they were in it,
they stood and prayed, as was their habit.
4 And they thought how they could make garments of
those skins because they had no skill.
5 Then Elohim sent to them His messenger to show
them how to accomplish this. And the messenger said
to Aḏam, “Go out and bring some palm-thorns.” Then
Aḏam went out, and brought some, as the messenger
had commanded him.
6 Then the messenger began before them to work
the skins, after the manner of one who prepares a shirt.
And he took the thorns and stuck them into the skins
before their eyes.
7 Then the messenger again stood up and prayed to
Elohim that the thorns in those skins should be hidden,
so as to be as if it were sewn with one thread.
8 And so it was, by Elohim’s order, and they became
garments for Aḏam and Ḥawwah. And He clothed
them with the skins.
9 From that time the nakedness of their bodies was
covered from the sight of each other’s eyes.
10 And this happened at the end of the fifty-first day.
11 Then when Aḏam’s and Ḥawwah’s bodies were
covered they stood and prayed and sought mercy of
HWHY and forgiveness, and gave Him thanks because
He had mercy on them and had covered their
nakedness. And they did not stop praying the entirety
of that night.
12 Then, when the morning dawned at sunrise, they
said their prayers, as was their custom, and then went
out of the cave.
13 And Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Since we don’t know
what there is to the west of this cave, let us go out and
see it today.” Then they departed and went toward the
western border.
54

ADAM AND EVE 1

53 They were not very far from the cave when Satan
came toward them. He hid himself between them and
the cave in the form of two ravenous lions that had
been three days without food. And they came toward
Aḏam and Ḥawwah as if to break them in pieces and
devour them.
2 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah cried out and begged
Elohim to deliver them from their paws.
3 Then the Word of Elohim came to them and drove
away the lions from them.
4 And Elohim said to Aḏam, “Aḏam, what do you
seek on the western border? And why have you left of
your own will the eastern border which was your living
place?
5 Now, turn back to your cave and remain in it, so that
Satan won’t deceive you or achieve his goal to
overtake you.
6 In this western border, Aḏam, there will go from you
a descendant that shall replenish it. And they will defile
themselves with their sins, and with their yielding to the
commands of Satan, and by following his works.
7 Therefore will I bring waters of a flood to cover them
and overwhelm them all. But I will deliver what is left of
the righteous among them and I will bring them to a
distant land, but the land in which you live now shall
remain desolate and without one inhabitant in it.”
8 After Elohim had spoken to them, they went back
to the Cave of Treasures. But their flesh was dried up,
and they were weak from fasting and praying, and from
the sorrow they felt at having sinned against Elohim.

54 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood up in the cave and
prayed the entire night until the morning dawned. And
when the sun came up they both went out of the cave.
Their minds were wandering from the heaviness of
sorrow and they didn’t know where they were going.
2 And they walked in that condition to the southern
border of the garden. And they began to go up that
55

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

border until they came to the eastern border, which
was land’s end.
3 And the keruḇ who guarded the garden was
standing at the western gate to guard it from Aḏam and
Ḥawwah in case they should attempt to suddenly
come into the garden.
4 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah thought the keruḇ was
not watching they came to the eastern border of the
garden. But as they were standing by the gate, as if
they desired to go in, the keruḇ turned around as if to
put them to death according to the order Elohim had
given him. And the keruḇ suddenly came with a
flashing sword of fire in his hand. When he saw them,
he went toward them to kill them. For he was afraid
that Elohim would destroy him if they went into the
garden without Elohim’s order.
5 And the sword of the keruḇ seemed to shoot flames
a distance away from it. But when he raised it over
Aḏam and Ḥawwah, the flame of the sword did not
flash out at them.
6 Because of this the keruḇ thought that Elohim was
approving to them and was bringing them back into the
garden. And the keruḇ stood wondering.
7 He could not go up to the shamayim to ascertain
Elohim’s order regarding Aḏam and Ḥawwah’s
entering the garden so continued to stand by them,
unable to leave them because he was afraid that if they
should enter the garden without permission Elohim
would destroy him.
8 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw the keruḇ coming
towards them with a flaming sword of fire in his hand
they fell on their faces from fear, and were as dead.
9 Then, the shamayim and the earth shook, and
another keruḇim came down from the shamayim to the
keruḇ who guarded the garden, and saw him amazed
and silent.
10 Then, again, other messengers came down close
to the place where Aḏam and Ḥawwah were. And the
keruḇim were split between joy and sorrow.
56

ADAM AND EVE 1

They were joyous because they thought that
Elohim was approving to Aḏam, and wished him to
return to the garden and wished to return him to the
gladness he once enjoyed.
12 But they were sorrowful over Aḏam because he
was fallen like a dead man, he and Ḥawwah. And they
said to themselves, “Aḏam has not died in this place,
but Elohim has put him to death for coming to this
place and wishing to enter the garden without His
permission.”
11

55 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and raised them up from their dead state,
saying to them, “Why did you come up here? Do you
intend to go into the garden from which I brought you
out? You cannot return today but only when the
Covenant I have made with you is fulfilled.”
2 Then Aḏam, when he heard the Word of Elohim,
and the fluttering of the messengers, which he only
heard and did not see, he and Ḥawwah cried and said
to the messengers:
3 “O Ruaḥoth, who wait on Elohim, look at me and at
my inability to see you! When I was in my former bright
nature I could see you. I sang praises as you do and
my heart was far above you.
4 But now that I have transgressed, that bright nature
is gone from me and I have come to this miserable
state in which I cannot see you. You do not serve me
like you used to do. For my flesh has become like that
of the animals.
5 O messengers of Elohim, ask Elohim to restore me
to the state I was in formerly and ask Him to rescue me
from this misery, and to remove the sentence of death
He passed on me for having trespassed against Him.
Ask Him, as I ask Him to do these things.”
6 Then, when the messengers heard these words
they all grieved over him and cursed Satan who had
misled Aḏam until he came from the garden to misery,
and from life to death, and from peace to distress, and
from gladness to a strange land.
57

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then the messengers said to Aḏam, “You obeyed
Satan and ignored the Word of Elohim who created
you. You believed that Satan would fulfill all he had
promised you.
8 But now, Aḏam, we will make known to you what
came over us though him, before his fall from the
shamayim.
9 He gathered together his hosts and deceived them,
promising to give them a great reign, a divine nature,
and other promises he made them.
10 His hosts believed that his word was true, so they
followed him, and renounced the glory of Elohim.
11 He then ordered us, and some obeyed and under
his command, and accepted his empty promises. But
we would not obey and we did not take his orders.
12 Then, after he had fought with Elohim and had dealt
disrespectfully with Him, he gathered together his
hosts and made war with us. And if it had not been for
Elohim’s strength that was with us we could not have
prevailed against him to hurl him from the shamayim.
13 But when he fell from among us there was great joy
in the shamayim because of his descent from us. If he
had remained in the shamayim, nothing, not even one
messenger would have remained in it.
14 But Elohim in His mercy drove him from among us
to this dark earth because he had become darkness
itself and a performer of unrighteousness.
15 And Aḏam, he has continued to make war against
you until he tricked you and made you come out of the
garden to this strange land, where all these trials have
come to you. And death, which Elohim brought to him,
he has also brought to you because you obeyed him
and sinned against Elohim.”
16 Then all the messengers rejoiced and praised
Elohim and asked Him not to destroy Aḏam for his
having sought to enter the garden at this time, but to
bear with him until the fulfillment of the promise, and to
help him in this world until he was free from Satan’s
hand.
7

58

ADAM AND EVE 1

56 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and said
to him:
2 “Aḏam, look at that garden of joy and at this earth
of toil, and see, the garden is full of messengers, but
look at yourself alone on this earth with Satan whom
you obeyed.
3 If you had submitted and been obedient to Me and
had kept My Word, you would be with My messengers
in My garden.
4 But when you sinned and obeyed Satan, you
became his guests among his messengers, that are
full of wickedness, and you came to this earth that
produces thorns and thistles for you.
5 O Aḏam, ask the one who deceived you to give you
the divine nature he promised you, or to make you a
garden as I had made for you, or to fill you with that
same bright nature with which I had filled you.
6 Ask him to make you a body like the one I made
you, or to give you a day of rest as I gave you, or to
create within you a wise soul, as I created for you; or
to take you from here to some other earth than this one
which I gave you. But, Aḏam, he will not fulfill even one
of the things he told you.
7 Acknowledge My favor toward you, and My mercy
on you, My creature. Acknowledge that I have not
shown vengeance on you for your transgression
against Me, but in My pity for you I have promised you
that at the end of the great five and a half days I will
come and save you.”
8 Then Elohim said again to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
“Get up, go down from here before the keruḇ with a
sword of fire in his hand destroys you.”
9 But Aḏam’s heart was comforted by Elohim’s words
to him, and he worshipped before Him.
10 And Elohim Commanded His messengers to escort
Aḏam and Ḥawwah to the cave with joy instead of the
fear that had come over them.
11 Then the messengers took up Aḏam and Ḥawwah
and brought them down the mountain by the garden,
59

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

with songs and praises and hymns until they arrived at
the cave. There the messengers began to comfort and
to strengthen them, and then departed from them
towards the shamayim to their Creator, who had sent
them.
12 But after the messengers had departed from Aḏam
and Ḥawwah, Satan came with shamefacedness and
stood at the entrance of the cave in which were Aḏam
and Ḥawwah. He then called to Aḏam, and said, “O
Aḏam, come, let me speak to you.”
13 Then Aḏam came out of the cave, thinking he was
one of Elohim’s messengers that had come to give him
some good counsel.

57 But when Aḏam came out and saw his hideous
figure he was afraid of him, and said to him, “Who are
you?”
2 Then Satan answered and said to him, “It is I, who
hid myself within the serpent, and who spoke to
Ḥawwah, and who enticed her until she obeyed my
command. I am he who, using my deceitful speech,
sent her to deceive you until you both ate of the fruit of
the tree and rejected the Command of Elohim.”
3 But when Aḏam heard these words from him, he
said to him, “Can you make me a garden as Elohim
made for me? Or can you clothe me in the same bright
nature in which Elohim had clothed me?
4 Where is the divine nature you promised to give
me? Where is that clever speech of yours that you had
with us at first, when we were in the garden?”
5 Then Satan said to Aḏam, “Do you think that when
I have promised someone something that I would
actually deliver it to him or fulfill my word? Of course
not. I myself have no hope of obtaining what I
promised.
6 Therefore I fell, and I made you fall for the same
reason that I myself fell. Whoever accepts my counsel,
falls.
7 But now, O Aḏam, because you fell you are under
my rule and I am sovereign over you because you
60

ADAM AND EVE 1

have obeyed me and have sinned against your Elohim.
There will be no deliverance from my hands until the
day promised you by your Elohim.”
8 Again he said, “Because we do not know the day
agreed on with you by your Elohim, nor the hour in
which you shall be delivered, we will multiply wars and
murders on you and your descendants after you.
9 This is our will and our good pleasure that we may
not leave one of the sons of men to inherit our place in
the shamayim.
10 Our home, Aḏam, is in burning fire and we will not
stop our evil doing even a single day nor even a single
hour. And I, O Aḏam, shall set you on fire when you
come into the cave to live there.”
11 When Aḏam heard these words he cried and
mourned and said to Ḥawwah, “Did you hear what he
said? He said that he would not fulfill any of what he
promised you in the garden. Did he really, at that time,
become sovereign over us?
12 We will ask Elohim, who created us, to deliver us
out of his hands.”

58 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah spread their hands
before Elohim, praying and begging Him to drive Satan
away from them so that he could not harm them or
force them to deny Elohim.
2 Then, suddenly, Elohim sent to them His
messenger who drove Satan away from them. This
happened about sunset on the fifty-third day after they
had come out of the garden.
3 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah went into the cave, and
stood up and lowered their faces to the ground to pray
to Elohim.
4 But before they prayed Aḏam said to Ḥawwah,
“Look, you have seen what temptations have befallen
us in this land. Come, let us get up and ask Elohim to
forgive us the sins we have committed and we will not
come out until the end of the day before the fortieth
day. And if we die in here He will save us.”
61

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah got up and joined
together in entreating Elohim.
6 They continued praying like this in the cave and did
not come out of it in the night or day, until their prayers
went up out of their mouths like a flame of fire.
5

59 But Satan, the hater of all that is good, did not
allow them to finish their prayers. He called to his hosts
and they all came. Then he said to them, “Since Aḏam
and Ḥawwah, whom we deceived, have agreed
together to pray to Elohim night and day, and to beg
Him to deliver them, and since they will not come out
of the cave until the end of the fortieth day.
2 And since they will continue their prayers as they
have both agreed to do, that He will deliver them out
of our hands and restore them to their former state, let
us see what we shall do to them.” And his hosts said
to him, “Power is yours, our master, to do what you
command.”
3 Then Satan, great in wickedness, took his hosts
and came into the cave on the thirtieth night of the forty
day period, and he beat Aḏam and Ḥawwah until he
thought they were dead and he left them as dead.
4 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and
Ḥawwah and raised them from their suffering, and
Elohim said to Aḏam, “Be strong, and do not be afraid
of him who has just come to you.”
5 But Aḏam cried and said, “Where were You, my
Elohim, that they should punish me with such blows
and that this suffering should come over me and over
Ḥawwah, your handmaiden?”
6 Then Elohim said to him, “Aḏam, see, he is master
of all you have, he who said, he would give you divinity.
Where is this love for you? And where is the gift he
promised?
7 Did it please him just once, Aḏam, to come to you,
comfort you, strengthen you, rejoice with you, or send
his hosts to protect you, because you have obeyed him
and have obeyed his counsel and have followed his
commandment and transgressed Mine?”
62

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Aḏam cried before HWHY, and said, “HWHY
because I transgressed a little, You have severely
punished me in return. I ask You to deliver me out of
his hands, or at least have pity on me and take my soul
out of my body now in this strange land.”
9 Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “If only there had been
this moaning and praying before you transgressed you
would have rest from the trouble in which you are now.”
10 But Elohim had patience with Aḏam, and let him
and Ḥawwah remain in the cave until they had fulfilled
the forty days.
11 But the strength and flesh withered on Aḏam and
Ḥawwah from fasting and praying, from hunger and
thirst, because they had not tasted either food or drink
since they left the garden, and their bodies functioned
erratically because they had no strength left to
continue in prayer from hunger until the end of the next
day to the fortieth. They were fallen down in the cave,
yet what speech escaped from their mouths, was only
in praises.
8

60 Then on the eighty-ninth day, Satan came to the
cave, clad in a garment of light, and belted with a bright
girdle.
2 In his hands was a staff of light, and he looked most
frightening, but his face was pleasant and his speech
was sweet.
3 He had transformed himself like this in order to
deceive Aḏam and Ḥawwah and to make them come
out of the cave before they had fulfilled the forty days.
4 He said to himself, “When they had fulfilled the forty
days’ fasting and praying, Elohim would restore them
to their former state but if He did not do this He would
still be favorable to them, and even if He had no mercy
on them would He still give them something from the
garden to comfort them as He had already twice
before.”
5 Then Satan came near the cave in beautiful
appearance and said:
63

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

“Aḏam, you and Ḥawwah arise and stand up and
come along with me to a good land and don’t be afraid.
I am flesh and bones like you and at first I was a
creature that Elohim created.
7 It was like this when He had created me, He placed
me in a garden in the north on the border of the world.
8 And He said to me, ‘Stay here!’ And I remained
there according to His word and I did not violate His
Commandment.
9 Then He made a sleep to come over me and then
He brought you, Aḏam, out of my side, but He did not
make you stay with me.
10 But Elohim took you in His qodesh hand and placed
you in a garden to the east.
11 Then I worried about you, because even though
Elohim had taken you out of my side, He had not
allowed you to stay with me.
12 But Elohim said to me: ‘Do not worry about Aḏam,
whom I brought out of your side, no harm will come to
him.
13 For now I have brought out of his side a help-meet
for him and I have given him joy by so doing.’ ”
14 Then Satan spoke again, saying, “I did not know
how it is you came to be in this cave, nor anything
about this trial that has come over you until Elohim said
to me, ‘Behold, Aḏam has transgressed. He whom I
had taken out of your side, and Ḥawwah also, whom I
took out of his side have sinned and I have driven them
out of the garden. I have made them live in a land of
sorrow and misery because they transgressed against
Me, and have obeyed Satan. And look, they are
suffering to this day, the eightieth.’
15 Then Elohim said to me, ‘Get up, go to them, and
make them come to your place, and do not permit
Satan to come near them and afflict them. For they are
now in great misery and lie helpless from hunger.’
16 He further said to me, ‘When you have taken them
to yourself, give them to eat of the fruit of the Tree of
Ḥai and give them to drink of the water of peace, and
6

64

ADAM AND EVE 1

clothe them in a garment of light, and restore them to
their former state of grace, and leave them not in
misery, for they came from you. But grieve not over
them, nor be sorry of that which has come over them.’
17 But when I heard this, I was sorry and my heart
could not bear it for your sake and I could not wait, my
child.
18 But, Aḏam, when I heard the name of Satan I was
afraid, and I said to myself, I will not come out because
he might trap me as he did my children, Aḏam and
Ḥawwah.
19 And I said, ‘Elohim, when I go to my children, Satan
will meet me on the way and fight against me as he did
against them.’
20 Then Elohim said to me, ‘Fear not; when you find
him, hit him with the staff that is in your hand and don’t
be afraid of him, because you are old and established,
and he shall not prevail against you.’
21 Then I said, ‘O HWHY, I am old, and cannot go. Send
Your messengers to bring them.’
22 But Elohim said to me, ‘Messengers are not like
Aḏam and Ḥawwah; and they will not consent to come
with them. But I have chosen you, because they are
your offspring and are like you and they will listen to
what you say.’
23 Elohim said further to me, ‘If you don’t have enough
strength to walk, I will send a cloud to carry you and
set you down at the entrance of their cave, then the
cloud will return and leave you there.
24 And if they will come with you, I will send a cloud to
carry you and them.’
25 Then He Commanded a cloud to carry me up and
it brought me to you, and then it went back.
26 And now, my children, Aḏam and Ḥawwah, look at
my old gray hair and at my feeble state, and at my
coming from that distant place. Come with me to a
place of rest.”
65

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then he began to cry and to sob before Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and his tears poured on the ground like
water.
28 And when Aḏam and Ḥawwah raised their eyes
and saw his beard and heard his sweet talk, their
hearts softened towards him and they obeyed him,
because they believed he was true.
29 And it seemed to them that they were really his
offspring when they saw that his face was like their
own; and they trusted him.
27

61 Then Satan took Aḏam and Ḥawwah by the hand
and started to lead them out of the cave.
2 But when they had gone a little way out of it Elohim
knew that Satan had overcome them and had brought
them out before the forty days were ended in order to
take them to some distant place and to destroy them.
3 Then the Word of HWHY Elohim again came and
cursed Satan and drove him away from them.
4 And Elohim began to speak to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
saying to them, “What made you come out of the cave
to this place?”
5 Then Aḏam said to Elohim, “Did you create a man
before us? Because, when we were in the cave there
suddenly came to us a friendly old man who said to us,
‘I am a messenger from Elohim to you, to bring you
back to some place of rest.’
6 And we believed that he was a messenger from
You, O Elohim, and we came out with him. We did not
know where we should go with him.”
7 Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “This is the father of the
evil arts who brought you and Ḥawwah out of the
Garden of Delights. And when he saw that you and
Ḥawwah both joined together in fasting and praying so
that you did not come out of the cave before the end
of the forty days, he wished to make your efforts
wasted and break your mutual bond in order to take
away all hope from you and to drive you to some place
where he might destroy you.
66

ADAM AND EVE 1

Because he couldn’t do anything to you unless he
showed himself in the likeness of you.
9 Therefore he came to you with a face like your own
and began to give you signs as if they were all true.
10 But because I am merciful and am favorable to you,
I did not allow him to destroy you. Instead, I drove him
away from you.
11 Now, Aḏam, take Ḥawwah and return to your cave
and remain in it until the morning after the fortieth day.
And when you come out, go toward the eastern gate
of the garden.”
12 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah worshipped Elohim, and
praised and baraḵ Him for the deliverance that had
come to them from Him. And they returned to the cave.
This happened in the evening of the thirty-ninth day.
13 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood up and with a
fervent passion, prayed to Elohim to give them
strength, for they had become weak because of
hunger and thirst and prayer. But they watched the
entire night praying until morning.
14 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Get up. Let us go
toward the eastern gate of the garden as Elohim told
us.”
15 And they said their prayers as they were
accustomed to do every day, and they left the cave to
go near to the eastern gate of the garden.
16 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood up and prayed and
appealed to Elohim to strengthen them and to send
them something to satisfy their hunger.
17 But after they finished their prayers they were too
weak to move.
18 Then the Word of Elohim came again, and said to
them, “Aḏam, get up, go and bring the two figs here.”
19 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah got up, and went until
they came near to the cave.
8

62 But Satan, the wicked one, was envious because
of the consolation Elohim had given them.
2 So he prevented them from getting the figs and
went into the cave and took the two figs and buried
67

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

them outside the cave so that Aḏam and Ḥawwah
should not find them. He also had thought to destroy
them.
3 But by Elohim’s mercy, as soon as those two figs
were in the ground Elohim defeated Satan’s wishes
regarding the figs and made them into two fruit trees
that grew higher than the cave and shaded the cave
because Satan had buried them on the eastern side of
it.
4 Then when the two trees were grown, and were
covered with fruit, Satan grieved and mourned, and
said, “It would have been better to have left those figs
where they were, because now they have become two
fruit trees that Aḏam will eat from all the days of his life.
But I had in my mind that when I buried them it would
destroy them entirely and hide them forever.
5 But Elohim has overturned my plan and would not
let that sacred fruit perish, and He has made known
my intention, and has defeated the plan I had formed
against His servants.”
6 Then Satan went away ashamed because he
hadn’t thought his plans all the way through.

63 As they got closer to the cave Aḏam and Ḥawwah
saw two fig trees covered with fruit, and giving shade
to the cave.
2 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “It seems to me that
we have gone the wrong way. When did these two
trees grow here? It seems to me that the enemy
wishes to lead us the wrong way. Do you suppose that
there is another cave in the earth besides this one?
3 But, Ḥawwah let us go into the cave and find the
two figs because this is our cave we were in. But if we
do not find the two figs in it then it cannot be our cave.”
4 Then they went into the cave and looked into the
four corners of it but did not find the two figs.
5 And Aḏam cried and said to Ḥawwah, “Did we go
to the wrong cave, Ḥawwah? It seems to me the two
figs should have been in the cave.” And Ḥawwah said,
“I do not know.”
68

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Aḏam stood up and prayed and said, “O
Elohim, You Commanded us to come back to the cave
to take the two figs and return to you.
7 But now, we cannot find them. Elohim, have you
taken them and planted these two trees, or have we
lost our way in the earth, or has the enemy deceived
us? If this is real then, O Elohim, reveal the secret of
these two trees and figs to us.”
8 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and said
to him, “Aḏam, when I sent you to bring back the figs,
Satan went ahead of you to the cave and took the figs,
and buried them outside, east of the cave, thinking to
destroy them, by not sowing them with good intent.
9 It wasn’t because of him that these trees have
immediately grown up but I had mercy on you and I
commanded them to grow. And they grew to be two
large trees, that would give you shade by their
branches, and you should find rest, and by this I made
you see My power and My marvelous works.
10 And, also I showed you Satan’s cruelty and his evil
works. Ever since you came out of the garden he has
not ceased for a single day from doing you harm in
some way. But I have not given him power over you.”
11 And Elohim said, “From now on, Aḏam, rejoice
because of the trees that you and Ḥawwah can rest
under when you feel weary. But do not eat any of their
fruit or come near them.”
12 Then Aḏam cried, and said, “Elohim, will You kill us
again, or will You drive us away from Your face, and
cut off our life from the face of the earth?
13 O Elohim, I beg you, if You know that these trees
bring either death or some other evil, as they did the
first time, root them up from near our cave and leave
us to die of the heat or hunger or thirst.
14 For we know Your marvelous works, O Elohim, that
they are great, and that by Your power You can bring
one thing out of another without the thing’s consent.
For Your power can make rocks to become trees, and
trees to become rocks.”
6

69

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

64 Then Elohim looked at Aḏam and at his strength
of mind and at his ability to endure hunger, thirst, and
heat. And He changed the two fig trees into two figs as
they were at first. Then He said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
“Each of you may take one fig.” And they took them as
HWHY Commanded them.
2 And He said to them, “You must now go into the
cave and eat the figs and satisfy your hunger or else
you will die.”
3 So, they went into the cave about sunset as Elohim
Commanded them. And Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood up
and prayed during the setting sun.
4 Then they sat down to eat the figs, but they did not
know how to eat them because they were not
accustomed to eating earthly food. They were afraid
that if they ate, their stomach would become heavy and
their flesh thickened, and their hearts would begin to
crave earthly food.
5 But while they were seated, Elohim sent them His
messenger, out of pity for them, so they wouldn’t
perish of hunger and thirst.
6 And the messenger said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah,
“Elohim says to you that you do not have the strength
that would be required to fast until death, so eat and
strengthen your bodies, for you are now animal flesh
and cannot subsist without food and drink.”
7 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah took the figs and began
to eat of them. But Elohim had put into them a mixture
as of savory bread and soup.
8 Then, the messenger left Aḏam and Ḥawwah as
they ate of the figs until they had satisfied their hunger.
Then they put aside what was left over, but by the
power of Elohim the figs became whole again,
because Elohim baraḵ them.
9 After this Aḏam and Ḥawwah got up and prayed
with a joyful heart and renewed strength, and praised
and rejoiced much for the entire night. And this was the
end of the eighty-third day.
70

ADAM AND EVE 1

65 And when it was day, they got up and prayed, after
their custom, and then went out of the cave.
2 But they became sick from the food they had eaten
because they were not used to it, so they went about
in the cave saying to each other:
3 “What has our eating caused to happen to us, that
we should be in such pain? We are in misery. We are
going to die! It would have been better for us to have
died keeping our bodies pure than to have eaten and
defiled them with food.”
4 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “This pain did not
come to us in the garden, neither did we eat such bad
food there. Ḥawwah, do you think that Elohim will
plague us through the food that is in us, or that our
insides will come out, or that Elohim intends to kill us
with this pain before He has fulfilled His promise to
us?”
5 Then Aḏam besought HWHY and said, “O HWHY, let
us not perish because of the food we have eaten. O
HWHY, don’t punish us, but deal with us according to
Your great mercy, and do not forsake us until the day
of the promise You have made us.”
6 Then Elohim looked at them, and then equipped
them to be able to eat food at once, as it is to this day,
so that they should not perish.
7 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah came back into the cave
sorrowful and crying because of the alteration of their
bodies. And they both knew from that hour that they
were altered beings and all hope of returning to the
garden was now lost, and they could not enter it again.
8 For now their bodies had strange functions and all
flesh that requires food and drink for its existence
cannot be in the garden.
9 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “See, our hope is now
lost and so is our faith that we will enter the garden.
We no longer belong to the inhabitants of the garden
but from now on we are earthy and of the dust, and of
the inhabitants of the earth. We shall not return to the
garden until the day in which Elohim has promised to
71

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

save us and to bring us again into the garden, as He
promised us.”
10 Then they prayed to Elohim that He would have
mercy on them. After this, their minds were quieted,
their hearts were broken, and their longing was cooled
down, and they were like strangers on earth. That night
Aḏam and Ḥawwah spent in the cave, where they slept
heavily because of the food they had eaten.

66 When the morning of the day after they had eaten
food came, Aḏam and Ḥawwah prayed in the cave,
and Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Look, we asked Elohim
for food, and He gave it. But now let us also ask Him
to give us a drink of water.”
2 Then they got up, and went to the bank of the
stream of water, that was on the south border of the
garden, which they had thrown themselves in before.
And they stood on the bank, and prayed to Elohim that
He would Command them to drink the water.
3 Then the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and said
to him, “O Aḏam, your body has become brutish, and
requires water to drink. Take some and drink it, you
and Ḥawwah, then give thanks and praise.”
4 Aḏam and Ḥawwah then went down to the stream
and drank from it, until their bodies felt refreshed. After
they drank, they praised Elohim and then returned to
their cave, as was their custom. This happened at the
end of eighty-three days.
5 Then on the eighty-fourth day, they took the two figs
and hung them in the cave together with the leaves of
the figs. To them these were a sign and a beraḵah from
Elohim. And they placed them there so that if their
descendants came there they would see the wonderful
things Elohim had done for them.
6 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah stood outside the cave
again and asked Elohim to show them some food with
which they could nourish their bodies.
7 Then the Word of Elohim came and said to him,
“Aḏam, go down west of the cave until you come to a
land that has dark soil, and there you will find food.”
72

ADAM AND EVE 1

And Aḏam obeyed the Word of Elohim and took
Ḥawwah, and went down to a land that had dark soil
and found wheat growing ripe in the ear, and figs to
eat; and Aḏam rejoiced over it.
9 Then the Word of Elohim came again to Aḏam, and
said to him, “Take some of this wheat and make
yourselves some bread with it, to nourish your body.”
And Elohim gave Aḏam’s heart wisdom to work the
corn until it became bread.
10 Aḏam accomplished it all until he grew very faint
and weak. He then returned to the cave rejoicing at
what he had learned and what he had done with the
wheat, until it was made into bread.
8

67 When Aḏam and Ḥawwah went down to the land
of black earth and came near to the wheat Elohim had
showed them and saw that it was ripe and ready for
reaping, they did not have a sickle to reap it with. So
they put themselves to the task and began to pull up
the wheat by hand until the task was complete.
2 They then heaped it into a pile. They were weak
from heat and from thirst and went under a shady tree
where the breeze fanned them to sleep.
3 But Satan saw what Aḏam and Ḥawwah had done
and he called his hosts, and said to them, “Elohim has
shown to Aḏam and Ḥawwah all about this wheat to
strengthen their bodies, and, look, they have come and
made a big pile of it. Now they are weak from the toil
and are now asleep. Come, let us set fire to this heap
of corn, and burn it. Let us take that bottle of water that
is by them and empty it out, so that they may find
nothing to drink, and we kill them with hunger and
thirst.
4 Then, when they wake up from their sleep and seek
to return to the cave, we will come to them along the
way and lead them in the wrong direction so that they
die of hunger and thirst. Then perhaps they will reject
Elohim, and He may destroy them. So, in this way we
can be rid of them.”
73

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Satan and his hosts set the wheat on fire and
burned it up.
6 But from the heat of the flame Aḏam and Ḥawwah
awoke from their sleep and saw the wheat burning and
the bucket of water by them was poured out.
7 Then they cried and began to go back to the cave.
8 But as they were going up from below the
mountain, Satan and his hosts met them in the form of
messengers, praising Elohim.
9 Then Satan said to Aḏam, “Aḏam, why are you so
pained with hunger and thirst? It seems to me that
Satan has burnt up the wheat.” And Aḏam said to him,
“Yes.”
10 Satan said to Aḏam, “Come back with us. We are
messengers of Elohim. Elohim sent us to you to show
you another field of corn better than that, and beyond
it is a fountain of good water and many trees, near
where you shall live. And you shall work the corn field
and make it better than that which Satan has
consumed.”
11 Aḏam thought that he was true, and that they were
messengers who talked with him and so he went back
with them.
12 Then Satan began to lead Aḏam and Ḥawwah in
the wrong direction for eight days, until they both fell
down as if dead, from hunger, thirst, and weakness.
Then he fled with his hosts, and left them.
5

68 Then Elohim looked at Aḏam and Ḥawwah, and
at what had befallen them from Satan, and how he
killed them.
2 So, Elohim sent His Word and raised Aḏam and
Ḥawwah from death.
3
Then, when he was raised, Aḏam said, “O Elohim,
You have burnt and taken the seeds which You had
given us. You have emptied out the bucket of water.
And You have sent Your messengers, who have
caused us to lose our way from the corn field. Will You
kill us? If this is from You, O Elohim, then take away
our souls but stop punishing us.”
74

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Elohim said to Aḏam, “I did not burn down the
wheat, and I did not pour the water out of the bucket,
and I did not send My messengers to lead you astray.
5 But it is Satan, your master who did it. It was he to
whom you have subjected yourself, while setting My
Commandment aside. It is he who burnt down the
corn, and poured out the water, and who has led you
astray. All the promises he has made you were just a
trick, a deception, and a lie.
6 But now, Aḏam, you shall acknowledge My good
deeds done to you.”
7 And Elohim told His messengers to take Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and to lift them up to the field of wheat, which
they found as before with the bucket full of water.
8 There they saw a tree and found on it solid manna,
and they were astonished at Elohim’s power. And the
messengers commanded them to eat of the manna
when they were hungry.
9 And Elohim admonished Satan with a curse, not to
come again and destroy the field of corn.
10 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah took of the corn, and
made an offering of it, and took it and offered it up on
the mountain, at the place where they had offered up
their first offering of blood.
11 And they offered this offering again on the altar they
had built at first. And they stood up and prayed, and
besought HWHY saying, “O Elohim, when we were in
the garden, our praises went up to you like this
offering, and our innocence went up to you like
incense. But now, O Elohim, accept this offering from
us, and don’t turn us away or deprive us of Your
mercy.”
12 Then Elohim said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah, “Since
you have made this offering and have offered it to Me,
I shall make it My Bĕn’s flesh when He comes down
on earth to save you. I shall cause it to be offered
continually on an altar for forgiveness and mercy for
those who partake of it appropriately.”
4

75

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then Elohim sent a bright fire over the offering of
Aḏam and Ḥawwah and filled it with brightness, grace,
and light. And the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh came down on that
offering.
14 Then Elohim Commanded a messenger to take fire
tongs, like a spoon, and take an offering and bring it to
Aḏam and Ḥawwah. And the messenger did so as
Elohim had Commanded him, and offered it to them.
15 And the souls of Aḏam and Ḥawwah were
brightened, and their hearts were filled with joy and
gladness and with the praises of Elohim.
16 And Elohim said to Aḏam, “This shall be a custom
to you to perform when affliction and sorrow should
come over you. But your deliverance and your
entrance in to the garden, shall not be until the days
are fulfilled as agreed between you and Me. If it were
not for this, I would bring you back to My garden and
to My favor and My mercy and pity for you, for the sake
of the offering you have just made to My Name.”
17 Aḏam rejoiced at these words, which he heard from
Elohim. And Aḏam and Ḥawwah worshipped before
the altar, to which they bowed, and then went back to
the Cave of Treasures.
18 And this took place at the end of the twelfth day
after the eightieth day (92 days), from the time Aḏam
and Ḥawwah came out of the garden.
19 And they stood up the entire night praying until
morning. Then they went out of the cave.
20 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, with joy in his heart,
because of the offering they had made to Elohim that
had been accepted by Him, “Let us do this three times
every week, on all the days of our life.”
21 And as they agreed on these words and Elohim
was pleased with their thoughts and with the decision
they made.
22 After this, the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam, and
said, “Aḏam, you have determined beforehand the
days in which sufferings shall come over My Bĕn,
13

76

ADAM AND EVE 1

when He is made flesh. They are the fourth day, and
the preparation day, which is sixth day.
23 But regarding the first day, I created all things in it,
and I raised the shamayim. Through My Bĕn’s rising
again on this day, will I create joy and raise those who
believe in Me on high. Aḏam, make this offering all the
days of your life.”
24 Then the Word of Elohim withdrew from Aḏam.
25 But Aḏam continued to make the offering as he
had, every week, three times a week, until the end of
seven weeks. And on the first day, which is the fiftieth,
Aḏam made an offering as he was accustomed, and
he and Ḥawwah took it and came to the altar before
Elohim, as He had taught them.

69 Then Satan, the hater of all that is good, was
envious of Aḏam by the fact that his offering found
favor with Elohim. So Satan hurried and took a sharp
stone from among the sharp ironstones, which were
shaped in the form of a man. And Satan went and
stood by Aḏam and Ḥawwah.
2 Aḏam was offering on the altar and had begun to
pray with his hands spread before Elohim.
3 Then Satan hurried with the sharp ironstone he had
and pierced Aḏam on the right side, and blood and
water flowed. Then Aḏam fell on the altar like a corpse,
and Satan fled.
4 Then Ḥawwah came and took Aḏam and placed
him below the altar. There she stayed, crying over him
while a stream of blood flowed from Aḏam’s side over
his offering. But Elohim looked upon the death of
Aḏam.
5 But Elohim looked at the death of Aḏam. He then
sent His Word and raised him up. And He said to him,
“Fulfill your offering because, certainly Aḏam, it is
worthy and there is no imperfection in it.”
6 Elohim continued speaking to Aḏam, “Thus will it
also happen to My Bĕn while on the earth, when He
shall be pierced and blood and water shall flow from
His side and run over His body, which is the true
77

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

offering, and which shall be offered on the altar as a
perfect offering.
7 Then Elohim Commanded Aḏam to finish his
offering. And when he had ended it he worshipped
before Elohim and praised Him for the signs He had
showed him.
8 And Elohim healed Aḏam in one day, which is the
end of the seven weeks and is the fiftieth day.
9 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah returned from the
mountain and went into the Cave of Treasures, as they
were used to do. This completed one hundred and
forty days for Aḏam and Ḥawwah, since their coming
out of the garden.
10 Then they both stood up that night and prayed to
Elohim. And when it was morning they went down to
the west side of the cave, to the place where their corn
was, and there they rested under the shadow of a tree,
as they were accustomed to do.
11 But when they were there, a multitude of beasts
came all around them. It was Satan’s wickedness and
his way to wage war against Aḏam through marriage.

70 After this Satan, the hater of all that is good, took
the form of a messenger, and two others with him. So,
they looked like the three messengers who had
brought to Aḏam gold, incense, and myrrh.
2 They came to Aḏam and Ḥawwah while they were
under the tree, and greeted Aḏam and Ḥawwah with
friendly words that were full of deceit.
3 But when Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw their friendly
countenance and heard their sweet speech, Aḏam
rose, welcomed them, and brought them to Ḥawwah
and they remained all together. Aḏam’s heart was
happy all the while because he thought that they were
the same messengers, who had brought him gold,
incense, and myrrh.
4 This was because when they came to Aḏam the
first time peace and joy came over him from them
because they brought him good gifts. So Aḏam
thought that they had come a second time to give him
78

ADAM AND EVE 1

other gifts to make him rejoice. He did not know it was
Satan, therefore he received them with joy and
associated with them.
5 Then Satan, the tallest of them, said, “Rejoice,
Aḏam, and be glad. Look, Elohim has sent us to you
to tell you something.”
6 And Aḏam said, “What is it?” Then Satan said, “It is
a simple thing, but it is the Word of Elohim. Will you
accept it from us and do it? If you will not accept it, we
will return to Elohim and tell Him that you would not
receive His Word.”
7 And Satan continued, saying to Aḏam, “Don’t be
afraid and don’t shake. Don’t you know us?”
8 But Aḏam said, “I do not know you.”
9 Then Satan said to him, “I am the messenger that
brought you gold and took it to the cave. This other
messenger is the one that brought you incense. And
that third messenger is the one who brought you myrrh
when you were on top of the mountain. It was he who
carried you to the cave.
10 It was our other fellow messengers who lifted you
to the cave. Elohim has not sent them with us this time
because He said to us, ‘You will be enough.’ ”
11 So when Aḏam heard these words he believed
them, and said to the messengers, “Speak the Word of
Elohim, and I will receive it.”
12 And Satan said to him, “Swear and promise me that
you will receive it.”
13 Then Aḏam said, “I do not know how to swear and
promise.”
14 And Satan said to him, “Hold out your hand and put
it inside my hand.”
15 Then Aḏam held out his hand, and put it into
Satan’s hand. Satan said to him, “Now say this; As
Elohim who raised the stars in the shamayim, and
established the dry ground on the waters, and has
created me out of the four elements, and out of the
dust of the earth, and is logical and true does speak, I
will not break my promise, nor abandon my word.”
79

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And Aḏam swore.
17 Then Satan said to him, “Look, some time has
passed since you came out of the garden, and you do
not know wickedness or evil. But now Elohim says to
you, to take Ḥawwah who came out of your side, and
marry her so that she will bear you children to comfort
you and to drive from you trouble and sorrow. This
thing is not difficult and there is nothing morally wrong
in it for you.”
16

71 But when Aḏam heard these words from Satan,
he sorrowed much, because of his oath and his
promise. And he said, “Shall I commit adultery with my
flesh and my bones, and shall I sin against myself, so
that Elohim will destroy me and blot me out from the
face of the earth?
2 First, I ate of the tree and He drove me out of the
garden into this strange land and deprived me of my
bright nature, and brought my death. If I do this, He will
cut off my life from the earth, and He will cast me into
Gĕy-Hinnom, and plague me there a long time.
3 But Elohim never spoke the words that you have
said and you are not Elohim’s messengers. He did not
send you. You are devils that have come to me under
the false appearance of messengers. Away from me,
you cursed of Elohim!”
4 Then the devils fled from Aḏam. And he and
Ḥawwah got up and returned to the Cave of Treasures,
and went into it.
5 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “If you saw what I did,
don’t tell anyone because I sinned against Elohim in
swearing by His Great Name, and I have placed my
hand once again into that of Satan.” Ḥawwah then held
her peace as Aḏam told her.
6 Then Aḏam got up and spread his hands before
Elohim, beseeching and entreating Him with tears to
forgive him of what he had done. And Aḏam remained
standing and praying in that way for forty days and
forty nights. He did not eat or drink until he dropped
down on the ground from hunger and thirst.
80

ADAM AND EVE 1

Then Elohim sent His Word to Aḏam, who raised
him up from where he lay, and said to him, “Aḏam, why
have you sworn by My Name? Why have you made
agreement with Satan again?”
8 But Aḏam cried and said, “O Elohim, forgive me. I
did this unwittingly because I believed they were
Elohim’s messengers.”
9 And Elohim forgave Aḏam and said to him,
“Beware of Satan.”
10 And He withdrew His Word from Aḏam.
11 Then Aḏam’s heart was comforted, and he took
Ḥawwah and they went out of the cave to prepare
some food for their bodies.
12 But from that day Aḏam struggled in his mind about
marrying Ḥawwah, because he was afraid that if he did
it, Elohim would be angry with him.
13 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah went to the river of water,
and sat on the bank, as people do when they enjoy
themselves.
14 But Satan was jealous of them and planned to
destroy them.
7

72 Then Satan, and ten from his hosts, transformed
themselves into maidens, with more grace than any
others in the entire world.
2 They came up out of the river in front of Aḏam and
Ḥawwah, and they said among themselves, “Come,
we will look at the faces of Aḏam and Ḥawwah who are
of the men on earth. They are beautiful and their faces
look different than ours.” Then they came to Aḏam and
Ḥawwah and greeted them, and they stood amazed at
them.
3 Aḏam and Ḥawwah looked at them also, and
wondered at their beauty, and said, “Is there another
world under us with such beautiful creatures as these
in it?”
4 And the maidens said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah, “Yes,
indeed, many of us were created.”
5 Then Aḏam said to them, “But how do you
multiply?”
81

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And they told him, “We have husbands who have
married us and we bear them children, who grow up
and in turn marry and are married and also bear
children. Thus we increase. O Aḏam, you will not
believe us, we will show you our husbands and our
children.”
7 Then they shouted over the river as if to call their
husbands and their children. And men and children
came up from the river, and every man came to his
wife, and his children were with him.
8 But when Aḏam and Ḥawwah saw them, they stood
speechless and were amazed at them.
9 Then they said to Aḏam and Ḥawwah, “See all our
husbands and our children? You should marry
Ḥawwah as we have married our husbands so that you
will have children as we have.” This was the way Satan
was to deceive Aḏam.
10 Satan also thought to himself, “Elohim at first
commanded Aḏam concerning the fruit of the tree,
saying to him, ‘Do not eat of it or else you shall die.’
But Aḏam ate of it but Elohim did not kill him. He only
gave him by law death, plagues, and trials, until the
day he shall leave his body.
11 But if I deceive him to do this thing and marry
Ḥawwah without Elohim’s permission, Elohim will kill
him.”
12 Therefore Satan worked this apparition before
Aḏam and Ḥawwah, because he sought to kill him, and
to make him disappear from off the face of the earth.
13 Meanwhile the fire of immorality came over Aḏam
and he thought of committing transgression. But he
restrained himself, fearing that if he followed the
advice of Satan, Elohim would put him to death.
14 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah got up and prayed to
Elohim, while Satan and his hosts went down into the
river in front of Aḏam and Ḥawwah so they would see
them going back to their own world.
15 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah went back to the Cave of
Treasures, as they usually did around evening time.
6

82

ADAM AND EVE 1

And they both got up and prayed to Elohim that
night. Aḏam remained standing in prayer but did not
know how to pray because of the thoughts in his heart
about marrying Ḥawwah. And he continued this way
until morning.
17 When light came up, Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “Get
up, let us go below the mountain where they brought
us gold and let us ask HWHY concerning this matter.”
18 Then Ḥawwah said, “What is that matter, Aḏam?”
19 And he answered her, “That I may request HWHY to
inform me about marrying you because I will not do it
without His permission or else He will kill you and me.
For those devils have set my heart on fire with thoughts
of what they showed us in their sinful visions.”
20 Then Ḥawwah said to Aḏam, “Why do we need to
go to the foot of the mountain? Let us rather stand up
and pray in our cave to Elohim to let us know whether
this advice is good or not.”
21 Then Aḏam rose up in prayer and said, “O Elohim,
you know that we transgressed against you, and from
the moment we sinned we were stripped of our bright
nature, and our body became brutish, requiring food
and drink, and with animal desires.
22 Command us, O Elohim, not to give way to them
without Your permission, for fear that You will turn us
into nothing. If you do not give us permission we will
be overcome and follow that advice of Satan, and You
will again kill us.
23 If not, then take our souls from us and let us be rid
of this animal lust. And if You give us no order about
this thing then separate Ḥawwah from me and me from
her, and place us each far away from the other.
24 Then, O Elohim, if You separate us from each other
the devils will deceive us with their apparitions that
resemble us, and destroy our hearts, and defile our
thoughts towards each other. If our heart is not toward
each other it will be toward them, through their
appearance when the devils come to us in our
likeness.” Here Aḏam ended his prayer.
16

83

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

73 Then Elohim considered the words of Aḏam that
they were true, and that he could not wait long for His
order, respecting the counsel of Satan.
2 And Elohim approved Aḏam in what he had thought
concerning this, and in the prayer he had offered in His
presence; and the Word of Elohim came to Aḏam and
said to him, “O Aḏam, if only you had had this caution
at first, before you came out of the garden into this
land!”
3 After that, Elohim sent His messenger who had
brought gold, and the messenger who had brought
incense, and the messenger who had brought myrrh to
Aḏam, that they should inform him respecting his
marriage to Ḥawwah.
4 Then those messengers said to Aḏam, “Take the
gold and give it to Ḥawwah as a wedding gift, and
promise to marry her; then give her some incense and
myrrh as a present; and be you both will be one flesh.”
5 Aḏam obeyed the messengers, and took the gold
and put it into Ḥawwah’s bosom in her garment; and
promised to marry her with his hand.
6 Then the messengers commanded Aḏam and
Ḥawwah to get up and pray forty days and forty nights;
when that was done, then Aḏam was to have sexual
intercourse with his wife; for then this would be an act
pure and undefiled; so that he would have children
who would multiply, and replenish the face of the earth.
7 Then both Aḏam and Ḥawwah received the words
of the messengers; and the messengers departed
from them.
8 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah began to fast and pray,
until the end of the forty days; and then they had sexual
intercourse, as the messengers had told them. And
from the time Aḏam left the garden until he wedded
Ḥawwah, were two hundred and twenty-three days,
that is seven months and thirteen days.
9 This was how Satan’s war with Aḏam was won by
Aḏam and Satan was defeated.
84

ADAM AND EVE 1

74 And they lived on the earth working so they could
keep their bodies in good health. And they continued
until the nine months of Ḥawwah’s pregnancy were
over and the time drew near when she would give birth.
2 Then she said to Aḏam, “The tokens placed in this
cave since we left the garden show it to be a pure
place. We will be praying in it again in a while. Because
of this, it is not appropriate that I should give birth in it.
Let us instead go to the sheltering rock cave that was
formed by the command of Elohim when Satan threw
a big rock down on us in an attempt to kill us.”
3 Aḏam then took Ḥawwah to that cave. When the
time came for her to give birth she strained very much.
Aḏam felt pity for her and he was very worried about
her because she was close to death and the Words of
Elohim to her were being fulfilled: “You shall bear a
child in suffering, and in sorrow shall you bring forth a
child.”
4 But when Aḏam saw the distress Ḥawwah was in,
he got up and prayed to Elohim, and said, “O HWHY,
look at me with the eye of Your mercy, and deliver her
out of her distress.”
5 And Elohim looked at His maidservant Ḥawwah,
and delivered her, and she gave birth to her first-born
son, and with him a daughter.
6 Then Aḏam rejoiced at Ḥawwah’s deliverance, and
also over the children she had given him. And Aḏam
ministered to Ḥawwah in the cave until the end of eight
days, when they named the son Qayin, and the
daughter Luluwa.
7 The meaning of Qayin is “hater,” because he hated
his sister in their mother’s womb, before they were
born. Because of this, Aḏam named him Qayin.
8 But Luluwa means “beautiful,” because she was
more beautiful than her mother.
9 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah waited until Qayin and his
sister were forty days old, when Aḏam said to
Ḥawwah, “We will make an offering and offer it up in
behalf of the children.”
85

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And Ḥawwah said, “We will first make one offering
for the first-born son and then later we shall make one
for the daughter.”
10

75 Then Aḏam prepared an offering. He and
Ḥawwah brought it to the altar they had built at first and
offered it up for their children.
2 And Aḏam offered up the offering, and asked
Elohim to accept his offering.
3 Then Elohim accepted Aḏam’s offering, and sent a
light from the shamayim that shined down on the
offering. Aḏam and his son drew near to the offering,
but Ḥawwah and the daughter did not approach it.
4 Aḏam and his son were joyful as they came down
from the altar. Aḏam and Ḥawwah waited until the
daughter was eighty days old and then Aḏam prepared
an offering and took it to Ḥawwah and to the children.
They went to the altar where Aḏam offered it up, as he
was accustomed, asking HWHY to accept his offering.
5 And HWHY accepted the offering of Aḏam and
Ḥawwah. Then Aḏam, Ḥawwah, and the children
gathered together and came down from the mountain,
rejoicing.
6 But they did not return to the cave in which they
were born. Instead they went to the Cave of Treasures,
so that the children should live in it and be baruḵ with
the tokens brought from the garden.
7 But after they had been baraḵ with the tokens they
went back to the cave in which they were born.
8 But, before Ḥawwah had offered up the offering,
Aḏam had taken her to the river of water in which they
threw themselves at first. There they washed
themselves. Aḏam washed his body and Ḥawwah
washed hers clean also, after the suffering and
distress that had come over them.
9 But after washing themselves in the river of water,
Aḏam and Ḥawwah returned every night to the Cave
of Treasures, where they prayed and were baruḵ, and
then went back to their cave where their children were
born.
86

ADAM AND EVE 1

Aḏam and Ḥawwah did this until the children had
been weaned. After they were weaned, Aḏam made
an offering for the souls of his children in addition to
the three times every week he made an offering for
them.
11 When the children were weaned, Ḥawwah
conceived again, and when her pregnancy came to
term, she gave birth to another son and daughter. They
named the son Heḇel and the daughter Aklia.
12 Then at the end of forty days, Aḏam made an
offering for the son, and at the end of eighty days he
made another offering for the daughter, and treated
them as he had previously treated Qayin and his sister
Luluwa.
13 He brought them to the Cave of Treasures, where
they received a beraḵah and then returned to the cave
where they were born. After these children were born,
Ḥawwah stopped having children.
10

76 As the children began to grow stronger and taller,
Qayin grew hard-hearted, and he ruled over his
younger brother.
2 Often, when his father made an offering, Qayin
would remain behind and not go with them to make the
offering.
3 But Heḇel had a meek heart, and was obedient to
his father and mother. He frequently influenced them
to make an offering because he loved it. He prayed
and fasted much.
4 Then this sign came to Heḇel. As he was corning
into the Cave of Treasures he saw the golden rods, the
incense and the myrrh and he asked his parents,
Aḏam and Ḥawwah, to tell him about them. Heḇel
asked, “Where did you get these from?”
5 Then Aḏam told him all that had befallen them. And
Heḇel felt deeply about what his father told him.
6 Then his father, Aḏam, told him about the works of
Elohim and of the garden. After hearing these things,
Heḇel remained behind after his father left and stayed
the entire of that night in the Cave of Treasures.
87

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

And that night, while he was praying, Satan
appeared to him in the form of a man. And Satan said
to him, “Often you have moved your father into making
offerings, and to fast and pray. Because of this, I will
kill you and make you perish from this world.”
8 But Heḇel prayed to Elohim and drove away Satan,
and he did not believe the words of the devil. Then
when it was day, a messenger of Elohim appeared to
him, who said to him, “Do not stop your fasting, prayer,
or offering to your Elohim. For, look, HWHY has
accepted your prayer. Be not afraid of the form which
appeared to you in the night, and who cursed you to
death.” Then the messenger departed from him.
9 Then Heḇel came to Aḏam and Ḥawwah when it
was day, and told them about the vision he had seen.
When they heard it they worried about it very much,
but said nothing to him about it. They only comforted
him.
10 But Satan came to the hard-hearted Qayin by night
and showed himself and said to him, “Since Aḏam and
Ḥawwah love your brother Heḇel so much more than
they love you, they wish to join him in marriage to your
beautiful sister because they love him. However, they
wish to join you in marriage to his ugly sister, because
they hate you.
11 Now before they do that, I am telling you that you
should kill your brother. That way your sister will be left
for you and you can throw his sister away.”
12 And Satan departed from him. But the devil
remained behind in Qayin’s heart, and frequently
prompted his ambition to kill his brother.
7

77 But when Aḏam saw that the older brother hated
the younger brother, he attempted to soften their
hearts. He said to Qayin, “My son, take some of the
fruits of your sowing and make an offering to Elohim,
so that He might forgive you for your wickedness and
your sin.”
2 He said also to Heḇel, “Take some of the fruit of
your sowing and make an offering and bring it to
88

ADAM AND EVE 1

Elohim, so that He might forgive you for your
wickedness and your sin.”
3 Then Heḇel obeyed his father and took some of his
sowing, and made a good offering, and said to his
father, Aḏam, “Come with me and show me how to
offer it up.”
4 And they went, Aḏam and Ḥawwah with him, and
they showed him how to offer up his gift on the altar.
Then after that they stood up and prayed that Elohim
would accept Heḇel’s offering.
5 Then Elohim looked at Heḇel and accepted his
offering. And Elohim was more pleased with Heḇel
than He was with his offering, because of his good
heart and pure body. There was no trace of guile in
him.
6 Then they came down from the altar and went to
the cave in which they lived. But because of his joy felt
at making his offering, Heḇel repeated it three times a
week, following the example of his father Aḏam.
7 But Qayin did not want to make an offering, but
after his father became very angry, he offered up a gift
once. He took the smallest of his sheep for an offering
and when he offered it up, his eyes were on the lamb.
8 Because of this, Elohim did not accept his offering,
because his heart was full of murderous thoughts.
9 And they all lived together like this in the cave in
which Ḥawwah had given birth, until Qayin was fifteen
years old, and Heḇel twelve years old.

78 Then Aḏam said to Ḥawwah, “The children have
grown up. We must think of finding wives for them.”
2 Then Ḥawwah answered, “How can we do that?”
3 Then Aḏam said to her, “We will join Heḇel’s sister
in marriage to Qayin, and Qayin’s sister to Heḇel.”
4 Then Ḥawwah said to Aḏam, “I do not like Qayin
because he is hard-hearted. So, let them stay with us
until we offer up to HWHY on their behalf.”
5 And Aḏam said no more.
6 Meanwhile Satan came to Qayin in the form of a
man of the field, and said to him, “Look. Aḏam and
89

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Ḥawwah have discussed together about the marriage
of you two, and they have agreed to marry Heḇel’s
sister to you, and your sister to Heḇel.
7 But if it were not that I love you, I would not have
told you this thing. So, if you will take my advice and
obey me, I will bring beautiful robes, plenty of gold and
silver, and my relations will attend you on your wedding
day.”
8 Then Qayin said with joy, “Where are your
relations?”
9 And Satan answered, “My relations are in a garden
in the north, where I once meant to bring your father
Aḏam, but he would not accept my offer.
10 But if you will receive my words and if you will come
to me after your wedding, you shall rest from the
misery in which you are; and you shall rest and be
better off than your father Aḏam.”
11 At these words, Satan got Qayin’s attention, and
Qayin inclined toward Satan to listen.
12 After this, he did not remain in the field, but he went
to Ḥawwah, his mother, and beat her and cursed her,
and said to her, “Why are you planning to take my
sister to marry her to my brother? Am I dead?”
13 But his mother quieted him and sent him back to
the field where he had been.
14 Then when Aḏam came, she told him of what Qayin
had done.
15 Aḏam was very worried, but held his peace, and did
not say a word.
16 Then, the next morning Aḏam said to Qayin his son,
“Take of your young and good sheep and offer them
up to your Elohim, and I will speak to your brother and
have him make an offering of corn to his Elohim.”
17 They both obeyed their father Aḏam, and they took
their offerings, and offered them up on the mountain
by the altar.
18 But Qayin behaved arrogantly toward his brother,
and he shoved him from the altar, and would not let
90

ADAM AND EVE 1

him offer up his gift on the altar, but he offered his own
offering on it with a proud heart, full of guile and fraud.
19 But Heḇel set up stones that were near at hand and
on that, he offered up his gift with a heart humble and
free from guile.
20 Qayin was then standing by the altar on which he
had offered up his gift and he cried to Elohim to accept
his offering, but Elohim did not accept it from Qayin,
nor did a divine fire come down to consume his
offering.
21 But he remained standing over against the altar out
of meanness, to make fun of his brother, and he glared
at his brother Heḇel to see if Elohim would accept his
offering or not.
22 And Heḇel prayed to Elohim to accept his offering.
Then a divine fire came down and consumed his
offering. And Elohim smelled the sweet savor of his
offering, because Heḇel loved Him and rejoice in Him.
23 And because Elohim was well pleased with him, He
sent him a messenger of light in the form of a man to
partake of his offering, because He had smelled the
sweet savor of his offering, and he comforted Heḇel
and strengthened his heart.
24 But Qayin was looking on all that took place at his
brother’s offering, and was angry because of it.
25 Then he opened his mouth and blasphemed
Elohim because He had not accepted his offering.
26 But Elohim said to Qayin, “Why do you look sad?
Be in right standing with Me so that I may accept your
offering. You have not murmured against Me, but
against yourself.”
27 And Elohim said this to Qayin in rebuke, and
because He hated him and his offering.
28 And Qayin came down from the altar and his color
changed and he had a sad face. And he came to his
father and mother and told them all that had happened
to him. And Aḏam grieved much because Elohim had
not accepted Qayin’s offering.
91

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But Heḇel came down rejoicing, and with a glad
heart, and told his father and mother how Elohim had
accepted his offering. And they rejoiced at it and kissed
his face.
30 And Heḇel said to his father, “Because Qayin
shoved me from the altar, and would not allow me to
offer my gift on it, I made an altar for myself and offered
my gift on it.”
31 But when Aḏam heard this he was very sorry
because it was the altar he had built at first, and on
which he had offered his own gifts.
32 Qayin was so resentful and so angry that he went
into the field. There, Satan came to him and said to
him, “Your brother Heḇel has taken refuge with your
father Aḏam, because you shoved him from the altar.
They have kissed his face and they rejoice over him
far more than over you.”
33 When Qayin heard these words of Satan he was
filled with rage but he let no one know. But he was lying
in wait to kill his brother, until he brought him into the
cave, and then said to him:
34 “Brother, the country is so beautiful and there are
such beautiful and pleasurable trees in it, and
charming to look at! But brother, you have never been
one day in the field to take your pleasure in that place.
35 Today, my brother, I wish very much that you would
come into the field with me, to enjoy yourself and to
baraḵ our fields and our flocks, for you are righteous,
and I love you much, O my brother! But you have
alienated yourself from me.”
36 Then Heḇel agreed to go with his brother Qayin into
the field.
37 But before going out, Qayin said to Heḇel, “Wait for
me and I will fetch a staff because of wild beasts.”
38 Then Heḇel stood innocently waiting. But Qayin,
the presumptuous, got a staff and went out.
39 And Qayin and his brother Heḇel began to walk in
the path. Qayin was talking to him, and comforting him,
to make him forget everything.
29

92

ADAM AND EVE 1

79 And so they walked on until they came to a place
they were alone where there were no sheep. Then
Heḇel said to Qayin, “Look, my brother, we are tired
from walking. We see none of the trees, or fruits, or the
growing green plants, or the sheep, or any of the things
of which you told me. Where are those sheep of yours
that you told me to baraḵ?”
2 Then Qayin said to him, “Come on, and you shall
see many beautiful things very soon, but go before me
until I catch up to you.”
3 Then Heḇel went on but Qayin stayed behind him.
4 And Heḇel was innocently walking, without
suspecting any craftiness, not thinking that his brother
would kill him.
5 Then Qayin came up to him, comforted him with his
words while walking a little behind him. Then he ran up
to him and beat him with the staff, blow after blow, until
he was dazed.
6 But when Heḇel fell down on the ground and saw
that his brother meant to kill him, he said to Qayin, “O,
my brother, have pity on me. By the breasts we have
sucked, do not hit me! By the womb that bore us and
that brought us into the world, do not beat me to death
with that staff! If you are set on killing me, take one of
these large stones and kill me outright.”
7 Then Qayin, the hard-hearted, and cruel murderer,
took a large stone, and beat his brother’s head with it
until his brains oozed out, and he wallowed in his
blood, before him.
8 And Qayin was not sorry for what he had done.
9 But when the blood of righteous Heḇel fell on the
earth, it trembled as it drank his blood, and would have
destroyed Qayin because of it.
10 And the blood of Heḇel cried mysteriously to Elohim
to avenge him of his murderer.
11 Then Qayin began to dig furiously at the ground to
bury his brother, because he was shaking from fear
that came over him when he saw the earth tremble
because of him.
93

1 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

He then threw his brother into the hole he made,
and covered him with dust. But the ground would not
receive him and it threw him up at once.
13 Again Qayin dug the ground and covered his
brother in it, but again the ground threw him up. Three
times the ground threw up the body of Heḇel on itself.
14 The muddy ground threw him up the first time
because he was not the first creation. It threw him up
the second time and would not receive him because
he was righteous and good and was killed without a
cause. The ground threw him up the third time and
would not receive him so that there might remain
before his brother a witness against him.
15 And so the earth mocked Qayin until the Word of
Elohim came to him concerning his brother.
16 Then Elohim was angry and very much displeased
at Heḇel’s death. And He thundered from the
shamayim, and lightning went out from Him, and the
Word of HWHY Elohim came from the shamayim to
Qayin, and said to him, “Where is Heḇel, your
brother?”
17 Then Qayin answered with a proud heart and a
gruff voice, “How am I to know, O Elohim? Am I my
brother’s keeper?”
18 Then Elohim said to Qayin, “Cursed be the earth
that has drunk the blood of Heḇel, your brother. And
as for you, you will always be trembling and shaking,
and this will be a mark on you so that whoever finds
you will kill you.”
19 But Qayin cried because Elohim had said those
words to him. And Qayin said to Him, “O Elohim,
whosoever finds me shall kill me, and I shall be blotted
out from the face of the earth.”
20 Then Elohim said to Qayin, “Whoever finds you will
not kill you,” because before this, Elohim had been
saying to Qayin, “I shall put seven punishments on
anyone that kills Qayin.” For the Word of Elohim to
Qayin was, “Where is your brother?” Elohim said it in
mercy to him, to try and make him repent.
12

94

ADAM AND EVE 1

And if Qayin had repented at that time, and had
said, “O Elohim, forgive me my sin, and the murder of
my brother,” Elohim would then have forgiven him his
sin.
22 But Elohim said to Qayin, “Cursed be the ground
that has drunk the blood of your brother.” That also,
was Elohim’s mercy on Qayin, because Elohim did not
curse him, but He cursed the ground, although it was
not the ground that had killed Heḇel, and committed a
wicked sin.
23 But it was fitting that the curse should fall on the
murderer, and yet, in mercy did Elohim manage His
thoughts so that no one should know the extent of His
anger for He turned it away from Qayin.
24 And He said to him, “Where is your brother?” To
which he answered and said, “I know not.” Then the
Creator said to him, “Be trembling and quaking.”
25 Then Qayin trembled and became terrified, and
through this sign Elohim made him an example before
all the creation to show him as the murderer of his
brother. Also Elohim brought trembling and terror over
him so that he might see the peace he had before and
also see the trembling and terror he endured at the
end, so that he might humble himself before Elohim
and repent of his sin, and seek the peace that he
enjoyed at first.
26 The Word of Elohim said, “I will put seven
punishments on anyone who kills Qayin.” So, Elohim
was not seeking to kill Qayin with the sword, but He
sought to make him die of fasting, and praying, and
crying by His discipline, until the time that he was
delivered from his sin.
27 And the seven punishments are the seven
generations during which Elohim awaited Qayin for the
murder of his brother.
28 But, ever since he had killed his brother, Qayin
could find no rest in any place, so he went back to
Aḏam and Ḥawwah, trembling, terrified, and defiled
with blood.
21

95

ADAM AND EVE 2

THE SECOND BOOK OF
AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH
‫ ספר אדם וחוה ב‬B hWXW mdA Rps

1 When Luluwa heard Qayin’s words, she wept and
went to call her father and mother, and told them how
Qayin had killed his brother Heḇel.
2 Then they all cried aloud and lifted up their voices,
and slapped their faces, and threw dust upon their
heads, and ripped their garments apart, and went out
and came to the place where Heḇel was killed.
3 And they found him lying on the earth, killed, and
beasts were around him. They wept and cried because
he was a just person. Because his body was pure, from
it went forth a smell of sweet spices.
4 And Aḏam carried him as Aḏam’s tears streaming
down his face; and he went to the Cave of Treasures,
where he laid Heḇel, and Aḏam wound him up with
sweet spices and myrrh.
5 And Aḏam and Ḥawwah continued in great grief by
the burial site for a hundred and forty days. Heḇel was
fifteen and a half years old, and Qayin seventeen
years and a half.
6 When the mourning for his brother was ended,
Qayin took his sister Luluwa and married her, without
permission from his father and mother. Because of
their heavy hearts they could not keep him from her.
7 He then went down to the foot of the mountain,
away from the garden, near the place where he had
killed his brother.
8 And in that place were many fruit trees and forest
trees. His sister gave birth to his children, who in their
turn began to multiply by degrees until they filled that
place.
9 But Aḏam and Ḥawwah did not come together for
seven years after Heḇel’s funeral. After this, however,
Ḥawwah conceived. And while she was with child
Aḏam said to her, “Come, let us take an offering and
96

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

offer it up unto Elohim and ask Him to give us a
beautiful child in whom we may find comfort, and
whom we may join in marriage to Heḇel’s sister.”
10 Then they prepared an offering and brought it up to
the altar, and offered it before HWHY, and began to ask
Him to accept their offering and to give them a good
offspring.
11 And Elohim heard Aḏam and accepted his offering.
Then, Aḏam, Ḥawwah and their daughter worshipped,
and came down to the Cave of Treasures and placed
a lamp in it by the body of Heḇel to burn by the body,
night and day.
12 Then Aḏam and Ḥawwah continued fasting and
praying until Ḥawwah’s time came that she should be
delivered, when she said to Aḏam, “I wish to go to the
cave in the rock, to give birth in it.”
13 And he said, “Go, and take your daughter with you
to wait on you; but I will remain in this Cave of
Treasures before the body of my son Heḇel.”
14 Then Ḥawwah listened to Aḏam, and she and her
daughter left, but Aḏam remained by himself in the
Cave of Treasures.

2 And Ḥawwah gave birth to a son, perfectly beautiful
in form and in demeanor. His beauty was like that of
his father Aḏam, yet more beautiful.
2 Then Ḥawwah was comforted when she saw him,
and remained eight days in the cave; then she sent her
daughter unto Aḏam to tell him to come and see the
child and name him. But the daughter stayed in his
place by the body of her brother, until Aḏam returned.
3 But when Aḏam came and saw the child’s good
looks, his beauty, and his perfect form, he rejoiced
over him, and was comforted for Heḇel. Then he
named the child Shĕth, which means, “That Elohim
has heard my prayer, and has delivered me out of my
affliction.” But it means also “Power and strength.”
4 Then after Aḏam had named the child, he returned
to the Cave of Treasures; and his daughter went back
to her mother.
97

ADAM AND EVE 2

But Ḥawwah continued in her cave, until forty days
were fulfilled, when she came to Aḏam, and brought
with her the child and her daughter.
6 And they came to a river of water, where Aḏam and
his daughter washed themselves, because of their
sorrow for Heḇel; but Ḥawwah and the babe washed
for purification.
7 Then they returned, and took an offering, and went
to the mountain and offered it up for the babe; and
Elohim accepted their offering, and sent His beraḵah
upon them, and upon their son Shĕth; and they came
back to the Cave of Treasures.
8 As for Aḏam, he did not have intercourse again with
his wife Ḥawwah, all the days of his life; neither was
any more offspring born of them; but only those five,
Qayin, Luluwa, Heḇel, Aklia, and Shĕth alone.
9 But Shĕth waxed in stature and in strength; and
began to fast and pray, fervently.
5

3 At the end of seven years from the day Aḏam had
been separated from his wife Ḥawwah, Satan envied
him, and when he saw Aḏam was separated from her,
Satan strove to make him live with her again.
2 Then Aḏam arose and went up above the Cave of
Treasures and continued to sleep there night by night.
But every day as soon as it was light he came down to
the cave to pray there and to receive a beraḵah from
it.
3 But when it was evening he went up on the top of
the cave, where he slept by himself, fearing that Satan
could overcome him. And he continued apart in this
way for thirty-nine days.
4 Then when Satan, the hater of all that is good, saw
Aḏam alone, fasting and praying, he appeared unto
him in the form of a beautiful woman who came and
stood in front of him in the night of the fortieth day, and
said to him:
5 “Aḏam, from the time you have dwelt in this cave,
we have experienced great peace from you, and your
98

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

prayers have reached us, and we have been
comforted because of you.
6 “But now, Aḏam, that you have gone up over the
roof of the cave to sleep, we have had doubts about
you, and a great sorrow has come upon us because of
your separation from Ḥawwah. Then again, when you
are on the roof of this cave, your prayer is poured out,
and your heart wanders from side to side.
7 “But when you were in the cave your prayer was
like fire gathered together. It came down to us, and you
found rest.
8 “Then I also worried over your children who are
separated from you, and my sorrow is great about the
murder of your son Heḇel because he was righteous,
and over a righteous man every one will grieve.
9 “But I rejoiced over the birth of your son Shĕth. But
after a little while I sorrowed greatly over Ḥawwah,
because she is my sister. For when Elohim sent a deep
sleep over you, and drew her out of your side, He
brought me out with her. But He raised her by placing
her with you, while He lowered me.
10 “I rejoiced over my sister for her being with you. But
Elohim had made me a promise before, and said, ‘Do
not grieve; when Aḏam has gone up on the roof of the
Cave of Treasures, and is separated from Ḥawwah his
wife, I will send you to him and you shall join yourself
to him in marriage, and bear five children for him, as
Ḥawwah gave him five children.’
11 “And now, look! Elohim’s promise to me is fulfilled
because it is He who has sent me to you for the
wedding, because if you wed me I shall bear you finer
and better children than those of Ḥawwah.
12 “You are still young. Do not end your youth in this
world in sorrow. Spend the days of your youth in
happiness and pleasure. Your days are few and your
trials have been great. Be strong and end your days in
this world in rejoicing. I shall take pleasure in you, and
you shall rejoice with me in this way and without fear.
13 “Get up and fulfill the command of your Elohim,”
she then came near Aḏam and embraced him.
99

ADAM AND EVE 2

But when Aḏam saw that he was going to be
overcome by her, he prayed to Elohim with a fervent
heart to deliver him from her.
15 Then Elohim sent His Word to Aḏam, saying,
“Aḏam, that apparition is the one that promised you the
Almighty, and majesty. He does not intend good for
you, but shows himself to you at one time in the form
of a woman and in another moment in the likeness of
a messenger, and on other occasions in the apparition
of a serpent, and at another time in the semblance of
a elohim. But he does all of this only to destroy your
soul.
16 “Aḏam, now that you understand this in your heart
you will see that I have delivered you many a time from
his hands in order to show you that I am a merciful
Elohim. I wish you good and I do not wish your ruin.”
14

4 Then Elohim ordered Satan to show himself to
Aḏam in his own hideous form, plainly.
2 But when Aḏam saw him he feared and trembled at
the sight of him.
3 And Elohim said to Aḏam, ‘Look at this devil, and at
his hideous sight, and know that he it is who made you
fall from brightness into darkness, from peace and rest
to toil and misery.
4 And look at him, Aḏam. He is the one who said that
he is elohim! Can Elohim be dark? Would Elohim take
the form of a woman? Is there any one stronger than
Elohim? And can He be overpowered?
5 “See Aḏam. Look at him bound in your presence,
in the air, unable to flee away! So, I say to you, do not
be afraid of him. From now on, take care, and beware
of him. He will try to do things to you.”
6 Then Elohim drove Satan away from Aḏam. And
Elohim strengthened Aḏam’s heart and comforted him,
saying, “Go down to the Cave of Treasures, and do not
separate yourself from Ḥawwah. I will quiet all of your
animal lust.”
7 From that hour it left Aḏam and Ḥawwah, and they
enjoyed rest by the Commandment of Elohim. But
100

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Elohim did not do the same to any of Aḏam’s seed.
Elohim did this only to Aḏam and Ḥawwah.
8 Then Aḏam worshipped before HWHY for delivering
him, and for having subdued his passions. And he
came down from above the cave, and lived with
Ḥawwah as had done before.
9 This ended the forty days of his separation from
Ḥawwah.

5 When Shĕth was seven years old, he knew good
and evil, and was consistent in fasting and praying,
and spent all his nights in praying to Elohim for mercy
and forgiveness.
2 He also fasted when bringing up his offering every
day. He fasted more than his father did because his
demeanor was beautiful, like that of a messenger of
Elohim. He also had a good heart, and his soul was
precious; and for this reason he brought up his offering
every day.
3 And Elohim was pleased with his offering, but He
was also pleased with his purity. And he continued
doing the Will of Elohim, and of his father and mother
until he was seven years old.
4 After that, as he was coming down from the altar
after giving his offering, Satan appeared to him in the
form of a beautiful messenger, brilliant with light, with
a staff of light in his hand, and wrapped with a girdle of
light.
5 He greeted Shĕth with a beautiful smile, and began
to beguile him with beautiful words, saying to him,
“Shĕth, why do you live in this mountain? It is rough,
full of stones and sand, and trees with no good fruit on
them. It is a wilderness without houses or towns, no
good place to live in. But everywhere there is heat,
weariness, and trouble.”
6 He said further, ‘But we live in beautiful places, in a
world other than this earth. Our world is one of light
and we live in the best conditions. Our women are
more beautiful than any others. Shĕth, I wish you to
marry one of them, because I see that you are
101

ADAM AND EVE 2

handsome to look at. In this land there is not one
woman good enough for you and there are only five
souls in it.
7 “But in our world there are many men and many
young, unmarried women, all more beautiful one than
the other. So, I wish to remove you from here so that
you may see my relations and be wedded to which
ever you like.
8 “You shall live by me and be at peace. You shall be
filled with glory and light, just as we are.
9 “You shall remain in our world and rest from this
world and its misery. You shall never again feel weak
and weary. You shall never bring up an offering or
appeal for mercy. You shall commit no more sin nor be
swayed by passions.
10 “And if you will listen to what I say, you shall wed
one of my daughters because to us it is not a sin and
it is not considered animal lust.
11 “For in our world we have no Elohim because we
all are elohiym and we all are of the light and are of the
shamayim, powerful, strong and glorious.”

6 When Shĕth heard these words he was amazed,
and began to believe Satan’s treacherous speech, and
said to him, “You said there is another world created
other than this one, and there are other creatures more
beautiful than the creatures that are in this world?”
2 And Satan said, “Yes; you have heard me correctly,
and I will tell you more good things about them and
their ways.”
3 But Shĕth said to him, “Your words have amazed
me, and your beautiful description of it all.
4 “But I cannot go with you today, at least not until I
have gone to my father Aḏam and to my mother
Ḥawwah, and told them all you have said to me. Then
if they give me permission to go with you, I will come.”
5 Shĕth said, “I am afraid of doing anything without
my father’s and mother’s permission. I do not want to
perish like my brother Qayin, and like my father Aḏam,
who transgressed the Commandment of Elohim. But,
102

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

you know your way to this place, so come and meet
me here tomorrow.”
6 When Satan heard this, he said to Shĕth, “If you tell
your father Aḏam what I have told you, he will not let
you come with me.
7 But listen to me, do not tell your father and mother
what I have said to you. Instead, come with me today.
Come now to our world where you will see beautiful
things and enjoy yourself there, and celebrate this day
among my children, watching them and taking your fill
of happiness; and have joy there. Then I shall bring
you back to this place tomorrow. However, if you would
rather stay there with me, so be it.”
8 Then Shĕth answered, “The hope of my father and
of my mother, hangs on me and if I hide from them one
day, they will die, and Elohim will hold me guilty of
sinning against them.
9 “And if they know that I have come to this place they
assume it is to bring up my offering, and they would
expect not to be separated from me one hour. Neither
should I go to any other place unless they let me. But
they treat me most kindly, because I always come back
to them quickly.”
10 Then Satan said to him, “What will happen to you if
you were to disappear from them one night, and return
to them at break of day?”
11 But Shĕth, when he saw how he kept on talking,
and that he would not leave him alone, he ran and went
up to the altar, and spread his hands to Elohim, and
sought deliverance from Elohim.
12 Then Elohim sent His Word, and cursed Satan,
who fled from Him.
13 But Shĕth had gone up to the altar, saying in his
heart. “The altar is the place of offering, and Elohim is
there. A divine fire shall consume what is on it and so
Satan will be unable to hurt me, and shall not take me
away from here.”
14 Then Shĕth came down from the altar and went to
his father and mother, whom he found on his way and
103

ADAM AND EVE 2

who were longing to hear his voice, because he had
been missing a while.
15 He then began to tell them what had befallen him
from Satan, under the form of a messenger.
16 But when Aḏam heard his account, he kissed his
face, and warned him against that messenger, telling
him it was Satan who appeared to him. Then Aḏam
took Shĕth, and they went to the Cave of Treasures
and rejoiced there.
17 But from that day on Aḏam and Ḥawwah were
never separated from him wherever he went, whether
for his offering or for anything else.
18 This sign happened to Shĕth, when he was nine
years old.

7 When our father Aḏam saw that Shĕth was of a
perfect heart, he wished him to marry; lest the enemy
should appear to him another time, and overcome him.
2 So Aḏam said to his son Shĕth, “I wish, O my son,
that you wed your sister Aklia, Heḇel’s sister, that she
may bear you children, who shall replenish the earth,
according to Elohim’s promise to us.
3 “Be not afraid, my son; there is no disgrace in it. I
wish you to marry, from fear that if you do not the
enemy could overcome you.”
4 Shĕth, however, did not wish to marry; but in
obedience to his father and mother, he did not say a
word.
5 So Aḏam married him to Aklia. And he was fifteen
years old.
6 But when he was twenty years of age, he had a
son, whom he called Enosh; and then had other
children.
7 Then Enosh grew up, married, and begat Qĕynan.
8 Qĕynan also grew up, married, and begat
Mahalal’ĕl.
9 Those fathers were born during Aḏam’s lifetime,
and dwelt by the Cave of Treasures.
10 Then were the days of Aḏam nine hundred and
thirty years, and those of Mahalal’ĕl one hundred. But
104

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Mahalal’ĕl, when he was grown up, loved fasting,
praying, and with hard work, until the end of our father
Aḏam’s days drew near.

8 When our father Aḏam saw that his end was near,
he called his son Shĕth, who came to him in the Cave
of Treasures, and he said to him:
2 “Shĕth, my son, bring me your children and your
children’s children, so that I may shed my beraḵah on
them before I die.”
3 When Shĕth heard these words from his father
Aḏam, he went from him, shed a flood of tears over his
face, and gathered together his children and his
children’s children, and brought them to his father
Aḏam.
4 But when our father Aḏam saw them around him,
he wept at having to be separated from them.
5 And when they saw him weeping, they all wept
together, and kissed his face saying, “How shall you
be separated from us, father? And how shall the earth
receive you and hide you from our eyes?” Thus they
lamented with words like these.
6 Then our father Aḏam baraḵ them all, and said to
Shĕth, after he had baraḵ them:
7 “Shĕth, my son, you know this world and that it is
full of sorrow, and of weariness; and you know all that
has come upon us from our trials in it. So, I command
you in these words: I want you to keep being innocent,
to be pure and just, and trusting in Elohim; and do not
believe the words of Satan, nor the apparitions in
which he will show himself to you.
8 But keep the commandments that I give you this
day; then give the same to your son Enosh; and let
Enosh give it to his son Qĕynan; and Qĕynan to his
son Mahalal’ĕl; so that this commandment abide firm
among all your children.
9 “Shĕth, my son, the moment I am dead take my
body and wrap it up with myrrh, aloes, and cassia, and
leave me here in this Cave of Treasures in which are
all the tokens which Elohim gave us from the garden.
105

ADAM AND EVE 2

“My son, after a while a flood will come and
overwhelm all creatures, and leave only eight souls out
of it.
11 “But, my son, let those whom it will leave from
among your children at that time, take my body with
them out of this cave; and when they have taken it with
them, let the oldest among them command his children
to lay my body in a ship until the flood recedes, and
they come out of the ship.
12 Then they shall take my body and lay it in the
middle of the earth, shortly after they have been saved
from the waters of the flood.
13 “The place where my body shall be laid is the
middle of the earth and Elohim shall come from that
place and shall save all our kindred.
14 “But now, Shĕth, my son, place yourself at the head
of your people. Tend to them and watch over them in
the fear of Elohim. Lead them in the good way.
Command them to fast to Elohim, and make them
understand they should not listen to Satan, or he will
destroy them.
15 “I tell you again, separate your children and your
children’s children from Qayin’s children. Do not let
them ever mix with them, nor come near them either
to talk or to work.”
16 Then Aḏam let his beraḵah descend upon Shĕth,
and upon his children, and upon all his children’s
children.
17 He then turned to his son Shĕth, and to Ḥawwah
his wife, and, said to them, “Preserve this gold, this
incense, and this myrrh, that Elohim has given us for a
sign, because in days that are coming a flood will
overwhelm the whole creation. But those who shall go
into the ark shall take with them the gold, the incense,
and the myrrh, together with my body, and will lay the
gold, the incense, and the myrrh, with my body in the
middle of the earth.
18 “Then, after a long time, the city in which the gold,
the incense, and the myrrh are found with my body,
10

106

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

shall be plundered. But when it is spoiled, the gold, the
incense, and the myrrh shall be taken care of with the
spoil that is kept; and none of them shall perish, until
the made man from the Word of Elohim shall come.
And sovereigns shall take them, and shall offer to Him,
gold in token of His being Sovereign; incense, in token
of His being the Bĕn of Elohim of the shamayim and
earth; and myrrh, in token of His passion.
19 “Gold also, as a token of His overcoming Satan,
and all our foes; incense as a token that He will rise
from the dead, and be exalted above things in the
shamayim and things in the earth; and myrrh, in token
that He will drink bitter gall; and feel the pains of GĕyHinnom from Satan.
20 “And now, Shĕth, my son, I have revealed to you
hidden mysteries, which Elohim had revealed to me.
Keep my commandment for yourself and for your
people.”

9 When Aḏam had ended his commandment to
Shĕth, his limbs went limp, his hands and feet lost all
strength, his voice became silent, and his tongue
ceased to speak. He closed his eyes and gave up the
ghost.
2 But when his children saw that he was dead, they
threw themselves over him, men and women, old and
young, weeping.
3 The death of Aḏam took place at the end of nine
hundred and thirty years that he lived upon the earth;
on the fifteenth day of first month, after the reckoning
of an epact of the sun, at the ninth hour.
4 It was on a sixth day, the very day on which he was
created, and on which he rested. And the hour at which
he died was the same as that at which he came out of
the garden.
5 Then Shĕth wrapped him up well, and embalmed
him with plenty of sweet spices, from sacred trees and
from the Qodesh Mountain. And he laid his body on
the eastern side of the inside of the cave, the side of
107

ADAM AND EVE 2

the incense; and placed a lamp stand in front of him
that kept burning.
6 Then his children stood before him weeping and
wailing over him the entire night, until break of day.
7 Then Shĕth and his son Enosh, and Qĕynan, the
son of Enosh, went out and took good offerings to
present to HWHY, and they came to the altar upon
which Aḏam offered gifts to Elohim.
8 But Ḥawwah said to them, “Wait until we have first
asked Elohim to accept our offering, and to keep the
soul of Aḏam His servant by Him, and to take it up to
rest.”
9 And they all stood up and prayed.

10 And when they had ended their prayer the Word
of Elohim came and comforted them concerning their
father Aḏam.
2 After this, they offered their gifts for themselves and
for their father.
3 And when they had ended their offering, the Word
of Elohim came to Shĕth, the eldest among them,
saying to him, “Shĕth, Shĕth, Shĕth, three times. As I
was with your father, so also shall I be with you, until
the fulfillment of the promise I made your father saying,
‘I will send My Word and save you and your seed.’
4 “But as to your father Aḏam, keep you the
commandment he gave you; and protect your seed
and keep them from that of Qayin your brother.”
5 And Elohim withdrew His Word from Shĕth.
6 Then Shĕth, Ḥawwah, and their children, came
down from the mountain to the Cave of Treasures.
7 But Aḏam was the first whose soul died in the land
of Ĕḏen, in the Cave of Treasures; for no one died
before him, but his son Heḇel, who died because he
was murdered.
8 Then all the children of Aḏam rose up, and wept
over their father Aḏam, and made offerings to him, one
hundred and forty days.

108

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

11 After the death of Aḏam and of Ḥawwah, Shĕth
separated his children, and his children’s children,
from Qayin’s children. Qayin and his seed went down
and lived to the west, below the place where he had
killed his brother Heḇel.
2 But Shĕth and his children, lived to the north on the
mountain of the Cave of Treasures, in order to be near
to their father Aḏam.
3 And Shĕth the oldest, tall and good, with a worthy
soul, and of a strong mind, stood at the head of his
people; and tended to them in innocence, patience,
and meekness, and did not allow even one of them to
go down to Qayin’s children.
4 And because of their purity, they were named
“Children of Elohim,” and they were with Elohim
instead of the hosts of messengers who fell, for they
continued in praises to Elohim and in singing songs to
Him in their cave, the Cave of Treasures.
5 Then Shĕth stood before the bodies of his father
Aḏam and of his mother Ḥawwah, and he prayed night
and day and asked for mercy for himself and his
children, and that when he had some difficulty dealing
with a child, Elohim would give him counsel.
6 But Shĕth and his children did not like mundane
work, but set themselves to do things of the shamayim,
because they had no other thought other than praises,
worship, and psalms to Elohim.
7 Therefore did they at all times hear the voices of
messengers, praising and glorifying Elohim; from
within the garden, or when they were sent by Elohim
on an errand, or when they were going up to the
shamayim.
8 Because of their own purity, Shĕth and his children
heard and saw the messengers. The garden was not
far above them, only about fifteen spiritual cubits.
9 One spiritual cubit is equal to three cubits of man,
altogether forty-five cubits.
10 Shĕth and his children lived on the mountain below
the garden. They did not sow nor reap. They made no
109

ADAM AND EVE 2

food for the body, not even wheat, but only enough for
offerings. They ate the flavorful fruit of trees that grew
on the mountain where they lived.
11 Shĕth often fasted for forty days, as did also his
oldest children. The family of Shĕth smelled the smell
of the trees in the garden when the wind blew that way.
12 They were happy, innocent, without sudden fear,
there was no jealousy, no evil action, nor hatred
among them. There was no animal passion. No one
among them spoke either foul words or curse. There
was neither evil intention nor fraud. The men of that
time never swore, but when under hard circumstances,
when men must swear, they swore by the blood of
Heḇel the just.
13 But every day they compelled their children and
their women to fast and pray, and to worship the Most
High Elohim, in the cave. They baraḵ themselves by
being near the body of their father Aḏam, and anointed
themselves.
14 And they did so until the end of Shĕth drew near.

12 Then Shĕth, the just, called his son Enosh, and
Qĕynan, the son of Enosh, and Mahalal’ĕl, the son of
Qĕynan, and said he to them:
2 “My end is near, and I wish to build a roof over the
altar on which gifts are offered.”
3 They listened to his commandment and all of them,
both old and young, went out and worked hard and
built a beautiful roof over the altar.
4 And Shĕth’s thought was that by doing this a
beraḵah should come upon his children on the
mountain. And he thought he should present an
offering for them before his death.
5 Then when the building of the roof was completed,
he commanded them to make offerings. They worked
diligently and brought them to Shĕth, their father, who
took them and offered them upon the altar, and prayed
Elohim to accept their offerings, to have mercy on the
souls of his children, and to keep them from the hand
of Satan.
110

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Elohim accepted his offering and sent His beraḵah
on him and on his children. Then Elohim made a
promise to Shĕth, saying, “At the end of the great five
days and a half, which is the promise I have made to
you and to your father, I will send My Word and save
you and your seed.”
7 Then Shĕth and his children, and grandchildren
met together and came down from the altar and went
to the Cave of Treasures, where they prayed. And he
baraḵ them in the body of our father Aḏam, and
anointed them with it.
8 But Shĕth stayed in the Cave of Treasures, a few
days, and then suffered - sufferings to death.
9 Then Enosh, his first-born son, came to him with
Qĕynan, his son, and Mahalal’ĕl, Qĕynan’s son, and
Yereḏ, the son of Mahalal’ĕl, and Ḥanoḵ, Yereḏ’s son,
and with their wives and children to receive a beraḵah
from Shĕth.
10 Then Shĕth prayed over them, and baraḵ them,
and earnestly requested them by the blood of Heḇel
the just, saying, “I beg of you my children, not to let one
of you go down from this Qodesh and pure Mountain.
11 Do not associate with the children of Qayin the
murderer and the sinner, who killed his brother. You
know, my children, that we flee from him and from all
his sin with all our might because he killed his brother
Heḇel.”
12 After having said this, Shĕth baraḵ Enosh, his firstborn son, and commanded him to minister continually
in purity before the body of their father Aḏam, all the
days of his life. He also made him promise to go at
times to the altar, which he had built. And he
commanded him to feed his people in righteousness,
in judgment, and in purity all the days of his life.
13 Then Shĕth’s limbs went limp. His hands and feet
lost all strength. His voice became silent and unable to
speak, and he gave up the ghost and died. Shĕth died
the day after his nine hundred and twelfth year, on the
twenty- seventh day of the first month; Ḥanoḵ being
then twenty years old.
6

111

ADAM AND EVE 2

Then they carefully wrapped up the body of Shĕth,
and embalmed him with sweet spices, and laid him in
the Cave of Treasures, on the right side of our father
Aḏam’s body, and they mourned for him forty days.
They offered gifts for him, as they had done for our
father Aḏam.
15 After the death of Shĕth, Enosh was raised to the
head of his people, whom he fed in righteousness, and
judgment, as his father had commanded him.
16 But by the time Enosh was eight hundred and
twenty years old, Qayin had a very large number of
offspring, because they married often, being given to
animal lusts, until the land below the mountain, was
filled with them.
14

13 Lemeḵ the blind lived in those days. He was one
of the sons of Qayin. He had a son whose name was
Atun, and the two of them had many cattle.
2 Lemeḵ was in the habit of sending them to graze
with a young shepherd, who tended them. He was
coming home in the evening when he went to his
grandfather, his father Atun, and his mother Hazina,
and he wept and he said to them, “I cannot feed those
cattle alone, or someone may rob me of some of them,
or kill me so they can take them.” Because among the
children of Qayin there was a lot of robbery, murder,
and sin.
3 Then Lemeḵ pitied him, and he said, “You may be
correct. When you are alone you might be
overpowered by the men of this place.”
4 So Lemeḵ arose, took a bow he had kept ever since
he was a youth, before he became blind, and he took
large arrows, and smooth stones, and a sling, which
he had, and he went to the field with the young
shepherd, and placed himself behind the cattle while
the young shepherd watched the cattle. Lemeḵ did this
for many days.
5 Meanwhile, ever since Elohim had cast him off and
had cursed him with trembling and fear, Qayin could
112

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

not be still nor find rest in any one place, so he
wandered from place to place.
6 In his wanderings he came to Lemeḵ’s wives, and
asked them about him. They said to him, “He is in the
field with the cattle.”
7 Then Qayin went to look for him and as he came
into the field, the young shepherd heard the noise he
made, and the cattle herding together in front of him.
8 Then said he to Lemeḵ, “My master, is that a wild
beast or a robber?”
9 And Lemeḵ said to him, “Tell me where he is when
he comes up.”
10 Then Lemeḵ bent his bow, placed an arrow on it,
and fitted a stone in the sling, and when Qayin came
out from the open country, the shepherd said to
Lemeḵ, “Shoot, behold, he is coming.”
11 Then Lemeḵ shot at Qayin with his arrow and hit
him in his side. And Lemeḵ struck him with a stone
from his sling, and the stone struck his face and
knocked out both his eyes. Then Qayin fell dead
instantly.
12 Then Lemeḵ and the young shepherd came up to
him and found him lying on the ground. And the young
shepherd said to him, ‘‘It is Qayin our grandfather,
whom you have killed, my master!”
13 Then Lemeḵ grieved in bitterness and regret. And
he clapped his hands together and struck the head of
the youth with his flat palm, and the youth fell as if he
were dead. But Lemeḵ thought the youth was
pretending, so he took up a stone and struck him, and
smashed his head until he died.

14 When Enosh was nine hundred years old, all the
children of Shĕth, and of Qĕynan, and his first-born,
with their wives and children, gathered around him,
asking for a beraḵah from him.
2 Then he prayed over them and baraḵ them, and
made them promise them by the blood of Heḇel the
just, saying to them, “Do not let even one of your
children go down from this Qodesh Mountain, and do
113

ADAM AND EVE 2

not let them make friends with the children of Qayin the
murderer.”
3 Then Enosh called his son Qĕynan and said to him,
“Look, my son, and set your heart on your people, and
establish them in righteousness, and in innocence,
and stand ministering before the body of our father
Aḏam, all the days of your life.”
4 After this Enosh rested. He was nine hundred and
eighty-five years old. Qĕynan wrapped him up, and
laid him in the Cave of Treasures on the left of his
father Aḏam, and made offerings for him, following the
custom of his fathers.

15 After the death of Enosh, Qĕynan led his people
in righteousness and innocence, as his father had
commanded him. He also continued to minister before
the body of Aḏam, in the Cave of Treasures.
2 Then when he had lived nine hundred and ten
years, suffering and sickness came upon him. And
when he was about to enter into rest, all the fathers
with their wives and children came to him, and he
baraḵ them, and earnestly urged them by the blood of
Heḇel, the just, saying to them, “Let no one among you
descend from this Qodesh Mountain; and do not make
friends with the children of Qayin the murderer.”
3 Mahalal’ĕl, his first-born son, received this
commandment from his father, who baraḵ him and
died.
4 Then Mahalal’ĕl embalmed him with sweet spices,
and laid him in the Cave of Treasures, with his fathers;
and they made offerings for him, as was the custom of
their fathers.

16 Then Mahalal’ĕl led his people, and fed them in
righteousness and innocence, and watched them to
see they had no relationship with the children of Qayin.
2 He also continued in the Cave of Treasures praying
and ministering before the body of their father Aḏam,
asking Elohim for mercy on himself and on his people,
114

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

until he was eight hundred and seventy years old,
when he fell sick.
3 Then all his children gathered around him to see
him, and to ask for his beraḵah on them all, before he
left this world.
4 Then Mahalal’ĕl arose and sat on his bed, his tears
streaming down his face, and he called his eldest son
Yereḏ, who came to him.
5 He then kissed his face, and said to him, “Yereḏ,
my son, I solemnly urge you by Him who made the
shamayim and earth, to watch over your people, and
to feed them in righteousness and in innocence; and
not to let even one of them go down from this Qodesh
Mountain to the children of Qayin, or he will perish with
them.
6 “Hear, my son, there will come a great destruction
upon this earth because of them. Elohim will be angry
with the world, and will destroy them with waters.
7 “But I also know that your children will not listen to
you, and that they will go down from this mountain and
have relations with the children of Qayin, and that they
shall perish with them.
8 “My son! Teach them, and watch over them, so that
no guilt will be on you because of them.”
9 Mahalal’ĕl continued, saying to his son Yereḏ,
“When I die, embalm my body and lay it in the Cave of
Treasures, by the bodies of my forefathers then stand
by my body and pray to Elohim, and take care of them,
and fulfill your ministry before them, until you enter into
rest yourself.”
10 Mahalal’ĕl then baraḵ all his children, then he laid
down on his bed and entered into rest like his fathers.
11 But when Yereḏ saw that his father Mahalal’ĕl was
dead, he wept and grieved, and embraced, and kissed
his hands and his feet, and so did all his children.
12 And his children embalmed him carefully, and laid
him by the bodies of his fathers. Then they stood and
mourned for him forty days.
115

ADAM AND EVE 2

17 Then Yereḏ kept his father’s commandment, and
arose like a lion over his people. He fed them in
righteousness and innocence, and commanded them
to do nothing without his consent. This was because
he was afraid for them that they should go to the
children of Qayin.
2 He gave them orders repeatedly, and continued to
do so until the end of the four hundred and eighty-fifth
year of his life.
3 At the end of these years, there came to him a sign.
As Yereḏ was standing like a lion before the bodies of
his fathers, praying and warning his people, Satan
envied him and produced a beautiful specter because
Yereḏ would not let his children do anything without his
counsel.
4 Satan appeared to him with thirty men of his hosts,
in the form of handsome men. Satan himself was the
oldest and tallest among them, with a fine beard.
5 They stood at the mouth of the cave, and called out
Yereḏ, who was in the cave.
6 He came out to them and found them looking like
handsome men, full of light, and very beautiful. He was
in awe of their beauty and their looks, and wondered
to himself whether they might not be of the children of
Qayin.
7 He said also in his heart, “The children of Qayin
cannot come up to the height of this mountain, and
none of them are this handsome as these appear to
be, and among these men there is not one of my
kindred, so they must be strangers.”
8 Then Yereḏ exchanged a greeting with them and
he said to the oldest among them, “My father, tell me
how you are so wonderful, and tell me who these are
with you. They look to me like strange men.”
9 Then the oldest began to weep and the rest wept
with him, and he said to Yereḏ, “I am Aḏam whom
Elohim made first, and this is Heḇel my son, who was
killed by his brother Qayin, whose heart was
influenced by Satan to murder.
116

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

“And this is my son Shĕth, whom I asked HWHY to
give me to comfort me when I no longer had Heḇel.
11 “Then this one is my son Enosh, son of Shĕth, and
that other one is Qĕynan, son of Enosh, and that other
one is Mahalal’ĕl, son of Qĕynan, your father.”
12 But Yereḏ remained wondering at their appearance
and at the words of the elder to him.
13 Then the oldest said to him, “Do not stand there is
awe, my son. We now live in the land north of the
garden, which Elohim created before the world. He
would not let us live there, but placed us inside the
garden, below which you are now living.
14 “After I transgressed, He made me come out of it
and I was left to live in this cave. That was when great
and horrible troubles came on me. And when the time
of my death drew near, I commanded my son Shĕth to
tend his people well. And my commandment is to be
handed from one to another, to the end of the
generations to come.
15 “But, Yereḏ, my son, we live in beautiful regions
while you live here in misery. Your father Mahalal’ĕl
informed me that a great flood would come and
overwhelm the whole earth.
16 “Therefore, my son, fearing for your sakes, I rose
and took my children with me, and came here to visit
you and your children. I found you standing in this cave
weeping, and your children scattered about this
mountain in the heat and in misery.
17 “But, my son, as we missed our way, and came as
far as this, we found other men below this mountain;
who inhabit a beautiful country, full of trees and of
fruits, and of all manner of lush, green vegetation. It is
like a garden. When we found them we thought they
were you, until your father Mahalal’ĕl told me they were
no such thing.
18 “Now, my son, listen to my advice, and go down to
them, you and your children. You will rest from all this
suffering you are in. If you will not go down to them
then arise, take your children, and come with us to our
garden. There, you shall live in our beautiful land, and
10

117

ADAM AND EVE 2

you shall rest from all this trouble which you and your
children are now living in.”
19 But when he heard these words from the oldest,
Yereḏ was confused and went here and there, but at
that moment he found none of his children.
20 Then he answered and said to the old one, “Why
have you hidden yourselves until this day?”
21 And the oldest replied, “If your father had not told
us, we would not have known it.”
22 Then Yereḏ believed his words were true.
23 So that oldest said to Yereḏ, “Wherefore did you
turn about, so and so?” And he said, “I was seeking
one of my children, to tell him about my going with you,
and about their coming down to those about whom you
have spoken to me.”
24 When the old one heard Yereḏ’s intention, he said
to him, “Do not worry about that right now but come
with us and you shall see our country. If the land in
which we live pleases you, we shall all return here and
take your family with us. But if our country does not
please you, you shall come back to your own home.”
25 And the old one urged Yereḏ to go before one of
his children came to talk him out of his decision.
26 Yereḏ, then, came out of the cave and went with
them, and among them. And they comforted him, until
they came to the top of the mountain of the sons of
Qayin.
27 Then the old one said to one of his companions,
“We have forgotten something by the mouth of the
cave, and that is the chosen garment we had brought
to clothe Yereḏ with.”
28 He then said to one of them, “One of you go back,
and we will wait for you here until you come back. Then
will we clothe Yereḏ and he shall be like us, good,
handsome, and fit to come with us into our country.”
29 Then that one went back.
30 But when he was a short distance off, the old one
called to him and said to him, “You stay there until I
come up and speak to you.”
118

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Then he stood still and the old one went up to him
and said to him, “One thing we forgot at the cave, it is
this; we forgot to put out the lamp that burns inside the
cave, above the bodies that are in there. Do it and
come back to us, quickly.
32 That one went, and the old one came back to his
fellows and to Yereḏ. And they came down from the
mountain, and Yereḏ was with them. And they stayed
by a fountain of water, near the houses of the children
of Qayin and waited for their companion until he
brought the garment for Yereḏ.
33 Then he who went back to the cave, put out the
lamp, and came to them and brought an apparition with
him and showed it to them. And when Yereḏ saw it he
wondered at the beauty and grace thereof, and
rejoiced in his heart believing it was all true.
34 But while they were staying there, three of them
went into houses of the sons of Qayin and said to
them, “Bring us today some food by the fountain of
water, for us and our companions to eat.”
35 But when the sons of Qayin saw them, they were in
awe at them and thought: “These men are beautiful to
look at. We have never seen such before.” So they
rose and came with them to the fountain of water, to
see their companions.
36 They thought them so very handsome that they
called aloud about their places for others to gather
together and come and look at these beautiful beings.
Then they gathered around them both men and
women.
37 Then the old one said to them, “We are strangers
in your land, bring us some good food and drink, and
bring yourselves and your women, so we can entertain
ourselves with you.”
38 When those men heard these words of the old one,
every one of Qayin’s sons brought his wife, and
another brought his daughter, and so, many women
came to them; every one calling out to Yereḏ either for
himself or for his wife.
31

119

ADAM AND EVE 2

But when Yereḏ saw what they did, his very soul
wrenched itself from them and he would not taste their
food or their drink.
40 The old one saw him as he wrenched himself from
them, and said to him, “Do not be sad. I am the great
elder, as you shall see me do, do yourself in like
manner.”
41 Then he spread his hands and took one of the
women, and five of his companions did the same in
front of Yereḏ, that he should do as they did.
42 But when Yereḏ saw them doing their wickedness
he wept, and said in his mind, “My fathers never acted
like this.
43 He then spread his hands and prayed with a fervent
heart, and with much weeping, and begged Elohim to
deliver him from their hands.
44 No sooner did Yereḏ begin to pray than the old one
fled with his companions; for they could not abide in a
place of prayer.
45 Then Yereḏ turned round but could not see them,
but found himself standing in the midst of the children
of Qayin.
46 He then wept and said, “O Elohim, do not destroy
me with this race, concerning which my fathers have
warned me. For now, HWHY my Elohim, I was thinking
that those who appeared to me were my forefathers,
but I have found them out to be devils, who lured me
by way of this beautiful apparition, until I believed
them.
47 “But now I ask You, O Elohim, to deliver me from
this race, among whom I am now staying, as You did
deliver me from those devils. Send Your messenger to
pull me out of the middle of them. I do not have the
power within myself to escape from among them.”
48 When Yereḏ had ended his prayer, Elohim sent His
messenger into the middle of them and he took Yereḏ
and set him up on the mountain, and showed him the
way, and he gave him wise advice, and then departed
from him.
39

120

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

18 The children of Yereḏ were in the habit of visiting
him hour after hour, to receive his beraḵah and to ask
his advice for every thing they did, and when he had
work to do, they did it for him.
2 But this time when they went into the cave they did
not find Yereḏ, but they found the lamp put out, and
the bodies of the fathers thrown about, and voices
came from them by the power of Elohim, that said,
“Satan in an apparition has deceived our son, wishing
to destroy him, as he destroyed our son Qayin.”
3 They said also, “HWHY Elohim of the shamayim and
earth, deliver our son from the hand of Satan, who
produced such a great and false specter before him.”
They also spoke of other matters, by the power of
Elohim.
4 But when the children of Yereḏ heard these voices
they feared, and stood weeping for their father
because they did not know what had happened to him.
5 And they wept for him that day until the setting of
the sun.
6 Then Yereḏ come with a mournful expression,
miserable in mind and body, and sorrowful at having
been separated from the bodies of his fathers.
7 But as he came near the cave, his children saw him
and ran to the cave, and hugged his neck, crying, and
saying to him, “O father, where have you been, and
why have you left us because we know you did not
want to?” And they spoke again saying, “Father, when
you disappeared the lamp over the bodies of our
fathers went out, and the bodies were thrown about,
and voices came from them.”
8 When Yereḏ heard this he was sorry, and went into
the cave; and there found the bodies thrown about, the
lamp put out, and the fathers themselves praying for
his deliverance from the hand of Satan.
9 Then Yereḏ fell upon the bodies and embraced
them, and said, “My fathers, through your intercession,
Elohim delivered me from the hand of Satan! I beg you
121

ADAM AND EVE 2

to ask Elohim to keep me and to hide me from him to
the day of my death.”
10 Then all the voices ceased except the voice of our
father Aḏam, who spoke to Yereḏ by the power of
Elohim, just as one would speak to his friend, saying,
“Yereḏ, my son, offer gifts to Elohim for having
delivered you from the hand of Satan. And when you
bring those offerings, offer them on the same altar on
which I gave offerings. Even then you must beware of
Satan, for he deluded me many a time with his
specters, wishing to destroy me, but Elohim delivered
me out of his hand.
11 “Command your people that they be on their guard
against him, and never cease to offer up gifts to
Elohim.”
12 Then the voice of Aḏam also became silent; and
Yereḏ and his children wondered at this. Then they laid
the bodies as they were at first; and Yereḏ and his
children stood praying the entire night, until break of
day.
13 Then Yereḏ made an offering and offered it up on
the altar, as Aḏam had commanded him. And as he
went up to the altar, he prayed to Elohim for mercy and
for forgiveness of his sin concerning the lamp going
out.
14 Then Elohim appeared to Yereḏ on the altar and
baraḵ him and his children, and accepted their
offerings; and commanded Yereḏ to take of the sacred
fire from the altar and light the lamp that shed light on
the body of Aḏam.

19 Then Elohim again revealed to him the promise
He had made to Aḏam. He explained to him the 5500
years, and revealed to him the mystery of His Bĕn
coming to the earth.
2 And Elohim said to Yereḏ, “Let that fire you have
taken from the altar to light the lamp abide with you to
give light to the bodies. Do not let it come out of the
cave until the body of Aḏam comes out.
122

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But, Yereḏ, take care of the fire, so that it burns
brightly in the lamp. Do not go out of the cave again
until you received an order through a vision, and not in
an apparition, you see.
4 “Then command your people again not to have
relations with the children of Qayin, and not to learn
their ways, for I am Elohim who does not love hatred
and works of iniquity.”
5 Elohim also gave many other Commandments to
Yereḏ, and He baraḵ him. And then withdrew His Word
from him.
6 Then Yereḏ came near to his children, took some
fire, and came down to the cave and lighted the lamp
in front of the body of Aḏam. Then he gave his people
the Commandments just as Elohim had told him to do.
7 This sign happened to Yereḏ at the end of his four
hundred and fiftieth year, as did many other wonders
we did not record. But we record only this one for the
sake of brevity to shorten our written account.
8 And Yereḏ continued to teach his children eighty
years, but after that they began to break the
Commandments he had given them, and to do many
things without his permission. They began to go down
from the Qodesh Mountain, one after another, and mix
with the children of Qayin, in obscene association.
9 Now the reason the children of Yereḏ went down
the Qodesh Mountain will now be revealed to you.
3

20 After Qayin had gone down to the land of dark soil,
and his children had multiplied, there was one of them,
whose name was Genun, son of Lemeḵ the blind who
slew Qayin.
2 Satan came to Genun in his childhood and made a
variety of trumpets and horns, and string instruments,
cymbals and psalteries, and lyres and harps, and
flutes. And Genun played them at all times and at
every hour.
3 And when he played them, Satan came to them so
that from among them were heard beautiful and sweet
sounds that seized the heart with delight.
123

ADAM AND EVE 2

Then he gathered many crowds to play on them,
and when they played it greatly pleased the children of
Qayin, who fanned themselves to flames of sin among
themselves and they burned with fire while Satan
inflamed their hearts with one another, and lust
increased among them.
5 Satan also taught Genun to make strong drink out
of corn. Genun used this to bring together crowd upon
crowd in houses of drink, and brought into their hands
all kinds of fruits and flowers, and they drank together.
6 Genun did this to multiply sin greatly. He also acted
with pride, and taught the children of Qayin to commit
all manner of the grossest wickedness, which they did
not know until then. And he put them up to all kinds of
deeds, which they did not know of before.
7 Then, when Satan saw that they obeyed Genun
and listened to him in every thing he told them, he
rejoiced greatly, and he increased Genun’s
understanding until he took iron and with it made
weapons of war.
8 Then when they were drunk, hatred and murder
increased among them. One man would use violence
against another and Satan would teach him evil in that
one man would take the other man’s children and
defile them before him.
9 And when men saw they were vanquished and saw
that others were not beaten, those who were beaten
came to Genun and took refuge with him, and he made
them part of his group.
10 Then sin increased among them greatly, until a
man married his own sister, or daughter, or mother,
and others, or the daughter of his father’s sister, so that
there was no more distinction of relationship, and they
could no longer discern what was sin and what was
not, but always were wicked and the earth was defiled
with sin. And they angered Elohim the Judge, who had
created them.
11 But Genun gathered together groups and groups,
that played on horns and on all the other instruments
4

124

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

we have already mentioned, at the foot of the Qodesh
Mountain. They did that so the children of Shĕth who
were on the Qodesh Mountain would hear it.
12 But when the children of Shĕth heard the noise,
they wondered, and came by companies, and stood on
the top of the mountain to look at those below. This
went on an entire year.
13 At the end of that year, Genun saw that they were
being won over to him little by little. Satan entered into
him, and taught him to make the elements for dyeing
garments of various patterns, and made him
understand how to dye crimson and purple and what
not.
14 And the sons of Qayin who worked at all of this
shone in beauty and gorgeous apparel. And they
gathered together at the foot of the mountain in
splendor, with horns and gorgeous dresses, and horse
races, and they were committing all manner of
disgusting acts.
15 Meanwhile the children of Shĕth, who were on the
Qodesh Mountain, prayed and praised Elohim in the
place of the hosts of messengers who had fallen.
Elohim had called them ‘messengers,’ because He
rejoiced over them greatly.
16 But after this time they no longer kept His
Commandment, nor were held by the promise He had
made to their fathers. But they relaxed from their
fasting and praying, and from the counsel of Yereḏ
their father. And they kept on gathering together on the
top of the mountain to watch the children of Qayin,
from morning until evening. And they watched what
they did and they looked at their beautiful dresses and
ornaments.
17 Then the children of Qayin looked up from below,
and saw the children of Shĕth, standing in numbers on
the top of the mountain, and they called to them to
come down to them.
18 But from above them, the children of Shĕth said,
“We don’t know the way.” Then Genun, the son of
Lemeḵ, heard them say they did not know the way, and
125

ADAM AND EVE 2

he began to think to himself of ways he might bring
them down.
19 Then Satan appeared to him by night, saying,
“There is no way for them to come down from the part
of the mountain on which they live, but when they
come out tomorrow, say to them, ‘Come to the western
side of the mountain. There you will find a stream of
water that comes down to the foot of the mountain,
between two hills. That marks the way. Come down
that way to us.’ ”
20 Then when it was day, Genun blew the horns and
beat the drums below the mountain, as he was
accustomed to do. The children of Shĕth heard it and
came as they used to do.
21 Then Genun said to them from down below, “Go to
the western side of the mountain, there you will find the
way to come down.”
22 But when the children of Shĕth heard these words
from him, they went back into the cave to Yereḏ to tell
him all they had heard.
23 Then when Yereḏ heard it, he was grieved because
he knew that they would defy his wishes.
24 After this a hundred men of the children of Shĕth
gathered together and said among themselves,
“Come, let us go down to the children of Qayin and see
what they do, and enjoy ourselves with them.”
25 But when Yereḏ heard this of the hundred men his
very soul was moved, and his heart was grieved. He
then stood with great emotion in the middle of them,
and earnestly compelled them by the blood of Heḇel
the just and said, “Let no one of you go down from this
qodesh and pure mountain, in which our fathers have
ordered us to live.”
26 But when Yereḏ saw that they did not listen to his
words, he said to them, “My good, innocent, and
qodesh children, you must understand that once you
go down from this qodesh mountain, Elohim will not
allow you to return to it again.”
126

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

He again adjured them, saying, “I plead with you by
the death of our father Aḏam, and by the blood of
Heḇel, of Shĕth, of Enosh, of Qĕynan, and of
Mahalal’ĕl, to listen to me. Do not go down from this
qodesh mountain, because the moment you leave it,
life and mercy will be taken from you; and you shall no
longer be called ‘children of Elohim,’ but ‘children of
the devil.’
28 But they would not listen to his words.
29 Ḥanoḵ was already grown up at that time, and in
his zeal for Elohim, he stood and said, “Hear me, you
large and small sons of Shĕth! When you transgress
the commandment of our fathers and go down from
this qodesh mountain, you shall not come up here
again for ever.”
30 But they rose up against Ḥanoḵ and would not
listen to his words, but they went down from the
Qodesh Mountain.
31 And when they looked at the daughters of Qayin, at
their beautiful figures, and at their hands and feet dyed
with color, and the tattoos on their faces that
ornamented them, the fire of sin was set ablaze in
them.
32 Then Satan made them look most beautiful before
the sons of Shĕth, as he also made the sons of Shĕth
appear the most handsome in the eyes of the
daughters of Qayin, so that the daughters of Qayin
lusted after the sons of Shĕth like ravenous beasts,
and the sons of Shĕth lusted after the daughters of
Qayin until they committed disgusting and disgraceful
acts with them.
33 But after they had fallen into this defilement they
returned by the way they had come, and tried to
ascend the Qodesh Mountain. But they could not
because the stones of that qodesh mountain were on
fire flashing before them, and prevented them so that
they could not go up again.
34 And Elohim was angry with them, and turned from
them because they had come down from glory, and
because of this had lost and forsaken their own purity
27

127

ADAM AND EVE 2

and innocence, and were fallen into the defilement of
sin.
35 Then Elohim sent His Word to Yereḏ, saying,
“These of your children, whom you once called ‘My
children,’ have broken My Commandment, and have
gone down to the house of damnation and sin. Send a
messenger to those that are left so that they will not go
down, and be lost.”
36 Then Yereḏ wept before HWHY, and asked Him for
mercy and forgiveness. But he wished that his soul
might depart from his body rather than hear these
words from Elohim about his children that went down
from the Qodesh Mountain.
37 But he followed Elohim’s order and preached to
them not to go down from that qodesh mountain, and
not to hold relations with the children of Qayin.
38 But they did not listen to his message, and they
would not obey his advice.

21 After this, another group gathered together and
went to look after their brothers but they perished with
them as well. And so it was, company after company,
until only a few of them remained.
2 Then Yereḏ was sickened with grief. And his
sickness was such that the day of his death was near.
3 Then he called Ḥanoḵ his eldest son, and
Methushelaḥ Ḥanoḵ’s son, and Lemeḵ the son of
Methushelaḥ, and Noaḥ the son of Lemeḵ.
4 And when they came to him he prayed over them
and baraḵ them, and said to them, “You are righteous,
innocent sons. Do not go down from this qodesh
mountain, because you have seen your children and
your children’s children have gone down from this
qodesh mountain, and have alienated themselves
from this qodesh mountain through their reprehensible
lust and transgression of Elohim’s Commandment.
5 But I know, through the power of Elohim, that He
will not leave you on this qodesh mountain. Your
children have transgressed His Commandment and
that of our fathers, which we had received from them.
128

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

But, my sons, Elohim will take you to a strange
land, and you never shall return to see this garden and
this qodesh mountain with your own eyes once again.
7 Therefore, my sons, set your hearts on your own
selves, and keep the Commandment of Elohim which
is with you. And when you go from this qodesh
mountain into a strange land which you do not know,
take the body of our father Aḏam with you, and with it
take these three precious gifts and offerings, namely,
the gold, the incense, and the myrrh; and let them be
in the place where the body of our father Aḏam shall
lay.
8 And, my sons, of you who are left, the Word of
Elohim will come, and when he goes out of this land
he shall take with him the body of our father Aḏam, and
shall lay it in the middle of the earth, the place in which
deliverance shall be worked out.”
9 Then Noaḥ said to him, “Who is he of us that shall
be left?”
10 And Yereḏ answered, “You are he that shall be left.
And you shall take the body of our father Aḏam from
the cave, and place it with you in the ark when the flood
comes.
11 “And your son Shĕm, who shall come out of your
loins, it is he who shall lay the body of our father Aḏam
in the middle of the earth, in the place where salvation
shall come.”
12 Then Yereḏ turned to his son Ḥanoḵ, and said to
him “My son, abide in this cave, and minister diligently
before the body of our father Aḏam all the days of your
life, and feed your people in righteousness and
innocence.”
13 And Yereḏ said no more. His hands went limp, his
eyes closed, and he entered into rest like his fathers.
His death took place in the three hundred and sixtieth
year of Noaḥ, and in the nine hundred and eighty-ninth
year of his own life; on the twelfth of ninth month on a
sixth day.
6

129

ADAM AND EVE 2

But as Yereḏ died, tears streamed down his face
by reason of his great sorrow, for the children of Shĕth,
who had fallen in his days.
15 Then Ḥanoḵ, Methushelaḥ, Lemeḵ and Noaḥ,
these four, wept over him; embalmed him carefully,
and then laid him in the Cave of Treasures. Then they
rose and mourned for him forty days.
16 And when these days of mourning were ended,
Ḥanoḵ, Methushelaḥ, Lemeḵ and Noaḥ remained in
sorrow of heart because their father had departed from
them and could not see him again.
14

22 Ḥanoḵ kept the commandment of Yereḏ his
father, and continued to minister in the cave.
2 Many wonders happened to this man, Ḥanoḵ, and
he also wrote a celebrated book; but those wonders
may not be told in this place.
3 Then after this, the children of Shĕth, as well as
their children and their wives went astray and fell. And
when Ḥanoḵ, Methushelaḥ, Lemeḵ and Noaḥ saw
them, their hearts suffered because of their fall, which
filled them with doubt and unbelief. And they wept and
sought of Elohim mercy to preserve them, and to bring
them out of that wicked generation.
4 Ḥanoḵ continued in his ministry before HWHY three
hundred and eighty-five years, and at the end of that
time he became aware through the grace of Elohim,
that Elohim intended to remove him from the earth.
5 He then said to his son, “O my son, I know that
Elohim intends to bring the waters of the Flood on the
earth, and destroy His creation.
6
“And you are the last rulers over the people on this
mountain. And I know that not one will be left for you
to have children on this qodesh mountain. Not one of
you will rule over the children of his people. No great
number of you will be left on this mountain.”
7 Ḥanoḵ also said to them, “Watch over your souls,
and hold tight to your fear of Elohim and your service
to Him, and worship Him in righteous faith, and serve
130

2 AḎAM AND ḤAWWAH

Him in righteousness, innocence and judgment.
Worship Him in repentance and in purity.”
8 When Ḥanoḵ had ended his commandments to
them, Elohim transported him from that mountain to
the land of ḥai, to the mansions of the righteous and of
the chosen ones, which is the abode of Paradise of joy,
in light that reaches up to the shamayim. It is the light
that is beyond the light of this world. It is the light of
Elohim that fills the whole world and no place can
contain.
9 Ḥanoḵ was in the light of Elohim and because of
this he found himself out of the grasp of death, until
Elohim would have him die.
10 Altogether, not one of our fathers or of their
children, remained on that qodesh mountain, except
those three, Methushelaḥ, Lemeḵ, and Noaḥ. All the
rest went down from the mountain and fell into sin with
the children of Qayin. And they were forbidden to come
back to that mountain. And none remained on it but
those three men.

131

ENOCH

ḤANOḴ
‫ חנוך‬KW!X
WATCHERS

1The words of the beraḵah of Ḥanoḵ, with which he
baraḵ the elect and righteous, who will be living in the
day of tribulation, when all the wicked and unrighteous
are to be removed.
2 And he took up his parable and said, “Ḥanoḵ a
righteous man, whose eyes were opened by Elohim,
saw the vision of the Qadosh One in the shamayim,
which the messengers showed me. And from them I
heard all matters, and from them I understood as I saw,
but not for this generation, but for a distant one which
is to come.”
3 Concerning the elect I said, and took up my parable
concerning them, “The Qadosh Great One will come
forth from His dwelling,
4 and the eternal Elohim will tread upon the earth, on
Mount Sinai, and appear from His camp and appear in
the strength of His might from the shamayim of
shamayim.
5
“And all shall be smitten with fear and the watchers
shall quake, and great fear and trembling shall seize
them unto the ends of the earth.
6
“And the high mountains shall be shaken, and the
high hills shall be made low, and shall melt like wax
before the flame.
7 “And the earth shall be completely torn in pieces,
and all that is upon the earth shall perish, and there
shall be a judgment upon all.
8 “But with the righteous He will make peace. And will
protect the elect, and compassion shall be upon them.
And they shall all belong to Elohim, and they shall be
prospered, and they shall all be baruḵ. And He will help
them all, and light shall appear unto them, and He will
make peace with them.
9
“And see! He comes with ten thousands of His
qodeshim to execute judgment upon all, and to destroy
132

ḤANOḴ

all the wicked, and to convict all flesh of all the works
of their wickedness which they have committed
wickedly, and of all the harsh matters which wicked
sinners have spoken against Him.

2 “Observe all matters that take place in the
shamayim, how they do not change their orbits, and
the lights which are in the shamayim, how they all rise
and put in order each in its season, and do not
transgress against their appointed order.
2 “See, the earth, and give heed to that which takes
place upon it from first to last, how steadfast they are,
how none of that on earth changes, but all the works
of Elohim appear to you.
3
“See, the summer and the winter, how the whole
earth is filled with water, and clouds and dew and rain
lie upon it.

3 “Observe and see how all the trees seem as though
they had withered and shed all their leaves, except
fourteen trees, which do not lose their foliage but retain
the old foliage from two to three years till the new
comes.

4 “And again, observe the days of summer how the
sun is above the earth over against it. And you seek
shade and shelter because of the heat of the sun, and
the earth also burns with growing heat, and so you
cannot tread on the earth, or on a rock because of its
heat.

5 “Observe how the trees cover themselves with
green leaves and bear fruit. Therefore give heed and
know with regard to all His works, and recognise how
He that lives forever has made them so.
2 “And all His works go on from year to year forever,
and all the tasks which they accomplish for Him, and
their tasks do not change, but according to how Elohim
has ordained, so it is done.
3 “And see, how the sea and the rivers in the same
way accomplish and do not change their tasks from
His Commandments.
133

ENOCH

“But you, you have not been steadfast, nor done
the Commandments of HWHY, but you have turned
away and spoken proud and harsh words with your
impure mouths against His greatness. Oh, you hardhearted! You shall find no peace.
5 “Therefore you shall loathe your days, and the
years of your life shall perish, and the years of your
destruction shall be multiplied in eternal loathing, and
you shall find no compassion.
6 “In those days you shall make your names an
eternal loathing unto all the righteous, and by you, all
who curse shall curse, and all the sinners and wicked
shall loathe by you, and for you, the wicked, there shall
be a curse. And all shall rejoice, and there shall be
forgiveness of sins, and every compassion and peace
and patience - there shall be salvation unto them – a
pleasant light. And for all of you sinners there shall be
no salvation, but on you all a curse shall abide.
7 “But for the elect there shall be light and joy and
peace, and they shall inherit the earth.
8 “And then there shall be given wisdom to the elect,
and they shall all live and never again sin, either
through wickedness or through pride, but they who are
wise shall be humble.
9 “And they shall not transgress again, nor shall they
sin all the days of their ḥai, nor shall they die of anger
or wrath, but they shall complete the number of the
days of their ḥai. And their lives shall be increased in
peace, and the years of their joy shall be multiplied, in
eternal gladness and peace, all the days of their life.”
4

6 And it came to be, when the children of men had
multiplied, that in those days were born unto them
good looking and lovely daughters.
2 And the messengers, the children of the shamayim,
saw and lusted after them, and said to one another:
“Come, let us choose us wives from among the
children of men and bring forth children.”
3 And Shemyatsa, who was their leader, said to
them, “I fear you will not indeed agree to do this deed,
and I alone shall have to pay the penalty of a great sin.”
134

ḤANOḴ

And they all answered him and said, “Let us all
swear an oath, and all bind ourselves by mutual curses
not to abandon this plan but to do this matter.”
5 Then they all swore together and bound
themselves by mutual curses upon it.
6 And they were, in all, two hundred who descended
in the days of Yereḏ on the summit of Mount Ḥermon,
and they called it Mount Ḥermon, because they had
sworn and bound themselves by mutual curses upon
it.
7 And these are the names of their leaders:
Shamlatsats, their leader, Araḵleḇa, Rame’ĕl,
Koḵaḇ’ĕl, Tamle’ĕl, Ramle’ĕl, Dani’ĕl, Yeḥezqĕl,
Baraḵi’ĕl, Asah’ĕl, Armaros, Batar’ĕl, Anan’ĕl,
Tsaqle’ĕl,
Shemshaphe’ĕl,
Satar’ĕl,
Tsuri’ĕl,
Yomya’ĕl, Sari’ĕl.
8 These are their chiefs of tens.
4

7 And all the others together with them took unto
themselves wives, and each chose one for himself,
and they began to go in unto them and to defile
themselves with them,
2 and they taught them charms and enchantments,
and the cutting of roots, and made them to know
plants. And they became pregnant, and they brought
forth great giants, and the giants brought forth
Nephilim, and the Nephilim brought forth Ĕli’uḏ:
3 Who consumed all the acquisitions of men. And
when men could no longer sustain them,
4 the giants turned against them and devoured
mankind.
5 And they began to sin against birds, and beasts,
and reptiles, and fish, and to devour one another’s
flesh, and drink the blood.
6 Then the earth laid accusation against the lawless
ones.

8 And Azaz’ĕl taught men to make swords, and
knives, and shields, and breastplates, and made
known to them the metals of the earth and the art of
working them, and bracelets, and ornaments, and the
135

ENOCH

use of antimony, and the adorning of the eyelids, and
all kinds of costly stones, and all colouring tinctures.
2 And there arose much wickedness, and they
committed whoring, and they were led astray, and
became corrupt in all their ways. Shemyatsa taught
enchantments, and root-cuttings, Armaros - the
resolving of enchantments, Baraḵi’ĕl - astrology,
Koḵaḇ’ĕl - the constellations, Yeḥezqĕl - the
knowledge of the clouds, Araqi’ĕl - the signs of the
earth, Shamsi’ĕl - the signs of the sun, and Sari’ĕl - the
course of the moon. And as men perished, they cried,
and their cry went up to the shamayim.

9 And then Miḵa’ĕl, Uri’ĕl, Repha’ĕl, and Gaḇri’ĕl
looked down from the shamayim and saw much blood
being shed upon the earth, and all lawlessness being
wrought upon the earth.
2 And they said one to another, “The earth made
without inhabitant cries the voice of their crying up to
the gates of the shamayim.
3 “And now to you, the qodeshim of the shamayim,
the beings of men make their petition, saying, ‘Bring
our cause before the Most High.’ ”
4 And they said to HWHY of the ages, “Aḏon of
masters, Elohim of mighty ones, Sovereign of
sovereigns, and Elohim of the ages, the throne of Your
esteem is unto all the generations of the ages, and
Your Name qodesh and magnificent and baruḵ unto all
the ages!
5 “You have made all, and You have power over all,
and all are naked and open in Your sight, and You see
all matters, and none can hide himself from You.
6 “You see what Azaz’ĕl has done, who has taught
all unrighteousness on earth and revealed the eternal
secrets which were in the shamayim, which men were
striving to learn.
7 “And Shemyatsa, to whom You have given
authority to bear rule over his associates.
8 “And they have gone to the daughters of men upon
the earth, and have slept with the women, and have
136

ḤANOḴ

defiled themselves, and revealed to them all kinds of
sins.
9 “And the women have borne giants, and by this the
whole earth has been filled with blood and
unrighteousness.
10 “And now, see, the beings of those who have died
are crying and making their petition to the gates of the
shamayim, and their lamentations have ascended: and
cannot cease because of the lawless deeds which are
wrought on the earth.
11 “And You know all matters before they come to
pass, and You see these and You allow them, and You
do not say to us what we are to do to them in regard to
these.”

10 Then said the Most High, the Qadosh and Great
One spoke, and sent Uri’ĕl to the son of Lemeḵ, and
said to him,
2 “Go to Noaḥ and tell him in My Name, ‘Hide
yourself!’ and reveal to him the end that is
approaching; that the whole earth will be destroyed,
and a flood is about to come upon the whole earth, and
will destroy all that is on it.
3 “And now instruct him that he may escape and his
seed may be preserved for all the generations of the
world.”
4 And again HWHY said to Repha’ĕl, “Bind Azaz’ĕl
hand and foot, and cast him into the darkness: and
make an opening in the desert, which is in Duḏa’ĕl, and
cast him in there.
5 “And place upon him rough and jagged rocks, and
cover him with darkness, and let him abide there
forever, and cover his face that he may not see light.
6 “And on the day of the great judgment he shall be
cast into the fire.
7 “And heal the earth which the messengers have
corrupted, and proclaim the healing of the earth, that
they may heal the plague, and that all the children of
men may not perish through all the secrets that the
watchers have disclosed and have taught their sons.
137

ENOCH

“And the whole earth has been corrupted through
the works that were taught by Azaz’ĕl: to him ascribe
all sin.”
9 And HWHY said to Gaḇri’ĕl, “Proceed against the
half-breeds and the reprobates, and against the
children of whoring: and destroy the children of the
watchers from amongst men. Send them one against
the other that they may destroy each other in battle, for
they shall not have length of days.
10 “And no request that they make of you shall be
granted unto their fathers on their behalf; for they
expect to live an eternal life, and that each one of them
will live five hundred years.”
11 And HWHY said to Miḵa’ĕl, “Go, bind Shemyatsa
and his associates who have united themselves with
women so as to have defiled themselves with them in
all their uncleanness.
12 “And when their sons have slain one another, and
they have seen the destruction of their beloved ones,
bind them fast for seventy generations in the valleys of
the earth, till the day of their judgment and of their
complete end, till the judgment that is forever and ever
is ended.
13 “In those days they shall be led off to the abyss of
fire, and to the torment and the prison in which they
shall be confined forever.
14 “And whoever shall be condemned and destroyed
will from thereon be bound together with them to the
end of all generations.
15 “And destroy all the spirits of the reprobate and the
children of the watchers, because they have wronged
mankind.
16 “Destroy all wicked from the face of the earth and
let every evil work come to an end: and let the plant of
righteousness and truth appear: and it shall prove a
beraḵah. The works of righteousness and truth shall
be planted in truth and joy forever.
17 “And then shall all the righteous escape, and shall
live till they bring forth thousands of children, and all
8

138

ḤANOḴ

the days of their youth and their old age, they shall
complete in peace.
18 “And then the whole earth shall be tilled in
righteousness, and shall all be planted with trees and
be full of beraḵah.
19 “And all desirable trees shall be planted on it, and
they shall plant vines on it, and the vine which they
plant upon it shall yield wine in abundance. And as for
all the seed which is sown upon, each measure shall
bear a thousand, and each measure of olives shall
yield ten presses of oil.
20 “And you, cleanse the earth from all oppression,
and from all unrighteousness, and from all sin, and
from all wickedness, and all the uncleanness that is
wrought upon the earth; destroy from off the earth.
21 “And all the children of men shall become
righteous, and all nations shall offer adoration and
shall praise Me, and all shall worship Me. And the earth
shall be cleansed from all defilement, and from all sin,
and from all punishment, and from all torment, and I
will never again send upon it from generation to
generation and forever.

11 “And in those days I will open the store chambers
of beraḵah which are in the shamayim, so as to send
them down upon the earth over the work and labour of
the children of men.
2 “And truth and peace shall be associated together
throughout all the days of the world and throughout all
the generations of men.”

12 Before these matters, Ḥanoḵ was hidden, and
none of the children of men knew where he was
hidden, and where he abode, and what had become of
him.
2 And his activities had to do with the watchers, and
his days were with the qodeshim.
3 And I, Ḥanoḵ, baraḵ HWHY of majesty and the
Sovereign of the ages, and see the watchers called
me, Ḥanoḵ the scribe, and said to me
139

ENOCH

“Ḥanoḵ, you scribe of righteousness, go, declare to
the watchers of the shamayim who have left the high
shamayim, the qodesh eternal place, and have defiled
themselves with women, and have done as the
children of earth do, and have taken unto themselves
wives, ‘You have wrought great destruction on the
earth.
5 ‘And you shall have no peace nor forgiveness of
sin: and inasmuch as they delight themselves in their
children,
6 ‘the murder of their beloved ones shall they see,
and over the destruction of their children shall they
lament, and shall make supplication unto eternity, but
compassion and peace shall you not attain.’ ”
4

13 And Ḥanoḵ went and said, “Azaz’ĕl, you shall
have no peace. A severe sentence has gone forth
against you to put you in bonds,
2 “and you shall not have toleration nor request
granted to you, because of the unrighteousness which
you have taught, and because of all the works of
wickedness and unrighteousness and sin which you
have shown to men.”
3 Then I went and spoke to them all together, and
they were all afraid, and fear and trembling seized
them.
4 And they pleaded with me to draw up a petition for
them that they might find forgiveness, and to read their
petition in the presence of HWHY of the shamayim.
5 For from thereon they could not speak nor lift up
their eyes to the shamayim for shame of their sins for
which they had been condemned.
6 Then I wrote out their petition, and the prayer in
regard to their spirits and their deeds individually, and
in regard to their requests that they should have
forgiveness and length.
7 And I went off and sat down at the waters of Dan,
in the land of Dan, to the south-west of Ḥermon; I read
their petition till I fell asleep.
8 And see, a dream came to me, and visions fell
down upon me, and I saw visions of rebuke, and a
140

ḤANOḴ

voice came bidding, to tell it to the sons of the
shamayim, and reprimand them.
9 And when I awoke, I came unto them, and they
were all sitting gathered together, weeping in
Aḇeltsayil, which is between Leḇanon and Senĕser,
with their faces covered.
10 And I recounted before them all the visions which I
had seen in sleep, and I began to speak the words of
righteousness, and to reprimand the watchers of the
shamayim.

14 The Book of the Words of righteousness, and of
the reprimand of the eternal watchers in accordance
with the command of the Qadosh Great One in that
vision.
2 I saw in my sleep what I will now say with a tongue
of flesh and with the breath of my mouth, which the
Great One has given to men to converse with and
understand with the heart.
3 As He has created and given to man the power of
understanding the Word of wisdom, so has He created
me also and given me the power of reprimanding the
watchers, the children of the shamayim.
4 “I wrote out your petition, and in my vision it
appeared thus, that your petition will not be granted
unto you throughout all the days of eternity, and that
judgment has been finally passed upon you, even so
will not be granted unto you.
5 “And from hereon you shall not ascend into the
shamayim unto all eternity, and in bonds of the earth
the decree has gone forth to bind you for all the days
of the world.
6 “And previously you shall have seen the destruction
of your beloved sons and you shall have no pleasure
in them, but they shall fall before you by the sword.
7 “And your petition on their behalf shall not be
granted, nor yet on your own, even though you weep
and pray and speak all the words contained in the
writing which I have written.”
8 And the vision was shown to me thus: See, in the
vision, clouds invited me and a mist summoned me,
141

ENOCH

and the course of the stars and the lightnings sped and
hastened me, and the winds in the vision caused me
to fly and lifted me upward, and carried me into the
shamayim.
9 And I went in till I drew near to a wall which is built
of crystals and surrounded by tongues of fire, and it
began to terrorise me.
10 And I went into the tongues of fire and drew near to
a large house which was built of crystals, and the walls
of the house were like a mosaic floor of crystals, and
its groundwork was of crystal.
11 Its ceiling was like the path of the stars and the
lightnings, and between them were fiery keruḇim, and
their shamayim was as water.
12 A flaming fire surrounded the walls, and its portals
blazed with fire.
13 And I entered into that house, and it was hot as fire
and cold as ice. There were no delights of life therein;
fear covered me, and trembling took hold of me.
14 And as I quaked and trembled, I fell upon my face.
15 And I saw a vision, and see! There was a second
house, greater than the former, and the entire portal
stood open before me, and it was built of flames of fire.
16 And in every respect it so excelled in splendour and
magnificence and extent that I cannot describe to you
its splendour and its extent.
17 And its floor was of fire, and above it were lightnings
and the path of the stars, and its ceiling also was
flaming fire.
18 And I looked and saw therein a high throne, its
appearance as crystal, and the wheels thereof as the
shining sun, and there was the vision of keruḇim.
19 And from underneath the throne came streams of
flaming fire so that I could not look upon it.
20 And the Great Esteem sat upon it, and His
garments shone more brightly than the sun and were
whiter than any snow.
21 None of the messengers could enter and look upon
His face because of the magnificence and esteem, and
no flesh could look upon Him.
142

ḤANOḴ

The flaming fire was round about Him, and a great
fire stood before Him, and none around could draw
near Him, ten thousand times ten thousand before
Him, yet He needed no counsellor.
23 And the most qodeshim who were near to Him did
not leave by night nor depart from Him.
24 And until then I had been prostrate on my face,
trembling, and HWHY called me with His own mouth,
and said to me, ‘Come here, Ḥanoḵ, and hear My
word.’
25 And one of the qodeshim came to me and woke
me, and he made me rise up and approach the door:
and I bowed my face downwards.
22

15 And He answered and said to me, and I heard His
voice, “Fear not, Ḥanoḵ, you righteous man and scribe
of righteousness, approach here and hear my voice.
2 “And go, say to the watchers of the shamayim who
have sent you to intercede for them, ‘You should
intercede for men, and not men for you.
3 ‘Why have you left the high, qodesh, and eternal
shamayim, and lain with women, and defiled
yourselves with the daughters of men and taken to
yourselves wives, and done like the children of earth,
and begotten giants as sons?
4 ‘And though you were qodesh, spiritual, living the
eternal ḥai, you have defiled yourselves with the blood
of women, and have brought forth with the blood of
flesh, and, as the children of men, have lusted after
flesh and blood, as those also do who die and perish.
5 ‘Therefore have I given them wives also that they
might impregnate them, and bring forth children by
them, that thus none might be lacking to them on earth.
6 ‘But you were formerly spiritual, living the eternal
ḥai, and immortal for all generations of the world.
7 ‘And therefore I have not appointed wives for you;
for as for the spiritual ones of the shamayim, in the
shamayim is their dwelling.
8 ‘And now, the giants, who are produced from the
spirits and flesh, shall be called evil spirits upon the
earth, and on the earth shall be their dwelling.
143

ENOCH

‘Evil spirits have proceeded from their bodies;
because they are born from men and from the qodesh
watchers is their beginning and primal origin; they shall
be evil spirits on earth, and evil spirits shall they be
called.
10 ‘As for the spirits of the shamayim, in the shamayim
shall be their dwelling, but as for the spirits of the earth
which were born upon the earth, on the earth shall be
their dwelling.
11 ‘And the spirits of the giants afflict, oppress,
destroy, attack, do battle, and work destruction on the
earth, and cause trouble. They take no food, but
nevertheless hunger and thirst, and cause offences.
And these spirits shall rise up against the children of
men and against the women, because they have
proceeded from them.
9

16 ‘From the days of the slaughter and destruction
and death of the giants, from the beings of whose flesh
the spirits, having gone forth, shall destroy without
incurring judgment - thus shall they destroy until the
day of the complete end - the great judgment, in which
the age shall be ended, over the watchers and the
wicked, even so, shall be completely ended.’
2 “And now, as to the watchers who have sent you to
intercede for them, who had been previously in the
shamayim, say to them,
3 ‘You have been in the shamayim, but all the
mysteries had not yet been revealed to you, and you
knew worthless matters, and these in the hardness of
your hearts you have made known to the women, and
through these mysteries, women and men work much
evil on earth.’
4 “Say to them therefore: ‘You have no peace.’ ”

17 And they took and brought me to a place in which
those who were there were like flaming fire, and, when
they wanted, they appeared as men.
2 And they brought me to the place of darkness, and
to a mountain, the point of whose summit reached to
the shamayim.
144

ḤANOḴ

And I saw the places of the lights and the treasuries
of the stars and of the thunder and in the uttermost
depths, where there were a fiery bow and arrows and
their quiver, and a fiery sword and all the lightnings.
4 And they took me to the living waters, and to the
fire of the west, which receives every going down of
the sun.
5 And I came to a river of fire in which the fire flows
like water and discharges itself into the great sea
towards the west.
6 I saw the great rivers and came to the great river
and to the great darkness, and went to the place where
no flesh walks.
7 I saw the mountains of the darkness of winter and
the place where all the waters of the deep flow.
8 I saw the mouths of all the rivers of the earth and
the mouth of the deep.
3

18 I saw the treasuries of all the winds. I saw how He
had furnished with them the whole creation and the
firm foundations of the earth.
2 And I saw the corner-stone of the earth. I saw the
four winds which bear the earth and the firmament of
the shamayim.
3 And I saw how the winds stretch out the vaults of
the shamayim, and have their station between the
shamayim and earth: these are the pillars of the
shamayim.
4 I saw the winds of the shamayim which turn and
bring the circumference of the sun and all the stars to
their going down.
5 I saw the winds on the earth carrying the clouds. I
saw the paths of the messengers.
6 I saw at the end of the earth the firmament of the
shamayim above. And I proceeded and saw a place
which burns day and night, where there are seven
mountains of magnificent stones, three towards the
east, and three towards the south.
7 And as for those towards the east, one was of
coloured stone, and one of pearl, and one of jacinth,
and those towards the south of red stone.
145

ENOCH

But the middle one reached to the shamayim like
the throne of Elohim – of alabaster - and the summit of
the throne was of sapphire.
9 And I saw a flaming fire, and beyond these
mountains is
10 a region - the end of the great earth - there the
shamayim were completed.
11 And I saw a deep abyss, with columns of fire of the
shamayim, and among them I saw columns of fire fall,
which were beyond measure - alike towards the height
and towards the depth.
12 And beyond that abyss I saw a place which had no
firmament of the shamayim above, and no firmly
founded earth beneath it: there was no water upon it,
and no birds, but it was a waste and horrible place.
13 I saw there seven stars like great burning
mountains, and to me, when I inquired regarding them,
14 the messenger said, “This place is the end of the
shamayim and earth. This has become a prison for the
stars and the host of the shamayim.
15 “And the stars which roll over the fire are they which
have transgressed the commandment of HWHY in the
beginning of their rising, because they did not come
forth at their appointed times.
16 “And He was wroth with them, and bound them till
the time when their guilt should be completely ended for ten thousand years.”
8

19 And Uri’ĕl said to me, “Here shall stand the
messengers who have connected themselves with
women - and their spirits assuming many different
forms are defiling mankind and shall lead them astray
into sacrificing to demons as mighty ones - till the day
of the great judgment in which they shall be rightlyruled till they are made an end of.
2 And the women, also of the messengers who went
astray shall become demons.”
3 And I, Ḥanoḵ, alone saw the vision, the end of all
matters, and no man shall see as I have seen.

146

ḤANOḴ

20 And these are the names of the qodesh
messengers who watch:
2 Uri’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers, who is over
the world and over Gĕy-Hinnom.
3 Repha’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers, who is
over the spirits of men.
4 Raḡu’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers who takes
vengeance on the world of the lights.
5 Miḵa’ĕl, one of qodesh messengers, in order that
he is appointed over the best part of mankind and over
disorder.
6 Saraqa’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers, who is
appointed over the spirits who sin in the spirit.
7 Gaḇri’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers, who is
over Paradise and the serpents and the keruḇim.
8 Rame’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers, whom
Elohim appointed over those who rise.

21 And I proceeded to where matters were
disordered.
2 And I saw there some horrible matter: I saw neither
a shamayim above nor a firmly founded earth, but a
place disorderly and horrible.
3 And there I saw seven stars of the shamayim bound
together in it, like great mountains and burning with
fire.
4 Then I said, “For what sin are they bound, and on
what account have they been cast in here?”
5 Then spoke Uri’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers,
who was with me, and was chief over them, and said,
“Ḥanoḵ, why do you ask, and why are you eager for
the truth?
6 “These are of the number of the stars of the
shamayim, which have transgressed the command of
HWHY, and are bound here till ten thousand years, the
time entailed by their sins, are ended.”
7 And from there I went to another place, which was
still more horrible than the former, and I saw a horrible
matter: a great fire there which burnt and blazed, and
the place was divided as far as the abyss, being full of
147

ENOCH

great descending columns of fire, neither its extent or
magnitude could I see, nor could I guess.
8 Then I said, “How fearful is the place and how
terrible to look upon!”
9 Then Uri’ĕl answered me, one of the qodesh
messengers who was with me, and said to me,
“Ḥanoḵ, why have you such fear and terror?” And I
answered, “Because of this fearful place, and because
of the spectacle of the pain.”
10 And he said to me, “This place is the prison of the
messengers, and here they will be imprisoned
forever.”

22 And then I went to another place, and he showed
me in the west another great and high mountain of
hard rock.
2 And there was in it four hollow places, deep and
wide and very smooth. “How smooth are the hollow
places and deep and dark to look at.”
3 Then Repha’ĕl answered, one of the qodesh
messengers who was with me, and said to me, “These
hollow places have been created for this very purpose,
that the spirits of the beings of the dead should
assemble there, even that all the beings of the children
of men should assemble here.
4 “And these places have been made to receive them
till the day of their judgment and till their appointed
time, till the great judgment upon them.”
5 I saw the spirits of the children of men who were
dead, and their voice went forth to the shamayim and
petitioned.
6 And I asked Repha’ĕl, the messenger who was with
me, and I said to him, “This spirit; whose is it whose
voice goes forth and petitions?”
7 And he answered me saying, “This is the spirit
which went forth from Heḇel, whom his brother Qayin
slew, and he makes his petition against him till his seed
is destroyed from the face of the earth, and his seed is
annihilated from amongst the seed of men.”
8 Then I asked regarding it, and regarding all the
hollow places, “Why is one separated from the other?”
148

ḤANOḴ

And he answered me and said to me, “These three
have been made that the spirits of the dead might be
separated. And such a division has been made for the
spirits of the righteous, in which there is the bright
spring of water.
10 “And such has been made for sinners when they
die and are buried in the earth and judgment has not
been executed on them in their lifetime.
11 “Here their spirits shall be put aside in this great
pain till the great day of judgment and punishment and
torment of the accursed forever, and retribution for
their spirits. There He shall bind them forever.
12 “And such a division has been made for the spirits
of those who make their petition, who make
disclosures concerning their destruction, when they
were slain in the days of the sinners.
13 “Such has been made for the spirits of men who
were not righteous, but sinners, who were complete in
transgression, and of the transgressors they shall be
companions, but their spirits shall not be slain in the
day of judgment nor shall they be raised from there.”
14 Then I baraḵ HWHY of esteem and said, “Baruḵ be
Aḏonai, HWHY of righteousness, who rules forever.”
9

23 From there I went to another place to the west of
the ends of the earth.
2 And I saw a burning fire which ran without resting,
and did not cease from its course day or night, but
regularly.
3 And I asked saying, “What is this which does not
rest?”
4 Then Raḡu’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers who
was with me, answered me and said to me, “This
course of fire which you have seen is the fire in the
west which pursues all the lights of the shamayim.”

24 And from there I went to another place of the
earth, and he showed me a mountain range of fire
which burnt day and night.
2 And I went beyond it and saw seven magnificent
mountains all differing each from the other, and the
149

ENOCH

stones were magnificent and pleasant, magnificent as
a whole, of magnificent appearance and fair exterior:
three towards the east, one founded on the other, and
three towards the south, one upon the other, and deep
rough ravines, none of which joined with any other.
3 And the seventh mountain was in the midst of
these, and it excelled them in height, resembling the
seat of a throne: and fragrant trees encircled the
throne.
4 And amongst them was a tree such as I had never
yet smelled, neither was any amongst them nor were
others like it: it had a fragrance beyond all fragrance,
and its leaves and blooms and wood wither not forever,
and its fruit is pleasant, and its fruit resembles the
dates of a palm.
5 Then I said, “How pleasant is this tree, and fragrant,
and its leaves are fair, and its blooms very delightful in
appearance.”
6 Then answered Miḵa’ĕl, one of the qodesh and
honoured messengers who was with me, and was their
leader.

25 And he said to me, “Ḥanoḵ, why do you ask me
regarding the fragrance of the tree, and why do you
want to learn the truth?”
2 Then I answered him saying, “I want to know about
all matters, but especially about this tree.”
3 And he answered saying, “This high mountain
which you have seen, whose summit is like the throne
of Elohim, is His throne, where the Qodesh Great One,
HWHY of Esteem, the Eternal Sovereign, will sit, when
He shall come down to visit the earth with goodness.
4 “And as for this fragrant tree; no mortal is permitted
to touch it till the great judgment, when He shall take
vengeance on all, and bring to its end forever. It shall
then be given to the righteous and qodesh.
5 “Its fruit shall be for food to the elect; it shall be
transplanted to the qodesh place, to the Hĕyḵal of
HWHY the Eternal Sovereign.
6 “Then they shall rejoice with joy and be glad, and
into the qodesh place they shall enter; and its
150

ḤANOḴ

fragrance shall be in their bones, and they shall live a
long life on earth, such as your fathers lived. And in
their days shall no sorrow, or plague, or torment, or
calamity touch them.”
7 Then I baraḵ the Elohim of Esteem, the Eternal
Sovereign, who has prepared such matters for the
righteous, and has created them and promised to give
to them.

26 And I went from there to the middle of the earth,
and I saw a baruḵ place in which there were trees with
branches abiding and blooming.
2 And there I saw a qodesh mountain, and
underneath the mountain to the east there was a
stream and it flowed towards the south.
3 And I saw towards the east another mountain
higher than this, and between them a deep and narrow
ravine, wherein also ran a stream underneath the
mountain.
4 And to the west of there, was another mountain,
lower than the former and of small height, and a ravine
deep and dry between them, and another deep and dry
ravine was at the extremities of the three mountains.
5 And all the ravines were deep and narrow, of hard
rock, and trees were not planted upon them.
6 And I marvelled at the rocks, and I marvelled at the
ravine, truly, I marvelled very much.

27 Then I said, “For what object is this baruḵ land,
which is entirely filled with trees, and this accursed
valley between?”
2 Then Uri’ĕl, one of the qodesh messengers who
was with me, answered and said, “This accursed
valley is for those who are accursed forever. Here shall
all the accursed be gathered together who utter with
their lips against HWHY, indecent words and of His
esteem speak harshness.
3 “Here shall they be gathered together, and here
shall be their place of judgment. In the last days there
shall be upon them the spectacle of righteous
judgment in the presence of the righteous forever.
151

ENOCH

Here shall the compassionate baraḵ HWHY of esteem,
the Eternal Sovereign.
4 “In the days of judgment over the former, they shall
baraḵ Him for the compassion in accordance with
which He has assigned them.”
5 Then I baraḵ HWHY of Esteem and proclaimed His
esteem and exalted Him magnificently.

28 And then I went towards the east, into the midst
of the mountain range of the desert, and I saw a
wilderness and it was solitary, full of trees and plants.
2 And water gushed forth from above.
3 Rushing like a plentiful watercourse towards the
north-west, it caused clouds and dew to ascend on
every side.

29 And then I went to another place in the desert,
approached to the east of this mountain range.
2 And I there saw aromatic trees exhaling the
fragrance of frankincense and myrrh, and the trees
also were similar to the almond tree.

30 And beyond these, I went far to the east, and I
saw another place, a valley of water.
2 And therein there was a tree, the colour of fragrant
trees such as the gum tree.
3 And on the sides of those valleys I saw fragrant
cinnamon. And beyond these I proceeded to the east.

31 And I saw other mountains, and amongst them
were groves of trees, and there sweet liquid flowed
forth from them, which is named sarara and galbanam.
2 And beyond these mountains I saw another
mountain to the east of the ends of the earth, whereon
were aloe trees, and all the trees were full of incense,
being like almond trees.
3 And when one burnt it, it smelled sweeter than any
fragrant odour.

32 And after these fragrant odours, as I looked
towards the north over the mountains I saw seven
152

ḤANOḴ

mountains full of choice nard and fragrant trees, and
cinnamon, and pepper.
2 And then I went over the summits of all these
mountains, far towards the east of the earth, and
passed above the Eastern sea and went far from it,
and passed over the messenger, Zoti’ĕl.
3 And I came to the Garden of Righteousness, and
saw beyond those trees, many large trees growing
there and of pleasant fragrance, large, very pleasant
and great, and the tree of wisdom of which they eat
and know great wisdom.
4 That tree is in height like the fir, and its leaves are
like the carob tree, and its fruit is like the clusters of the
vine - very lovely - and the fragrance of the tree
penetrates afar.
5 Then I said, “How lovely is the tree, and how good
to look at!”
6 Then Repha’ĕl the qodesh messenger, who was
with me, answered me and said, “This is the tree of
wisdom, of which your elderly father and your aged
mother, who were before you, have eaten, and they
learned wisdom and their eyes were opened, and they
knew that they were naked and they were driven out
of the garden.”

33 And from there I went to the ends of the earth and
saw there great beasts, and each differed from the
other; and birds also differing in appearance and form
and voice, the one differing from the other.
2 And to the east of those beasts I saw the ends of
the earth whereon the shamayim rests, and the portals
of the shamayim open.
3 And I saw how the stars of the shamayim come
forth, and I counted the portals out of which they
proceed, and wrote down all their outlets, of each
individual star by itself, according to their number and
their names, their courses and their positions, and their
times and their months, as Uri’ĕl, the qodesh
messenger who was with me showed me.

153

ENOCH

He showed all matters to me and wrote them down
for me; also their names he wrote for me, and their
laws and their beginnings.
4

34 And from there I went towards the north to the
ends of the earth, and there I saw a great and
magnificent object at the ends of the whole earth.
2 And here HWHY of hosts I saw three portals of the
shamayim open in the shamayim: through each of
them proceed north winds: when they blow there is
cold, hail, frost, snow, dew, and rain.
3 And out of one portal they blow for good, but when
they blow through the other two portals, it is with
violence and affliction on the earth, and they blow with
violence.

35 And from there I went towards the west to the
ends of the earth, and saw there three portals of the
shamayim open such as I had seen in the east, the
same number of portals, and the same number of
outlets.

36 And from there I went to the south to the ends of
the earth, and saw there three open portals of the
shamayim: and then there come dew, rain, and wind.
2 And from there I went to the east to the ends of the
shamayim, and saw where the three eastern portals of
the shamayim open and small portals above them.
3 Through each of these small portals pass the stars
of the shamayim and run their course to the west on
the path which is shown to them.
4 And as often as I saw I baraḵ always HWHY of
Esteem, and I continued to baraḵ HWHY of Esteem who
has wrought great and magnificent wonders, to show
the greatness of His work to the messengers and to
spirits and to men, that they might praise His work and
all His creation: that they might see the work of His
might and praise the great work of His hands and
baraḵ Him forever.
THE PARABLES
154

ḤANOḴ

37 The second vision which he saw, the vision of
wisdom, which Ḥanoḵ the son of Yereḏ, the son of
Mahalal’ĕl, the son of Qĕynan, the son of Enosh, the
son of Shĕth, the son of Aḏam, saw.
2 And this is the beginning of the words of wisdom
which I lifted up my voice to speak and say to those
who dwell on earth, “Hear, you men of old time, and
see, you that come after, the words of the Qadosh One
which I will speak before HWHY of hosts.
3 “It were better to declare to the men of old time, but
even from those that come after we will not withhold
the beginning of wisdom.
4 “Till the present day such wisdom has never been
given by HWHY of hosts as I have received according
to my insight, according to the good pleasure of HWHY
of hosts by whom the lot of eternal ḥai has been given
to me.”
5 Now three Parables were imparted to me, and I
lifted up my voice and recounted them to those that
dwell on the earth.

38 The first Parable. When the congregation of the
righteous shall appear, and sinners shall be judged for
their sins, and shall be driven from the face of the
earth:
2 And when the Righteous One shall appear before
the eyes of the righteous, whose elect works hang
upon HWHY of hosts, and light shall appear to the
righteous and the elect who dwell on the earth, where
then will be the dwelling of the sinners, and where the
resting-place of those who have denied HWHY of
hosts? It would have been good for them if they had
not been born.
3 When the secrets of the righteous shall be revealed
and the sinners rightly-ruled, and the wicked driven
from the presence of the righteous and elect.
4 From that time those that possess the earth shall
no longer be powerful and exalted, and they shall not
be able to look upon the face of the qodesh, for HWHY
155

ENOCH

hosts has caused His light to appear on the face of the
qodesh, righteous, and elect.
5 Then shall the sovereigns and the mighty perish
and be given into the hands of the righteous and
qodesh.
6 And from thereon none shall seek for themselves
compassion from HWHY of hosts for their life is at an
end.

39 And it shall come to be in those days that elect
and qodesh children will descend from the high
shamayim, and their seed will become one with the
children of men.
2 And in those days Ḥanoḵ received Books of ardour
and wrath, and Books of unrest and expulsion. And
compassion shall not be granted to them, says HWHY
of hosts.
3 And in those days a whirlwind carried me off from
the earth, and put me down at the end of the
shamayim.
4 And there I saw another vision, the dwelling-places
of the qodesh, and the resting-places of the righteous.
5 Here my eyes saw their dwellings with His
righteous messengers, and their resting-places with
the qodesh. And they petitioned and interceded and
prayed for the children of men, and righteousness
flowed before them as water, and compassion like dew
upon the earth. And so it is amongst them forever and
ever.
6 And in that place my eyes saw the Elect One of
righteousness and of belief, and I saw His dwellingplace under the wings of HWHY of hosts. And
righteousness shall prevail in His days, and the
righteous and elect shall be without number before
Him forever and ever.
7 And all the righteous and elect before Him shall be
strong as fiery lights, and their mouth shall be full of
beraḵah, and their lips exalt the Name of HWHY of
hosts, and righteousness before Him shall never fail,
and uprightness shall never fail before Him.
156

ḤANOḴ

There I wanted to dwell, and my spirit longed for
that dwelling-place, and there as yet has been my
portion, for so has it been established concerning me
before HWHY of hosts.
9 In those days I praised and exalted the Name of
HWHY of hosts with bireḵoth and praises, because He
has destined me for beraḵah and esteem according to
the good pleasure of HWHY of hosts.
10 For a long time my eyes regarded that place, and I
baraḵ Him and praised Him, saying, “Baruḵ is He, and
may He be baruḵ from the beginning and for eternity.
11 “And before Him there is no ceasing. He knows
before the world was created what is forever and what
will be from generation unto generation.
12 “Those who do not sleep baraḵ You. They stand
before Your esteem and baraḵ, praise, and exalt,
saying, ‘Qodesh, qodesh, qodesh is HWHY of hosts. He
fills the earth with spirits.’ ”
13 And here my eyes saw all those who do not sleep.
They stand before Him and baraḵ and say, “Baruḵ be
You, and baruḵ be the Name of HWHY forever and
ever.”
14 And my face was changed, for I could no longer
look on.
8

40 And after that I saw thousands of thousands and
ten thousand times ten thousand. I saw a multitude
beyond number and reckoning, who stood before
HWHY of hosts.
2 And on the four sides of HWHY of hosts I saw four
presences, different from those that do not sleep, and
I learned their names: for the messengers that went
with me made known to me their names, and showed
me all the hidden matters.
3 And I heard the voices of those four presences as
they uttered praises before HWHY of esteem.
4 The first voice baraḵ HWHY of hosts forever and
ever.
5 And the second voice I heard beraḵah the Elect
One and the elect ones who hang upon HWHY of hosts.
157

ENOCH

And the third voice I heard pray and intercede for
those who dwell on the earth and make supplication in
the Name of HWHY of hosts.
7 And I heard the fourth voice fending off the
adversaries and forbidding them to come before HWHY
of hosts to accuse them who dwell on the earth.
8 After that I asked the messenger of peace who
went with me, who showed me all matters that are
hidden, “Who are these four presences which I have
seen and whose words I have heard and written
down?”
9 And he said to me, “This first is Miḵa’ĕl, full of favour
and patient. And the second, who is appointed over all
the diseases and all the wounds of the children of men,
is Repha’ĕl. And the third, who is appointed over all the
powers, is Gaḇri’ĕl. And the fourth, who is appointed
over the repentance unto expectancy of those who
inherit eternal ḥai, is named Phanu’ĕl.” And these are
the four messengers of HWHY of hosts and the four
voices I heard in those days.
6

41 And after that I saw all the secrets of the
shamayim, and how the reign is divided, and how the
actions of men are weighed in the balance.
2 And there I saw the mansions of the elect and the
mansions of the qodesh, and my eyes saw there all the
sinners being driven from there which deny the Name
of HWHY of hosts, and being dragged off. And they
could not abide because of the punishment which
proceeds from HWHY of hosts.
3 And there my eyes saw the secrets of the lightning
and of the thunder, and the secrets of the winds, how
they are divided to blow over the earth, and the secrets
of the clouds and dew. And these I saw from where
they proceed in that place and from where they
saturate the dusty earth.
4 And there I saw closed chambers out of which the
winds are divided: the chamber of the hail and winds,
the chamber of the mist and of the clouds, and the
cloud thereof hovers over the earth from the beginning
of the world.
158

ḤANOḴ

And I saw the chambers of the sun and moon,
where they proceed and where they come again, and
their magnificence return, and how one is superior to
the other, and their stately orbit, and how they do not
leave their orbit, and they do not add to their orbit and
they do not take from it, and they keep trust with each
other, in accordance with the oath by which they are
bound together.
6 And first: the sun goes forth and traverses his path
according to the commandment of HWHY of hosts, and
mighty is His Name forever and ever.
7 And after that I saw the hidden and the visible path
of the moon, and she accomplishes the course of her
path in that place by day and by night - the one holding
a position opposite to the other before HWHY of hosts.
And they give thanks and praise and do not rest; for
unto them is their thanksgiving rest.
8 For the sun changes often for a beraḵah or a curse,
and the course of the path of the moon is light to the
righteous and darkness to the sinners in the Name of
HWHY, who made a separation between the light and
the darkness, and divided the spirits of men, and
strengthened the spirits of the righteous, in the Name
of His righteousness.
9 For no messenger delays and no power is able to
delay; for He appoints a right-ruler for them all and He
rightly-rules them all before Him.
5

42 Wisdom found no place where she might dwell;
then a dwelling-place was assigned her in the
shamayim.
2 Wisdom went forth to make her dwelling among the
children of men, and found no dwelling-place. Wisdom
returned to her place, and took her seat among the
messengers.
3 And
unrighteousness went forth from her
chambers. Whom she did not seek, she found, and
dwelt with them, as rain in a desert and dew on a thirsty
land.

159

ENOCH

43 And I saw other lightnings and the stars of the
shamayim, and I saw how He called them all by their
names and they listened to Him.
2 And I saw how they are weighed in a righteous
balance according to their proportions of light: - the
width of their spaces and the day of their appearing and how their revolution produces lightning, and their
revolution according to the number of the messengers,
and they keep trust with each other.
3 And I asked the messenger who went with me who
showed me what was hidden, “What are these?”
4 And he said to me, “HWHY of hosts has showed you
their similarity. These are the names of the qodesh
who dwell on the earth and believe in the Name of
HWHY of hosts forever and ever.”

44 Also another matter I saw in regard to the
lightnings: how some of the stars arise and become
lightnings and cannot part with their new form.

45 And this is the second Parable concerning those
who deny the Name of the dwelling of the qodeshim
and HWHY of hosts.
2 And into the shamayim they shall not ascend, and
on the earth they shall not come. Such shall be the lot
of the sinners who have denied the Name of HWHY of
hosts, who are thus preserved for the day of suffering
and tribulation.
3 On that day My Elect One shall sit on the throne of
esteem and shall try their works, and their places of
rest shall be innumerable. And their beings shall grow
strong within them when they see My elect ones, and
those who have called upon My magnificent Name.
4 Then will I cause My Elect One to dwell among
them, and I will transform the shamayim and make it
an eternal beraḵah and light.
5 And I will transform the earth and make it a
beraḵah, and I will cause My elect ones to dwell upon
it, but the sinners and evil-doers shall not place a foot
upon it.
160

ḤANOḴ

For I have provided and satisfied with peace My
righteous ones and have caused them to dwell before
Me. But for the sinners, there is judgment impending
with Me, so that I shall destroy them from the face of
the earth.
6

46 And there I saw One who had a head of days, and
His head was white like wool, and with Him was
another Being whose face had the appearance of a
man, and His face was full of favour, like one of the
qodesh messengers.
2 And I asked the messenger who went with me and
showed me all the hidden matters, concerning the Bĕn
of Aḏam, who He was, and where He was, why He
went with the Head of Days. And he answered and
said to me,
3 “This is the Bĕn of Aḏam who has righteousness,
with whom dwelt righteousness, and who revealed all
the treasures of that which is hidden, because HWHY of
hosts has chosen Him, and whose lot has the
preeminence before HWHY of hosts in uprightness
forever.
4 “And this Bĕn of Aḏam whom you have seen shall
raise up the sovereigns and the mighty from their
thrones, and shall loosen the kidneys of the strong,
and break the teeth of the sinners.
5 “And He shall put down the sovereigns from their
thrones and reigns because they do not exalt and
praise Him, nor humbly acknowledge where the reign
was bestowed upon them.
6 “And He shall put down the pride of the strong, and
shall fill them with shame. And darkness shall be their
dwelling, and worms shall be their bed, and they shall
have no expectancy of rising from their beds, because
they do not exalt the Name of HWHY of hosts.
7 “And these are they who judge the stars of the
shamayim, and raise their hands against the Most
High, and tread upon the earth and dwell upon it. And
all their deeds manifest unrighteousness, and their
power rests upon their riches, and their belief is in the
161

ENOCH

mighty ones which they have made with their hands,
and they deny the Name of HWHY of hosts,
8 “And
they persecute the houses of His
congregations, and the trustworthy who hang upon the
Name of HWHY of hosts.”

47 And in those days the prayer of the righteous, and
the blood of the righteous shall have ascended from
the earth before HWHY of hosts.
2 In those days the qodeshim who dwell above in the
shamayim shall unite with one voice and make
supplication and pray and praise, and give thanks and
baraḵ the Name of HWHY of hosts on behalf of the blood
of the righteous which has been shed. And that the
prayer of the righteous may not be in vain before HWHY
of hosts, that judgment may be done unto them, and
that they may not have to suffer forever.
3 In those days I saw the Head of Days when He
seated himself upon the throne of His esteem, and the
Books of the living were opened before Him: and all
His host which is in the shamayim above and His
counsellors stood before Him,
4 And the hearts of the qodesh were filled with joy
because the number of the righteous had been
offered, and the prayer of the righteous had been
heard, and the blood of the righteous been required
before HWHY of hosts.

48 And in that place I saw the fountain of
righteousness which was inexhaustible, and around it
were many fountains of wisdom, and all the thirsty
drank of them, and were filled with wisdom, and their
dwellings were with the righteous and qodesh and
elect.
2 And at that hour the Bĕn of Aḏam was Named In
the presence of HWHY of hosts, and his Name before
the Head of Days.
3 Even before the sun and the signs were created,
before the stars of the shamayim were made, His
Name was Named before HWHY of hosts.
162

ḤANOḴ

He shall be a staff to the righteous to brace
themselves upon and not fall, and he shall be the light
of the nations, and the expectancy of those who are
troubled of heart.
5 All who dwell on earth shall fall down and worship
before Him, and will praise and baraḵ and celebrate
HWHY of hosts with song.
6 And for this reason He has been chosen and
hidden before Him, before the creation of the world and
for eternity.
7 And the wisdom of HWHY of hosts has revealed Him
to the qodesh and righteous; for he has preserved the
lot of the righteous, because they have hated and
despised this world of unrighteousness, and have
hated all its works and ways in the Name of HWHY of
hosts, for in His Name they are saved, and according
to His good pleasure has it been in regard to their life.
8 In these days the sovereigns of the earth shall have
become downcast in face, and the strong who possess
the land because of the works of their hands, for on the
day of their anguish and affliction they shall not save
themselves. And I will give them over into the hands of
My elect:
9 As straw in the fire so they shall burn before the
face of the qodesh - as lead in the water they shall sink
before the face of the righteous, and no trace of them
shall be found any more.
10 And on the day of their affliction there shall be rest
on the earth, and before them they shall fall and not
rise again, and there shall be no one to take them with
his hands and raise them, for they have denied HWHY
of hosts and His Anointed. The Name of HWHY of hosts
be baruḵ.
4

49 For wisdom is poured out like water, and esteem
failed not before Him for eternity.
2 For He is mighty in all the secrets of righteousness,
and unrighteousness shall disappear as a shadow,
and have no continuance; because the Elect One
stands before HWHY of hosts, and His esteem is forever
and ever, and His might unto all generations.
163

ENOCH

And in Him dwells the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit
which gives insight, and the spirit of understanding and
of might, and the spirit of those who have fallen asleep
in righteousness.
4 And He shall judge the secret matters, And none
shall be able to utter a lying word before Him; for He is
the Elect One before HWHY of hosts according to His
good pleasure.
3

50 And in those days a change shall take place for
the qodesh and elect, and the light of days shall abide
upon them, and esteem and honour shall turn to the
qodesh,
2 on the day of affliction on which evil shall have been
treasured up against the sinners. And the righteous
shall be victorious in the Name of HWHY of hosts, and
He will cause the others to witness that they may
repent and abandon the works of their hands.
3 They shall have no honour through the Name of
HWHY of hosts, yet through His Name shall they be
saved, and HWHY of hosts will have compassion on
them, for His compassion is great.
4 And He is righteous also in His judgment, and in the
presence of His esteem unrighteousness also shall not
maintain itself. At His judgment the unrepentant shall
perish before Him.
5 “And from hereon I will have no compassion on
them,” says HWHY of hosts.

51 And in those days shall the earth also give back
that which has been entrusted to it, and the grave also
shall give back that which it has received, and GĕyHinnom shall give back that which it owes. For in those
days the Elect One shall arise,
2 and He shall choose the righteous and qodesh from
among them, for the day has drawn near that they
should be saved.
3 And the Elect One shall in those days sit on My
throne, and His mouth shall pour forth all the secrets
of wisdom and counsel, for HWHY of hosts has given to
Him and has esteemed Him.
164

ḤANOḴ

And in those days the mountains shall leap like
rams, and the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied
with milk, and the faces of the messengers in the
shamayim shall be lit up with joy.
5 And the earth shall rejoice, and the righteous shall
dwell upon it, and the elect shall walk upon it.
4

52 And after those days in that place where I had
seen all the visions of that which is hidden, for I had
been carried off in a whirlwind and they had borne me
towards the west.
2 There my eyes saw all the secret matters of the
shamayim that shall be, a mountain of iron, and a
mountain of copper, and a mountain of silver, and a
mountain of gold, and a mountain of soft metal, and a
mountain of lead.
3 And I asked the messenger who went with me,
saying, “What are these which I have seen in secret?”
4 And he said to me, “All these which you have seen
shall serve the dominion of His Anointed that he may
be potent and mighty on the earth.”
5 And that messenger of peace answered, saying
unto me, “Wait a little, and there shall be revealed unto
you all the secret matters which surround HWHY of
hosts.
6 “And these mountains which your eyes have seen
- the mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and
the mountain of silver, and the mountain of gold, and
the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead all these shall be in the presence of the Elect One as
wax before the fire, and like the water which streams
down from above, and they shall become powerless
before his feet.
7 “And it shall come to be in those days that none
shall be saved, either by gold or by silver, and none be
able to escape.
8 “And there shall be no iron for war, nor shall one
clothe oneself with a breastplate. Bronze shall be of no
service, and tin shall not be esteemed, and lead shall
not be desired.
165

ENOCH

“And all these shall be destroyed from the surface
of the earth, when the Elect One shall appear before
the face of HWHY of hosts.”
9

53 There my eyes saw a deep valley with open
mouths, and all who dwell on the earth and sea and
islands shall bring to Him gifts and presents and tokens
of homage, but that deep valley shall not become full.
2 And their hands commit lawless deeds, and the
sinners devour all whom they lawlessly oppress; yet
the sinners shall be destroyed before the face of HWHY
of hosts, and they shall be banished from off the face
of His earth, and they shall perish forever and ever.
3 For I saw all the messengers of punishment abiding
and preparing all the instruments of Satan.
4 And I asked the messenger of peace who went with
me, “For whom are they preparing these Instruments?”
5 And he said to me, “They prepare these for the
sovereigns and the mighty of this earth, that they may
be destroyed by them.
6 “And after this the Righteous and Elect One shall
cause the house of His congregation to appear. From
now on they shall be no longer hindered in the Name
of HWHY of hosts.
7 “And these mountains shall not stand as the earth
before His righteousness, and the hills shall be as a
fountain of water, and the righteous shall have rest
from the oppression of sinners.”

54 And I looked and turned to another part of the
earth, and saw there a deep valley with burning fire.
2 And they brought the sovereigns and the mighty,
and began to cast them into this deep valley.
3 And there my eyes saw how they made these their
instruments - iron chains of immeasurable weight.
4 And I asked the messenger of peace who went with
me, saying, “For whom are these chains being
prepared?”
5 And he said to me, “These are being prepared for
the hosts of Azaz’ĕl so that they may take them and
cast them into the abyss of complete condemnation,
166

ḤANOḴ

and they shall cover their jaws with rough stones as
HWHY of hosts commanded.
6 “And Miḵa’ĕl, and Gaḇri’ĕl, and Repha’ĕl, and
Phanu’ĕl shall take hold of them on that great day, and
cast them on that day into the burning furnace, that
HWHY of hosts may take vengeance on them for their
unrighteousness in becoming subject to Satan and
leading astray those who dwell on the earth.
7 “And in those days punishment shall come from
HWHY of hosts, and He will open all the chambers of
waters which are above the shamayim, and of the
fountains which are beneath the earth.
8 “And all the waters shall be joined with the waters that which is above the shamayim is the masculine,
and the water which is beneath the earth is the
feminine.
9 “And they shall destroy all who dwell on the earth
and those who dwell under the ends of the shamayim.
10 “And
when they have recognised their
unrighteousness which they have wrought on the
earth, then by these shall they perish.”

55 And after that the Head of Days repented and
said, “In vain have I destroyed all who dwell on the
earth.”
2 And He swore by His great Name, “From now on I
will not do so to all who dwell on the earth, and I will
place a sign in the shamayim, and this shall be a
pledge of good trust between Me and them forever, so
long as the shamayim is above the earth. And this is in
accordance with My command.
3 “When I have desired to take hold of them by the
hand of the messengers on the day of tribulation and
pain because of this, I will cause My chastisement and
My wrath to abide upon them, says Elohim, HWHY of
hosts.
4 “You mighty sovereigns who dwell on the earth; you
shall have to look upon My Elect One, how He sits on
the throne of esteem and judges Azaz’ĕl, and all his
associates, and all his hosts in the Name of HWHY of
hosts.”
167

ENOCH

56 And I saw there the hosts of the messengers of
punishment going, and they held scourges and chains
of iron and bronze.
2 And I asked the messenger of peace who went with
me, saying, “To whom are these who hold the
scourges going?”
3 And he said to me, “To their elect and beloved
ones, that they may be cast into the chasm of the
abyss of the valley.
4 “And then that valley shall be filled with their elect
and beloved, and the days of their lives shall be at an
end, and the days of their leading astray shall not be
reckoned thereafter.
5 “And in those days the messengers shall return and
hurl themselves to the east upon the Parthians and
Maḏites: they shall stir up the sovereigns, so that a
spirit of unrest shall come upon them, and they shall
rouse them from their thrones, that they may break
forth as lions from their lairs, and as hungry wolves
among their flocks.
6 “And they shall go up and tread under foot the land
of His elect ones.
7 “But the city of my righteous shall be a hindrance to
their horses, and they shall begin to fight among
themselves, and their right hand shall be strong
against themselves, and a man shall not know his
brother, nor a son his father or his mother, till there be
no number of the corpses through their slaughter, and
their punishment be not in vain.
8 “In those days the grave shall open its jaws, and
they shall be swallowed up therein and their
destruction shall be at an end; the grave shall devour
the sinners in the presence of the elect.”

57 And it came to be after this, that I saw another
host of chariots, and men riding upon them, and
coming on the winds from the east, and from the west
to the south.
2 And the noise of their chariots was heard, and when
this turmoil took place, the qodeshim from the
168

ḤANOḴ

shamayim observed it, and the pillars of the earth were
moved from their place, and the sound thereof was
heard from the one end of the shamayim to the other,
in one day.
3 And they shall all fall down and worship HWHY of
hosts. And this is the end of the second Parable.

58 And I began to speak the third Parable concerning
the righteous and elect.
2 “Baruḵ are you, you righteous and elect, for
magnificent shall be your lot.
3 “And the righteous shall be in the light of the sun,
and the elect in the light of eternal ḥai. The days of
their ḥai shall be unending, and the days of the qodesh
without number.
4 “And
they shall seek the light and find
righteousness with HWHY of hosts. There shall be
peace to the righteous in the Name of the Eternal
Aḏon.
5 “And after this it shall be said to the qodesh in the
shamayim that they should seek out the secrets of
righteousness, the heritage of belief, for it has become
bright as the sun upon earth, and the darkness is past.
6 “And there shall be a light that never ends, and to a
number of days they shall not come, for the darkness
shall first have been destroyed, and the light of
uprightness established forever before HWHY of hosts.”

59 ln those days my eyes saw the secrets of the
lightnings, and of the lights, and the right-rulings they
execute: and they lighten for a beraḵah or a curse as
HWHY of hosts desires.
2 And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, and how
when it resounds above in the shamayim - the sound
thereof is heard, and he caused me to see the rightrulings executed on the earth, whether they be for wellbeing and beraḵah, or for a curse according to the
word of HWHY of hosts.
3 And after that all the secrets of the lights and
lightnings were shown to me, and they lighten for
beraḵah and for satisfying.
169

ENOCH

A FRAGMENT OF
THE BOOK OF NOAḤ

60 In the year 500, in the seventh month, on the
fourteenth day of the month in the life of Ḥanoḵ - In that
Parable I saw how a mighty quaking made the
shamayim of shamayim to quake, and the host of the
Most High, and the messengers, a thousand
thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, were
disturbed with a great unrest.
2 And the Head of Days sat on the throne of His
esteem, and the messengers and the righteous stood
around Him.
3 And a great trembling seized me, and fear took hold
of me, and my loins gave way, and my kidneys melted,
and I fell upon my face.
4 And Miḵa’ĕl sent another messenger from among
the qodeshim and he raised me up, and when he had
raised me up my spirit returned; for I had not been able
to endure the look of this host, and the commotion and
the quaking of the shamayim. And Miḵa’ĕl said to me,
“Why are you disturbed with such a vision? Until this
day lasted the day of His compassion; and He has
shown favour and patience towards those who dwell
on the earth.
5 “And when the day, and the power, and the
punishment, and the judgment come, which HWHY of
hosts has prepared for those who do not worship the
righteous Law, and for those who deny the righteous
Right-Ruling, and for those who take His Name in vain
- that day is prepared. For the elect: a Covenant, but
for sinners: a judgment.
6 “When the punishment of HWHY of hosts shall rest
upon them, it shall rest in order that the punishment of
HWHY of hosts may not come in vain, and it shall slay
the children with their mothers and the children with
their fathers. Afterward the judgment shall take place
according to His compassion and His patience.”

170

ḤANOḴ

And on that day were two monsters parted, a
female monster named Liwiathan, to dwell in the
abysses of the ocean over the fountains of the waters.
8 And the male is named Behemoth, who occupied
with his breast a waste wilderness named Dawiḏayin,
on the east of the garden where the elect and righteous
dwell - where my grandfather was taken up - the
seventh from Aḏam, the first man whom HWHY of hosts
created.
9 And I pleaded with the other messenger that he
should show me the might of those monsters, how they
were parted on one day and cast - the one into the
abysses of the sea, and the other unto the dry land of
the wilderness.
10 And he said to me, “You son of man, in this do you
seek to know what is hidden.”
11 And the other messenger who went with me and
showed me what was hidden told me what is first and
last in the shamayim in the height, and beneath the
earth in the depth, and at the ends of the shamayim,
and on the foundation of the shamayim.
12 And the chambers of the winds, and how the winds
are divided, and how they are weighed, and the portals
of the winds are reckoned, each according to the
power of the wind, and the power of the lights of the
moon, and according to the power that is fitting, and
the divisions of the stars according to their names, and
how all the divisions are divided.
13 And the thunders according to the places where
they fall, and all the divisions that are made among the
lightnings that it may lighten, and their host that they
may at once obey.
14 For the thunder has places of rest assigned while it
is waiting for its peal; and the thunder and lightning are
inseparable, and although not one and undivided, they
both go together through the spirit and do not
separate.
15 For when the lightning lightens, the thunder utters
its voice, and the spirit enforces a pause during the
peal, and divides equally between them; for the
7

171

ENOCH

treasury of their peals is like the sand, and each one
of them as it peals is held in with a bridle, and turned
back by the power of the spirit, and pushed forward
according to the many quarters of the earth.
16 And the spirit of the sea is masculine and strong,
and according to the might of his strength he draws it
back with a rein, and in the same way it is driven
forward and disperses amid all the mountains of the
earth.
17 And the spirit of the hoar-frost is his own
messenger, and the spirit of the hail is a good
messenger.
18 And the spirit of the snow has forsaken his
chambers on account of his strength. There is a
special spirit therein, and that which ascends from it is
like smoke, and its name is frost.
19 And the spirit of the mist is not united with them in
their chambers, but it has a special chamber; for its
course is magnificent both in light and in darkness, and
in winter and in summer, and in its chamber is a
messenger.
20 And the spirit of the dew has its dwelling at the ends
of the shamayim, and is connected with the chambers
of the rain, and its course is in winter and summer: and
its clouds and the clouds of the mist are connected,
and the one gives to the other.
21 And when the spirit of the rain goes forth from its
chamber, the messengers come and open the
chamber and lead it out. And when it is diffused over
the whole earth it unites with the water on the earth,
and whenever it unites with the water on the earth...
22 For the waters are for those who dwell on the earth;
for they are nourishment for the earth from the Most
High who is in the shamayim. Therefore there is a
measure for the rain, and the messengers take it in
charge.
23 And these I saw towards the garden of the
righteous.

172

ḤANOḴ

And the messenger of peace who was with me said
to me, “These two monsters, prepared conformable to
the greatness of Elohim, shall feed…”
24

61 And I saw in those days how long cords were
given to those messengers, and they took to their
wings and flew, and they went towards the north.
2 And I asked the messenger, saying unto him, “Why
have they taken these cords and gone off?” And he
said to me, “They have gone to measure.”
3 And the messenger who went with me said to me,
“These shall bring the measures of the righteous, and
the ropes of the righteous to the righteous, that they
may support themselves on the Name of HWHY of hosts
forever and ever.
4 “The elect shall begin to dwell with the elect, and
those are the measures which shall be given to belief
and which shall strengthen righteousness.
5 “And these measures shall reveal all the secrets of
the depths of the earth, and those who have been
destroyed by the desert, and those who have been
devoured by the beasts, and those who have been
devoured by the fish of the sea, that they may return
and support themselves on the day of the Elect One;
for none shall be destroyed before HWHY of hosts, and
none can be destroyed.”
6 And all who dwell above in the shamayim received
a command and power and one voice and one light like
fire.
7 And their first words, that One they baraḵ, and
exalted and lifted up with wisdom, and they were wise
in utterance and in the spirit of ḥai.
8 And HWHY of hosts placed the Elect One on the
throne of esteem. And He shall judge all the works of
the qodesh above in the shamayim, and in the balance
shall their deeds be weighed.
9 And when He shall lift up His face to judge their
secret ways according to the Word of the Name of
HWHY of hosts, and their path according to the Way of
the righteous judgment of HWHY of hosts, then shall
173

ENOCH

they all with one voice speak and baraḵ, and esteem
and exalt and qadosh the Name of HWHY of hosts.
10 And He will summon all the host of the shamayim,
and all the qodeshim above. And the host of Elohim:
the keruḇim, seraphim and ophannim, and all the
messengers of power, and all the messengers of
principalities, and the Elect One, and the other powers
on the earth and over the water,
11 on that day shall raise one voice, and baraḵ and
esteem and exalt in the spirit of belief, and in the spirit
of wisdom, and in the spirit of patience, and in the spirit
of favour, and in the spirit of judgment and of peace,
and in the spirit of goodness, and shall all say with one
voice: “Baruḵ is He, and may the Name of HWHY of
hosts be baruḵ forever and ever.”
12 All who do not sleep in the shamayim above shall
baraḵ Him. All the qodeshim who are in the shamayim
shall baraḵ Him, and all the elect who dwell in the
garden of ḥai, and every spirit of light who is able to
baraḵ, and esteem, and exalt, and qadosh Your baruḵ
Name, and all flesh shall beyond measure esteem and
baraḵ Your Name forever and ever.
13 For great is the favour of HWHY of hosts, and He is
patient, and all His works and all that He has created
He has revealed to the righteous and elect in the Name
of HWHY of hosts.

62 And thus HWHY commanded the sovereigns and
the mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell on the
earth, and said, “Open your eyes and lift up your horns
if you are able to recognise the Elect One.”
2 And HWHY of hosts seated Him on the throne of His
esteem, and the spirit of righteousness was poured out
upon Him, and the Word of His mouth slays all the
sinners, and all the unrighteous are destroyed from
before His face.
3 And there shall stand up in that day all the
sovereigns and the mighty, and the exalted and those
who hold the earth, and they shall see and recognise
how He sits on the throne of His esteem, and
174

ḤANOḴ

righteousness is rightly-ruled before Him, and no lying
word is spoken before Him.
4 Then pain shall come upon them as on a woman in
travail, when her child enters the mouth of the womb,
and she has pain in bringing forth.
5 And one portion of them shall look on the other, and
they shall be terrified, and they shall be sad-faced, and
pain shall seize them, when they see the Bĕn of Aḏam
sitting on the throne of His esteem.
6 And the sovereigns and the mighty and all who
possess the earth shall baraḵ and esteem and exalt
Him who rules over all, who was hidden.
7 For from the beginning the Bĕn of Aḏam was
hidden, and the Most High preserved Him in the
presence of His might, and revealed Him to the elect.
8 And the congregation of the elect and qodesh shall
be shown, and all the elect shall stand before Him on
that day.
9 And all the sovereigns and the mighty and the
exalted and those who rule the earth shall fall down
before Him on their faces, and worship and place their
expectancy upon the Bĕn of Aḏam, and petition Him
and make supplication for compassion at His hands.
10 Nevertheless that Aḏon of hosts will so press them
that they shall hastily go forth from His presence, and
their faces shall be filled with shame and the darkness
grow deeper on their faces.
11 And He will deliver them to the messengers for
punishment to execute vengeance on them because
they have oppressed His children and His elect.
12 And they shall be a spectacle for the righteous and
for His elect. They shall rejoice over them, because the
wrath of HWHY of hosts rested upon them, and His
sword is drunk with their blood.
13 And the righteous and elect shall be saved on that
day, and they shall never thereafter see the face of the
sinners and unrighteous.
14 And HWHY of hosts will abide over them, and with
the Bĕn of Aḏam they shall eat and lie down and rise
up forever and ever.
175

ENOCH

And the righteous and elect shall have risen from
the earth, and ceased to be sad-faced. And they shall
have been clothed with garments of esteem.
16 And these shall be the garments of ḥai from HWHY
of hosts, and your garments shall not grow old, nor
your esteem pass away before HWHY of hosts.
15

63 In those days the mighty and the sovereigns who
possess the earth shall beg to grant them a little relief
from His messengers of punishment to whom they
were delivered, that they might fall down and worship
before HWHY of hosts, and confess their sins before
Him.
2 And they shall baraḵ and esteem HWHY of hosts,
and say, “Baruḵ is HWHY of hosts and HWHY of
sovereigns, and HWHY of the mighty and HWHY of the
rich, and HWHY of esteem and HWHY of wisdom.
3 “And splendid in every secret matter is Your power
from generation to generation, and Your esteem
forever and ever. Deep are all Your secrets and
innumerable, and Your righteousness is beyond
reckoning.
4 “We have now learned that we should esteem and
baraḵ HWHY of sovereigns and Him who is Sovereign
over all sovereigns.”
5 And they shall say, “O that we had rest to esteem
and give thanks and confess our belief before His
esteem!
6 “And now we long for a little rest but do not find it,
we follow hard upon and do not obtain, and light has
vanished from before us, and darkness is our dwellingplace forever and ever.
7 “For we have not believed before Him nor
esteemed the Name of HWHY of hosts, but our
expectancy was in the scepter of our reign, and in our
esteem.
8 “And in the day of our suffering and tribulation He
does not save us, and we find no relief for confession
that our Aḏon is true in all His works, and in His rightrulings and His justice, and His right-rulings have no
respect of persons.
176

ḤANOḴ

“And we pass away from before His face on
account of our works, and all our sins are reckoned up
in righteousness.”
10 Now they shall say unto themselves, “Our beings
are full of unrighteous gain, but it does not prevent us
from descending from the midst thereof into the burden
of Gĕy-Hinnom.”
11 And after that their faces shall be filled with
darkness and shame before the Bĕn of Aḏam, and
they shall be driven from His presence, and the sword
shall abide before His face in their midst.
12 Thus spoke HWHY of hosts, “This is the statute and
judgment with respect to the mighty and the
sovereigns and the exalted and those who possess the
earth before HWHY of hosts.”
9

64 And other forms I saw hidden in that place.
I heard the voice of the messenger saying, “These
are the messengers who descended to the earth, and
revealed what was hidden to the children of men and
seduced the children of men into committing sin.”
2

65 And in those days Noaḥ saw the earth that it had
sunk down and its destruction was near.
2 And he arose from there and went to the ends of
the earth, and cried aloud to his grandfather Ḥanoḵ,
and Noaḥ said three times with an embittered voice,
“Hear me, hear me, hear me.”
3 And I said to him, “Tell me what it is that is falling
out on the earth that the earth is in such evil plight and
shaken, if perhaps I shall perish with it?”
4 And after that there was a great commotion on the
earth, and a voice was heard from the shamayim, and
I fell on my face.
5 And Ḥanoḵ my grandfather came and stood by me,
and said to me, “Why have you cried unto me with a
bitter cry and weeping.
6 “And a command has gone forth from the presence
of HWHY concerning those who dwell on the earth that
their ruin is accomplished because they have learned
all the secrets of the messengers, and all the violence
177

ENOCH

of the adversaries, and all their powers -the most
secret ones- and all the power of those who practice
sorcery, and the power of witchcraft, and the power of
those who make molten images for the whole earth.
7 “And how silver is produced from the dust of the
earth, and how soft metal originates in the earth.
8 “For lead and tin are not produced from the earth
like the first. It is a fountain that produces them, and a
messenger stands therein, and that messenger is the
head.”
9 And after that my grandfather Ḥanoḵ took hold of
me by my hand and raised me up, and said to me, “Go,
for I have asked HWHY of hosts regarding this
commotion on the earth.
10 “And
He said to me, ‘Because of their
unrighteousness their judgment has been determined
upon and shall not be withheld by Me forever. Because
of the sorceries which they have searched out and
learned, the earth and those who dwell upon it shall be
destroyed.’
11 “And these, they have no place of repentance
forever, because they have shown them what was
hidden, and they are the condemned. But as for you,
my son, HWHY of hosts knows that you are pure, and
guiltless of this reproach concerning the secrets.
12 “And He has destined your name to be among the
qodesh, and will preserve you amongst those who
dwell on the earth, and has destined your righteous
seed both for sovereignty and for great honours, and
from your seed shall proceed a fountain of the
righteous and qodesh without number forever.”

66 And after that he showed me the messengers of
punishment who are prepared to come and let loose
all the powers of the waters which are beneath in the
earth in order to bring judgment and destruction on all
who dwell on the earth.
2 And HWHY of hosts gave command to the
messengers who were going forth, that they should not
cause the waters to rise but should hold them in check;
178

ḤANOḴ

for those messengers were over the powers of the
waters.
3 And I went away from the presence of Ḥanoḵ.

67 And in those days the word of Elohim came unto
me, and He said to me, “Noaḥ, your lot has come up
before Me, a lot without blame, a lot of love and
uprightness.
2 “And now the messengers are making a wooden
object, and when they have completed that task I will
place My hand upon it and preserve it, and there shall
come forth from it the seed of life, and a change shall
come so that the earth will not remain without
inhabitant.
3 “And I will establish your seed before me forever
and ever, and I will spread abroad those who dwell with
you. It shall not be unfruitful on the face of the earth,
but it shall be baruḵ and multiply on the earth in the
Name of HWHY.”
4 And He will imprison those messengers, who have
shown unrighteousness, in that burning valley which
my grandfather Ḥanoḵ had formerly shown to me in the
west among the mountains of gold and silver and iron
and soft metal and tin.
5 And I saw that valley in which there was a great
earthquake and a convulsion of the waters.
6 And when all this took place, from that fiery molten
metal and from the earthquake in that place, there was
produced a smell of sulphur, and it was connected with
those waters, and that valley of the messengers who
had led astray burned beneath that land.
7 And through its valleys proceed streams of fire,
where these messengers are punished who had led
astray those who dwell upon the earth.
8 But those waters shall in those days serve for the
sovereigns and the mighty and the exalted, and those
who dwell on the earth, for the healing of the body, but
for the punishment of the spirit. Now their spirit is full
of lust, that they may be punished in their body, for they
have denied HWHY of hosts and see their punishment
daily, and yet do not believe in His Name.
179

ENOCH

And in proportion as the burning of their bodies
becomes severe, a corresponding change shall take
place in their spirit forever and ever; for before HWHY
of hosts none shall utter an idle word.
10 For the judgment shall come upon them, because
they believe in the lust of their body and deny the Ruaḥ
of HWHY.
11 And those same waters will undergo a change in
those days; for when those messengers are punished
in these waters, these water-springs shall change their
temperature, and when the messengers ascend, this
water of the springs shall change and become cold.
12 And I heard Miḵa’ĕl answering and saying, “This
judgment with which the messengers are judged is a
witness for the sovereigns and the mighty who
possess the earth.
13 “Because these waters of judgment minister to the
healing of the body of the sovereigns and the lust of
their body; therefore they will not see and will not
believe that those waters will change and become a
fire which burns forever.”
9

68 And after that my grandfather Ḥanoḵ gave me the
teaching of all the secrets in the Book in the parables
which had been given to him, and he put them together
for me in the words of the Book of the Parables.
2 And on that day Miḵa’ĕl answered Repha’ĕl and
said, “The power of the spirit transports and makes me
tremble because of the severity of the judgment of the
secrets - the judgment of the messengers. Who can
endure the severe judgment which has been executed,
and before which they melt away?”
3 And Miḵa’ĕl answered again, and said to Repha’ĕl,
“Who is he whose heart is not softened concerning it,
and whose kidneys are not troubled by this word of
judgment gone forth upon them because of those who
have thus led them out?”
4 And it came to be, when he stood before HWHY of
hosts, Miḵa’ĕl said thus to Repha’ĕl, “I will not take
their part under the eye of HWHY; for HWHY of hosts has
been angry with them because they do as if they were
180

ḤANOḴ

HWHY. Therefore all that is hidden shall come upon
them forever and ever.
5 “For neither messenger nor man shall have his
portion, but alone they have received their judgment
forever and ever.”

69 And after this judgment they shall terrify and make
them to tremble because they have shown this to those
who dwell on the earth.
2 And see, the names of those messengers, and
these are their names: the first of them is Shemyatsa,
the second Artaqipha, and the third Armĕn, the fourth
Koḵaḇ’ĕl, the fifth Tura’ĕl, the sixth Rumya’al, the
seventh Dani’ĕl, the eighth Neqa’ĕl, the ninth Baraḵi’ĕl,
the tenth Azaz’ĕl, the eleventh Armaros, the twelfth
Batarya’al, the thirteenth Busasya’al, the fourteenth
Ḥanan’ĕl, the fifteenth Tur’ĕl, and the sixteenth
Simapesi’ĕl, the seventeenth Yetre’ĕl, the eighteenth
Tuma’ĕl, the nineteenth Tsuri’ĕl, the twentieth
Rame’ĕl, the twenty-first Azaz’ĕl.
3 And these are the chiefs of their messengers and
their names, and their chief ones over hundreds and
over fifties and over tens.
4 The name of the first Yĕqon: that is, the one who
led astray the sons of Elohim, and brought them down
to the earth, and led them astray through the
daughters of men.
5 And the second was named Asḇe’ĕl: he imparted
to the qodesh sons of Elohim evil counsel, and led
them astray so that they defiled their bodies with the
daughters of men.
6 And the third was named Gaḏre’ĕl: it is he who
showed the children of men all the smitings of death,
and he led astray Ḥawwah, and showed the shield and
the coat of mail, and the sword for battle, and all the
weapons of death to the children of men.
7 And from his hand they have proceeded against
those who dwell on the earth from that day and for
eternity.

181

ENOCH

And the fourth was named Penemu’ĕl: he taught
the children of men the bitter and the sweet, and he
taught them all the secrets of their wisdom.
9 And he instructed mankind in writing with ink and
paper, and thereby many sinned from everlasting to
everlasting and until this day.
10 For men were not created for such a purpose, to
give confirmation to their good belief with pen and ink.
11 For men were created exactly like the messengers,
to the intent that they should continue pure and
righteous. And death, which destroys all matters, could
not have taken hold of them, but through this, their
knowledge, they are perishing, and through this power
it is consuming me.
12 And the fifth was named Kasḏeya: this is he who
showed the children of men all the wicked smiting of
spirits and demons, and the smiting of the embryo in
the womb, that it may pass away, and the bites of the
serpent, and the smiting which befalls through the
noontide heat, the son of the serpent named Taḇa’ĕt.
13 And this is the task of Kasḇe’ĕl, the chief of the oath
which he showed to the qodeshim when he dwelt high
above in esteem, and its name is Biḵa.
14 This one requested Miḵa’ĕl to show him the hidden
Name, that he might pronounce it in the oath, so that
those might quake before that Name and oath who
revealed all that was in secret to the children of men.
15 And this is the power of this oath, for it is powerful
and strong, and he placed this oath Aḵa’ĕl in the hand
of Miḵa’ĕl.
16 And these are the secrets of this oath. And they are
strong through his oath. And the shamayim was
suspended before the world created, and forever.
17 And through it the earth founded upon the water,
and from the secret recesses of the mountains come
pleasant waters from the creation of the world and unto
forever.
18 And through that oath the sea was created, and as
its foundation He appointed for it the sand against the
8

182

ḤANOḴ

time of anger, and it dare not pass beyond it from the
creation of the world unto forever.
19 And through that oath are the depths made firm,
and endure and do not move from their place from
everlasting to everlasting.
20 And through that oath the sun and moon complete
their course, and deviate not from their ordinance from
everlasting to everlasting.
21 And through that oath the stars complete their
course, and He calls them by their names, and they
answer Him from everlasting to everlasting.
22 And in the same way the spirits of the water, and of
the winds, and of all breezes, and paths from all the
quarters of the winds.
23 And there are preserved the voices of the thunder
and the light of the lightnings: and there are preserved
the chambers of the hail and the chambers of the
hoarfrost, and the chambers of the mist, and the
chambers of the rain and the dew.
24 And all these believe and give thanks before HWHY
of hosts, and praise with all their power, and their food
is in every act of thanksgiving: they thank and esteem
and exalt the Name of HWHY of hosts forever and ever.
25 And this oath is mighty over them and through it
they are preserved and their paths are preserved, and
their course is not destroyed.
26 And there was great joy amongst them, and they
baraḵ and esteemed and exalted because the Name
of the Bĕn of Aḏam had been revealed unto them.
27 And He sat on the throne of his esteem, and the
sum of judgment was given unto the Bĕn of Aḏam, and
He caused the sinners to pass away and be destroyed
from off the face of the earth, and those who have led
the world astray.
28 With chains shall they be bound, and in their
assemblage-place of destruction shall they be
imprisoned, and all their works vanish from the face of
the earth.
29 And from hereon there shall be none corruptible; for
the Bĕn of Aḏam has appeared, and has seated
183

ENOCH

Himself on the throne of His esteem, and all evil shall
pass away before His face, and the Word of the Bĕn
of Aḏam shall go forth and be strong before HWHY of
hosts. This is the Third Parable of Ḥanoḵ.

70 And it came to be after this that his name during
his lifetime was raised above to the Bĕn of Aḏam and
to HWHY of hosts from amongst those who dwell on the
earth.
2 And he was raised above on the chariots of the
spirit and his name vanished among them.
3 And from that day I was no longer numbered
amongst them: and he placed me between the two
winds, between the North and the West, where the
messenger took the cords to measure for me the place
for the elect and righteous.
4 And there I saw the first fathers and the righteous
who from the beginning dwell in that place.

71 And it came to be after this, that my spirit was
translated and it ascended into the shamayim: and I
saw the qodesh sons of Elohim. They were stepping
on flames of fire: their garments were white and their
faces shone like snow.
2 And I saw two streams of fire, and the light of that
fire shone like jacinth, and I fell on my face before
HWHY of hosts.
3 And the messenger Miḵa’ĕl seized me by my right
hand, and lifted me up and led me forth into all the
secrets, and he showed me all the secrets of
righteousness.
4 And he showed me all the secrets of the ends of
the shamayim, and all the chambers of all the stars,
and all the lights, where they proceed before the face
of the qodeshim.
5 And he translated my spirit into the shamayim of
shamayim, and I saw there as it were, a structure built
of crystals, and between those crystals - tongues of
living fire.

184

ḤANOḴ

And my spirit saw the girdle which surrounded that
house of fire, and on its four sides were streams full of
living fire, and they surrounded that house.
7 And round about were seraphim, keruḇim, and
ophannim: and these are they who do not sleep but
guard the throne of His esteem.
8 And I saw messengers who could not be counted,
a thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten
thousand, encircling that house. And Miḵa’ĕl, and
Repha’ĕl, and Gaḇri’ĕl, and Phanu’ĕl, and the qodesh
messengers who are above the shamayim, go in and
out of that house.
9 And they came forth from that house, and Miḵa’ĕl
and Gaḇri’ĕl, Repha’ĕl and Phanu’ĕl, and many
qodesh messengers without number.
10 And with them the Head of Days, His head white
and pure as wool, and His garments indescribable.
11 And I fell on my face, and my whole body became
relaxed, and my spirit was transfigured; and I cried with
a loud voice, with the spirit of power, and baraḵ and
esteemed and exalted.
12 And these bireḵoth which went forth out of my
mouth were well pleasing before that Head of Days.
13 And that Head of Days came with Miḵa’ĕl and
Gaḇri’ĕl, Repha’ĕl and Phanu’ĕl, thousands and ten
thousands of messengers without number.
14 And he came to me and greeted me with his voice,
and said to me, “This is the Bĕn of Aḏam who is born
unto righteousness, and righteousness abides over
Him, and the righteousness of the Head of Days does
not forsake Him.
15 And he said to me, “He proclaims unto you peace
in the name of the world to come. For from here has
proceeded peace since the creation of the world, and
so shall it be unto you forever and forever and ever.
16 “And all shall walk in His ways since righteousness
never forsakes Him. With Him will be their dwellingplaces, and with Him their heritage, and they shall not
be separated from Him forever and ever and ever.
6

185

ENOCH

“And so there shall be length of days with the Bĕn
of Aḏam, and the righteous shall have peace and an
upright Way in the Name of HWHY of hosts forever and
ever.”
17

ASTRONOMY

72 The book of the courses of the lights of the
shamayim, the relations of each, according to their
classes, their dominion and their seasons, according
to their names and places of origin, and according to
their months, which Uri’ĕl, the qodesh messenger, who
was with me, who is their guide, showed me; and he
showed me all their laws exactly as they are, and how
it is with regard to all the years of the world and unto
everlasting, till the new creation is accomplished which
endures till everlasting.
2 And this is the first law of the lights: the light, the
Sun has its rising in the eastern portals of the
shamayim, and its going down in the western portals
of the shamayim.
3 And I saw six portals in which the sun rises, and six
portals in which the sun goes down and the moon rises
and goes down in these portals, and the leaders of the
stars and those whom they lead: six in the east and six
in the west, and all following each other in accurately
corresponding order: also many windows to the right
and left of these portals.
4 And first there goes forth the great light, named the
sun, and its circumference is like the circumference of
the shamayim, and he is quite filled with illuminating
and heating fire.
5 The chariot on which he ascends, the wind drives,
and the sun goes down from the shamayim and returns
through the north in order to reach the east, and is so
guided that he comes to that portal and shines in the
face of the shamayim.
6 In this way he rises in the first month in the great
portal, which is the fourth.
7 And in that fourth portal from which the sun rises in
the first month are twelve window-openings, from
186

ḤANOḴ

which proceed a flame when they are opened in their
season.
8 When the sun rises in the shamayim, he comes
forth through that fourth portal thirty mornings in
succession, and goes down exactly in the fourth portal
in the west of the shamayim.
9 And during this period the day becomes daily
longer and the night, nightly shorter to the thirtieth
morning.
10 On that day the day is longer than the night by a
ninth part, and the day amounts exactly to ten parts
and the night to eight parts.
11 And the sun rises from that fourth portal, and goes
down in the fourth and returns to the fifth portal of the
east thirty mornings, and rises from it and goes down
in the fifth portal.
12 And then the day becomes longer by two parts and
amounts to eleven parts, and the night becomes
shorter and amounts to seven parts.
13 And it returns to the east and enters into the sixth
portal, and rises and goes down in the sixth portal
thirty-one mornings on account of its sign.
14 On that day the day becomes longer than the night,
and the day becomes double the night, and the day
becomes twelve parts, and the night is shortened and
becomes six parts.
15 And the sun mounts up to make the day shorter and
the night longer, and the sun returns to the east and
enters into the sixth portal, and rises from it and goes
down thirty mornings.
16 And when thirty mornings are accomplished, the
day decreases by exactly one part, and becomes
eleven parts, and the night seven.
17 And the sun goes forth from that sixth portal in the
west, and goes to the east and rises in the fifth portal
for thirty mornings, and goes down in the west again in
the fifth western portal.
18 On that day the day decreases by two parts, and
amounts to ten parts and the night to eight parts.
187

ENOCH

And the sun goes forth from that fifth portal and
goes down in the fifth portal of the west, and rises in
the fourth portal for thirty-one mornings on account of
its sign, and goes down in the west.
20 On that day the day is equalised with the night, and
the night amounts to nine parts and the day to nine
parts.
21 And the sun rises from that portal and goes down
in the west, and returns to the east and rises thirty
mornings in the third portal and goes down in the west
in the third portal.
22 And on that day the night becomes longer than the
day, and night becomes longer than night, and day
shorter than day till the thirtieth morning, and the night
amounts exactly to ten parts and the day to eight parts.
23 And the sun rises from that third portal and goes
down in the third portal in the west and returns to the
east, and for thirty mornings rises in the second portal
in the east, and in the same way goes down in the
second portal in the west of the shamayim.
24 And on that day the night amounts to eleven parts
and the day to seven parts.
25 And the sun rises on that day from that second
portal and goes down in the west in the second portal,
and returns to the east into the first portal for thirty-one
mornings, and goes down in the first portal in the west
of the shamayim.
26 And on that day the night becomes longer and
amounts to the double of the day: and the night
amounts exactly to twelve parts and the day to six.
27 And the sun has traversed the divisions of its orbit
and turns again on those divisions of its orbit, and
enters that portal thirty mornings and goes down also
in the west opposite to it.
28 And on that night, the night has decreased in length
by a ninth part, and the night has become eleven parts,
and the day seven parts.
29 And the sun has returned and entered into the
second portal in the east, and returns on those, its
19

188

ḤANOḴ

divisions of its orbit for thirty mornings, rising and going
down.
30 And on that day the night decreases in length, and
the night amounts to ten parts and the day to eight.
31 And on that day the sun rises from that portal, and
goes down in the west, and returns to the east, and
rises in the third portal for thirty-one mornings, and
goes down in the west of the shamayim.
32 On that day the night decreases and amounts to
nine parts, and the day to nine parts, and the night is
equal to the day and the year is exactly as to its days
three hundred and sixty-four.
33 And the length of the day and of the night, and the
shortness of the day and of the night arise - through
the course of the sun they are separated.
34 So it comes that its course becomes daily longer,
and its course nightly shorter.
35 And this is the law and the course of the sun, and
its return as often as he returns sixty times and rises the great light which is named the sun, forever and
ever.
36 And that which rises is the great light, and is so
named according to its appearance, according as
HWHY commanded.
37 As he rises, so he goes down and does not
decrease, and does not rest, but runs day and night,
and its light is sevenfold brighter than that of the moon;
but as regards size, they are both equal.

73 And after this law I saw another law dealing with
the smaller light, which is named the moon.
2 And her circumference is like the circumference of
the shamayim, and her chariot in which she rides is
driven by the wind, and light is given to her in measure.
3 And her rising and going down change every
month, and her days are like the days of the sun, and
when her light is uniform it amounts to the seventh part
of the light of the sun.
4 And thus she rises, and her first phase in the east
comes forth on the thirtieth morning. And on that day
she becomes visible, and constitutes for you the first
189

ENOCH

phase of the moon on the thirtieth day together with
the sun in the portal where the sun rises.
5 And the one half of her goes forth by a seventh part,
and her whole circumference is empty, without light,
with the exception of one-seventh part of it, the
fourteenth part of her light.
6 And when she receives one-seventh part of the half
of her light, her light amounts to one-seventh part and
the half thereof.
7 And she goes down with the sun, and when the sun
rises the moon rises with him and receives the half of
one part of light, and in that night in the beginning of
her morning in the beginning of the lunar day, the
moon goes down with the sun, and is invisible that
night with the fourteen parts and the half of one of
them.
8 And she rises on that day with exactly a seventh
part, and comes forth and recedes from the rising of
the sun, and in her remaining days she becomes bright
in the thirteen parts.

74 And I saw another course, a law for her, how
according to that law she performs her monthly
revolution.
2 And all these Uri’ĕl, the qodesh messenger who is
the leader of them all, showed to me, and their
positions. And I wrote down their positions as he
showed them to me, and I wrote down their months as
they were, and the appearance of their lights till fifteen
days were accomplished.
3 In single seventh parts she accomplishes all her
light in the east, and in single seventh parts
accomplishes all her darkness in the west.
4 And in certain months she alters her going down,
and in certain months she pursues her own peculiar
course.
5 In two months the moon goes down with the sun: in
those two middle portals the third and the fourth.
6 She goes forth for seven days, and turns about and
returns again through the portal where the sun rises,
and accomplishes all her light: and she recedes from
190

ḤANOḴ

the sun, and in eight days enters the sixth portal from
which the sun goes forth.
7 And when the sun goes forth from the fourth portal
she goes forth seven days, until she goes forth from
the fifth and turns back again in seven days into the
fourth portal and accomplishes all her light: and she
recedes and enters into the first portal in eight days.
8 And she returns again in seven days into the fourth
portal from which the sun goes forth.
9 Thus I saw their position - how the moon rose and
the sun went down in those days.
10 And if five years are added together the sun has an
excess of thirty days, and all the days which increase
to it for one of those five years, when they are full,
amount to three hundred and sixty-four days.
11 And the excess of the sun and of the stars amounts
to six days: in five years, six days every year come to
thirty days, and the moon falls behind the sun and stars
to the number of thirty days.
12 And the sun and the stars bring in all the years
exactly, so that they do not advance or delay their
position by a single day unto everlasting; but complete
the years with perfect justice in three hundred and
sixty-four days.
13 In three years there are one thousand and ninetytwo days, and in five years; one thousand, eight
hundred and twenty days, so that in eight years there
are two thousand, nine hundred and twelve days.
14 For the moon alone the days amount in three years
to one thousand and sixty-two days, and in five years
she falls fifty days behind: to the sum there is five to be
added and sixty-two days.
15 And in five years there are one thousand, seven
hundred and seventy days, so that for the moon the
days six in eight years amount to two thousand, eight
hundred and thirty-two days.
16 For in eight years she falls behind to the amount of
eighty days, all the seventeen days she falls behind in
eight years are eighty.
191

ENOCH

And the year is accurately completed in conformity
with their world-stations and the stations of the sun,
which rise from the portals through which it rises and
goes down thirty days.
17

75 And the leaders of the heads of the thousands,
who are placed over the whole creation and over all
the stars, have also to do with the four intercalary days,
being inseparable from their office, according to the
reckoning of the year, and these render service on the
four days which are not reckoned in the reckoning of
the year.
2 And owing to them men go astray therein, for those
lights truly render service on the world-stations, one in
the first portal, one in the third portal of the shamayim,
one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal, and
the exactness of the year is accomplished through its
separate three hundred and sixty-four stations.
3 For the signs and the times and the years and the
days the messenger Uri’ĕl showed to me, whom HWHY
of esteem has appointed forever over all the lights of
the shamayim, in the shamayim and in the world, that
they should rule on the face of the shamayim and be
seen on the earth, and be leaders for the day and the
night: the sun, moon, and stars, and all the ministering
beings which make their revolution in all the chariots of
the shamayim.
4 In the same way, twelve doors Uri’ĕl showed me,
open in the circumference of the sun’s chariot in the
shamayim, through which the rays of the sun break
forth: and from them is warmth diffused over the earth,
when they are opened at their appointed times.
5 And for the winds and the spirit of the dew when
they are opened, standing open in the shamayim at the
ends.
6 As for the twelve portals in the shamayim, at the
ends of the earth, out of which go forth the sun, moon,
and stars, and all the works of the shamayim in the
east and in the west,
7 there are many windows open to the left and right
of them, and one window at its appointed time
192

ḤANOḴ

produces warmth, corresponding to those doors from
which the stars come forth according as He has
commanded them, and wherein they are placed
corresponding to their number.
8 And I saw chariots in the shamayim, running in the
world, above those portals in which revolve the stars
that never go down.
9 And one is larger than all the rest, and it is that
which makes its course through the entire world.

76 And at the ends of the earth I saw twelve portals
open to all the quarters from which the winds go forth
and blow over the earth.
2 Three of them are open on the face of the
shamayim, and three in the west, and three on the right
of the shamayim, and three on the left.
3 And the three first are those of the east, and three
are of the north, and three after those on the left of the
south, and three of the west.
4 Through four of these come winds of beraḵah and
prosperity, and from those eight come hurtful winds when they are sent, they bring destruction on all the
earth and on the water upon it, and on all who dwell
upon it, and on all which are in the water and on the
land.
5 And the first wind from those portals, called the east
wind, comes forth through the first portal which is in the
east, inclining towards the south - from it come forth
desolation, drought, heat, and destruction.
6 And through the second portal in the middle comes
what is fitting, and from it, there comes rain and
fruitfulness and prosperity and dew; and through the
third portal which lies toward the north come cold and
drought.
7 And after these come forth the south winds through
three portals - through the first portal of them inclining
to the east comes forth a hot wind.
8 And through the middle portal next to it there come
forth fragrant smells, and dew and rain, and prosperity
and health.
193

ENOCH

And through the third portal lying to the west come
forth dew and rain, locusts and desolation.
10 And after these the north winds - from the seventh
portal in the east come dew and rain, locusts and
desolation.
11 And from the middle portal, come in a direct
direction, health and rain and dew and prosperity; and
through the third portal in the west come cloud and
frost, and snow and rain, and dew and locusts.
12 And after these four are the west winds - through
the first portal adjoining the north come forth dew and
frost, and cold and snow and ice.
13 And from the middle portal come forth dew and rain,
and prosperity and beraḵah; and through the last portal
which adjoins the south come forth drought and
desolation, and burning and destruction.
14 And the twelve portals of the four quarters of the
shamayim are completed, and all their laws and all
their plagues and all their goodness have I shown to
you, my son Methushelaḥ.
9

77 And the first quarter is called the east, because it
is the first and the second, the south, because the Most
High will descend there, even there, in quite a special
sense will He who is baruḵ, forever descend.
2 And the west quarter is named the diminished,
because there all the lights of the shamayim diminish
and go down.
3 And the fourth quarter, named the north, is divided
into three parts: the first of them is for the dwelling of
men; and the second contains seas of water, and the
abysses and forests and rivers, and darkness and
clouds; and the third part contains the garden of
righteousness.
4 I saw seven high mountains, higher than all the
mountains which are on the earth: and from there
comes forth frost, and days, seasons, and years pass
away.
5 I saw seven rivers on the earth larger than all the
rivers - one of them coming from the west pours its
waters into the Great Sea.
194

ḤANOḴ

And these two come from the north to the sea and
pour their waters into the Eastern Sea in the east.
7 And the remaining four come forth on the side of
the north to their own sea, two of them to the Eastern
Sea, and two into the Great Sea and discharge
themselves there, and some say, into the desert.
8 Seven great islands I saw in the sea and in the
mainland: two in the mainland and five in the Great
Sea.
6

78 And the names of the sun are the following: the
first Aryares, and the second T’oma.
2 And the moon has four names: the first name is
Asoniya, the second Eḇla, the third Benase, and the
fourth Erae.
3 These are the two great lights: their circumference
is like the circumference of the shamayim, and the size
of the circumference of both is alike.
4 In the circumference of the sun there are seven
portions of light which are added to it more than to the
moon, and in definite measures it is transferred till the
seventh portion of the sun is exhausted.
5 And they go down and enter the portals of the west,
and make their revolution by the north, and come forth
through the eastern portals on the face of the
shamayim.
6 And when the moon rises, one-fourteenth part
appears in the shamayim - the light becomes full in her
- on the fourteenth day she accomplishes her light.
7 And fifteen parts of light are transferred to her till
the fifteenth day - her light is accomplished, according
to the sign of the year, and she becomes fifteen parts,
and the moon grows by fourteenth parts.
8 And in her diminishing, decreases on the first day
to fourteen parts of her light; on the second, to thirteen
parts of light; on the third, to twelve; on the fourth, to
eleven; on the fifth, to ten; on the sixth, to nine; on the
seventh, to eight; on the eighth, to seven; on the ninth,
to six; on the tenth, to five; on the eleventh, to four; on
the twelfth, to three; on the thirteenth, to two; on the
195

ENOCH

fourteenth, to the half of a seventh, and all her
remaining light disappears wholly on the fifteenth.
9 And in certain months the month has twenty-nine
days and once twenty-eight.
10 And Uri’ĕl showed me another law: when light is
transferred to the moon, and on which side it is
transferred to her by the sun.
11 During all the period during which the moon is
growing in her light, she is transferring it to herself
when opposite to the sun. During fourteen days her
light is accomplished in the shamayim, and when she
is illuminated throughout, her light is accomplished full
in the shamayim.
12 And on the first day she is called the new moon, for
on that day the light rises upon her.
13 She becomes full moon exactly on the day when
the sun goes down in the west, and from the east she
rises at night, and the moon shines the whole night
through till the sun rises over against her and the moon
is seen over against the sun.
14 On the side where the light of the moon comes
forth, there again she diminishes till all the light
vanishes and all the days of the month are at an end,
and her circumference is empty, void of light.
15 And three months she makes of thirty days, and at
her time she makes three months of twenty-nine days
each, in which she accomplishes her diminishing in the
first period of time, and in the first portal for one
hundred and seventy-seven days.
16 And in the time of her going out she appears for
three months, thirty days each, and for three months
she appears twenty-nine each.
17 At night she appears like a man for twenty days
each time, and by day she appears like the shamayim,
and there is none else in her save her light.

79 And now, my son, I have shown you all matters,
and the law of all the stars of the shamayim is
completed.
2 And he showed me all the laws of these for every
day, and for every season of bearing rule, and for
196

ḤANOḴ

every year, and for its going forth, and for the order
prescribed to it every month and every week:
3 And the diminishing of the moon which takes place
in the sixth portal - for in this sixth portal her light is
accomplished. And after that there is the beginning of
the diminishing,
4 which takes place in the first portal in its season, till
one hundred and seventy-seven days are
accomplished - reckoned according to weeks - twentyfive and two days.
5 She falls behind the sun and the order of the stars
exactly five days in the course of one period, and when
this place which you see has been traversed.
6 Such is the picture and sketch of every light which
Uri’ĕl the chief messenger, who is their leader showed
to me.

80 And in those days the messenger Uri’ĕl answered
and said to me, “See, I have shown you all matters,
Ḥanoḵ, and I have revealed all to you that you should
see - this sun and this moon, and the leaders of the
stars of the shamayim and all those who turn them,
their tasks and times and departures.
2 “And in the days of the sinners the years shall be
shortened, and their seed shall be late on their lands
and fields, and all on the earth shall alter, and shall not
appear in their time, and the rain shall be kept back
and the shamayim shall withhold.
3 “And in those times the fruits of the earth shall be
backward, and shall not grow in their time, and the
fruits of the trees shall be withheld in their time.
4 “And the moon shall alter her order, and not appear
at her time.
5 “And in those days the sun shall be seen and he
shall journey in the evening on the extremity of the
great chariot in the west and shall shine more brightly
than accordance with the order of light.
6 “And many chiefs of the stars shall transgress the
order, and these shall alter their orbits and tasks, and
not appear at the seasons prescribed to them.
197

ENOCH

“And the whole order of the stars shall be
concealed from the sinners, and the thoughts of those
on the earth shall err concerning them, and they shall
be altered from all their ways, also they shall go astray
and take them to be mighty ones.
8 “And evil shall be multiplied upon them, and
punishment shall come upon them so as to destroy all.”
7

81 And he said to me, “Observe, Ḥanoḵ, these
tablets of the shamayim, and read what is written upon
them, and mark every individual fact.”
2 And I observed the tablets of the shamayim, and
read all which was written and understood all matters,
and read the Book of all the deeds of mankind, and of
all the children of flesh that shall be upon the earth to
the remotest generations.
3 And immediately I baraḵ the great Aḏon, the
Sovereign of esteem forever, in that He has made all
the works of the world, and I exalted HWHY because of
His patience, and baraḵ Him because of the children
of men.
4 And after that I said, “Baruḵ is the man who dies in
righteousness and goodness, concerning whom there
is no book of unrighteousness written, and against
whom no day of judgment shall be found.”
5 And those seven qodeshim brought me and placed
me on the earth before the door of my house, and said
to me, “Declare all matters to your son Methushelaḥ,
and show to all your children that no flesh is righteous
in the sight of HWHY for He is their Creator.
6 “One year we will leave you with your son, till you
give your Commands, that you may teach your
children and record for them, and witness to all your
children, and in the second year they shall take you
from their midst.
7 “Let your heart be strong, for the good shall
announce righteousness to the good; the righteous
with the righteous shall rejoice, and shall offer
congratulations to one another.
8 “But the sinners shall die with the sinners, and the
backslider go down with the backslider.
198

ḤANOḴ

“And those who practice righteousness shall die on
account of the deeds of men, and be taken away on
account of the doings of the wicked.”
10 And in those days they ceased to speak to me, and
I came to my people, giving beraḵah to the Aḏon of the
world.
9

82 And now, my son Methushelaḥ, all these I am
recounting to you and writing down for you and I have
revealed to you all matters, and given you books
concerning all these. So preserve, my son
Methushelaḥ, the books from your father’s hand, and
deliver them to the generations of the world.
2 I have given wisdom to you and to your children,
and your children that shall be unto you, that they may
give it to their children for generations – this wisdom that passes their thought.
3 And those who understand it shall not sleep, but
shall listen with the ear that they may learn this
wisdom, and it shall please those that eat of it, better
than good food.
4 Baruḵ are all the righteous. Baruḵ are all those who
walk In the Way of righteousness and do not sin as the
sinners, in the reckoning of all their days in which the
sun traverses the shamayim, entering into and
departing from the portals for thirty days with the heads
of thousands of the order of the stars, together with the
four which are intercalated which divide the four
portions of the year, which lead them and enter with
them four days.
5 Owing to them, men shall be at fault and not reckon
them in the whole reckoning of the year; also, men
shall be at fault, and not recognise them accurately.
6 For they belong to the reckoning of the year and
are truly recorded forever; one in the first portal and
one in the third, and one in the fourth and one in the
sixth, and the year is completed in three hundred and
sixty-four days.
7 And the account thereof is accurate and the
recorded reckoning thereof exact; for the lights, and
months and Festivals, and years and days, has Uri’ĕl
199

ENOCH

shown and revealed to me, to whom the Aḏon of the
whole creation of the world has subjected the host of
the shamayim.
8 And He has power over night and day in the
shamayim to cause the light to give light to men - sun,
moon, and stars, and all the powers of the shamayim
which revolve in their circular chariots.
9 And these are the orders of the stars, which go
down in their places, and in their Appointed Times and
Festivals and months.
10 And these are the names of those who lead them,
who watch that they enter at their times, in their orders,
in their seasons, in their months, in their periods of
dominion, and in their positions.
11 Their four leaders who divide the four parts of the
year enter first; and after them the twelve leaders of
the orders who divide the months; and for the three
hundred and sixty there are heads over thousands
who divide the days; and for the four intercalary days
there are the leaders which divide the four parts of the
year.
12 And these heads over thousands are intercalated
between leader and leader, each behind a station, but
their leaders make the division.
13 And these are the names of the leaders who divide
the four parts of the year which are ordained: Malki’ĕl,
Allammeleḵ, and Meleḵya’al, and Nĕr’ĕl.
14 And the names of those who lead them: Aḏnar’ĕl,
and Yasusa’ĕl, and Elome’ĕl - these three follow the
leaders of the orders, and there is one that follows the
three leaders of the orders which follow those leaders
of stations that divide the four parts of the year.
15 In the beginning of the year Meleḵya’al rises first
and rules, who is named Tama’ini and Shemesh, and
all the days of his dominion whilst he bears rule are
ninety-one days.
16 And these are the signs of the days which are to be
seen on earth in the days of his dominion: sweat, and
heat, and calms. And all the trees bear fruit, and leaves
are produced on all the trees, and the harvest of wheat,
200

ḤANOḴ

and the rose-flowers, and all the flowers which come
forth in the field, but the trees of the winter season
become withered.
17 And these are the names of the leaders which are
under them: Beraḵi’ĕl, Zeleḇts’ĕl, and another who is
added a head of a thousand, called Ḥiluyasĕph: and
the days of the dominion of this are at an end.
18 The next leader after him is Ḥelemmeleḵ, whom
one names the shining sun, and all the days of his light
are ninety-one days.
19 And these are the signs of days on the earth:
glowing heat and dryness, and the trees ripen their
fruits and produce all their fruits ripe and ready, and
the sheep pair and become pregnant, and all the fruits
of the earth are gathered in, and all that is in the fields,
and the winepress - these take place in the days of his
dominion.
20 These are the names, and the orders, and the
leaders of those heads of thousands: Geḏalyahu,
Qe’ĕl, and Ḥi’ĕl, and the name of the head of a
thousand which is added to them, Aspha’ĕl: and the
days of his dominion are at an end.
DREAMS

83 And now, my son Methushelaḥ, I will show you all
my visions which I have seen, recounting them before
you.
2 Two visions I saw before I took a wife, and the one
was quite unlike the other: the first when I was learning
to write; the second before I took your mother, I saw a
terrible vision. And regarding them I prayed to HWHY.
3 I had laid down in the house of my grandfather
Mahalal’ĕl; I saw in a vision how the shamayim
collapsed and was taken away and fell to the earth.
4 And when it fell to the earth I saw how the earth
was swallowed up in a great abyss, and mountains
were suspended on mountains, and hills sank down on
hills, and high trees were torn from their stems, and
hurled down and sunk in the abyss.
201

ENOCH

And after that a word fell into my mouth, and I lifted
up to cry aloud, and said, “The earth is destroyed.”
6 And my grandfather Mahalal’ĕl woke me as I lay
near him, and said to me, “Why do you cry so, my son,
and why do you make such lamentation?”
7 And I recounted to him the whole vision which I had
seen, and he said to me, “A terrible matter you have
seen, my son, and of grave moment is your vision as
to the secrets of all the sin of the earth - it must sink
into the abyss and be destroyed with a great
destruction.
8 “And now, my son, arise and make petition to HWHY
of esteem, since you are a believer, that a remnant
may remain on the earth, and that He may not destroy
the whole earth.
9 “My son, from the shamayim all this will come upon
the earth, and upon the earth there will be great
destruction.”
10 After that I arose and prayed and implored and
pleaded, and wrote down my prayer for the
generations of the world, and I will show all matters to
you, my son Methushelaḥ.
11 And when I had gone forth below and seen the
shamayim, and the sun rising in the east, and the
moon going down in the west, and a few stars, and the
whole earth, and all as He had known it in the
beginning, then I baraḵ HWHY of right-ruling and
exalted Him because He had made the sun to go forth
from the windows of the east, and He ascended and
rose on the face of the shamayim, and departed and
kept traversing the path shown unto Him.
5

84 And I lifted up my hands in righteousness and
baraḵ the Qadosh and Great One, and spoke with the
breath of my mouth, and with the tongue of flesh, which
Elohim has made for the children of the flesh of men,
that they should speak with, and He gave them breath
and a tongue and a mouth that they should speak with,
2 “Baruḵ are You, O Aḏon, Sovereign, great and
mighty in Your greatness, Aḏon of the whole creation
of the shamayim, Sovereign of sovereigns and Elohim
202

ḤANOḴ

of the whole world. And Your power and reign and
greatness abide forever and ever, and throughout all
generations. Your dominion, and all the shamayim are
Your throne forever, and the whole earth Your
footstool forever and ever.
3 “For You have made and You rule all, and no matter
is too hard for You. Wisdom does not depart from the
place of Your throne, nor turn away from Your
presence. And You know and see and hear all matters,
and there is none hidden from You for You see all.
4 “And now the messengers of Your shamayim are
guilty of trespass, and upon the flesh of men Your
wrath abides until the great day of judgment.
5 “And now, O Elohim and Aḏon and Great
Sovereign, I implore and pray to fulfill my prayer, to
leave me a posterity on earth, and not destroy all the
flesh of man, and make the earth without inhabitant, so
that there should be an eternal destruction.
6 “And now, Aḏonai, destroy from the earth the flesh
which has aroused Your wrath, but the flesh of
righteousness and uprightness establish as a plant of
the eternal seed, and do not hide Your face from the
prayer of Your servant, O HWHY.”

85 And after this I saw another dream, and I will show
the whole dream to you, my son.
2 And Ḥanoḵ lifted up and spoke to his son
Methushelaḥ, “To you, my son, will I speak. Hear my
words, incline your ear to the vision of your father.
3 “Before I took your mother Edna, I saw in a vision
on my bed, and see, a bull came forth from the earth,
and the bull was white, and after it came forth a heifer,
and along with this came forth two bulls, one of them
black and the other red.
4 “And the black bull gored the red one and pursued
him over the earth, and I could no longer see the red
bull.
5 “But the black bull grew and the heifer went with
him, and I saw that many oxen proceeded from him
which resembled and followed him.
203

ENOCH

“And the cow, the first one, went from the presence
of the first bull in order to seek the red one, but did not
find, and lamented with a great lamentation over him
and sought him.
7 “And I looked till the first bull came to her and
quieted her, and from that time onward she cried no
more.
8 “And after that she bore another white bull, and
after him she bore many bulls and black cows.
9 “And I saw in my sleep the white bull likewise grow
and become a great white bull, and from him
proceeded many white bulls, and they resembled him.
And they began to bring forth many white bulls, which
resembled them, one following the other, very many.”
6

86 And again I saw with my eyes as I slept, and I saw
the shamayim above, and see, a star fell from the
shamayim, and it arose and ate and pastured amongst
those oxen.
2 And after that I saw the large and the black oxen,
and see, they all changed their stalls and pastures and
their cattle, and began to live with each other.
3 And again I saw in the vision, and looked towards
the shamayim, and see, I saw many stars descend and
cast themselves down from the shamayim to the first
star, and they became bulls amongst those cattle and
pastured with them amongst them.
4 And I looked at them and saw, and see, they all let
out their members like horses, and began to cover the
cows of the oxen, and they all became pregnant and
brought forth elephants, camels, and donkeys.
5 And all the oxen feared them and were frightened
at them, and began to bite with their teeth and to
devour, and to gore with their horns.
6 And they began also, to devour those oxen; and
see, all the children of the earth began to tremble and
quake before them, and to flee from them.

87 And again I saw how they began to gore each
other and to devour each other, and the earth began
to cry aloud.
204

ḤANOḴ

And I raised my eyes again to the shamayim, and I
saw in the vision, and see, there came forth from the
shamayim, beings who were like white men, and four
went forth from that place, and three with them.
3 And those three that had last come forth grasped
me by my hand and took me up, away from the
generations of the earth, and raised me up to a high
place, and showed me a tower raised high above the
earth, and all the hills were lower.
4 And one said to me, “Remain here till you see all
that befalls those elephants, camels, and donkeys,
and the stars and the oxen, and all of them.”
2

88 And I saw one of those four who had come forth
first, and he seized the first star which had fallen from
the shamayim, and bound it hand and foot and cast it
into an abyss. Now the abyss was narrow and deep,
and horrible and dark.
2 And one of them drew a sword, and gave it to those
elephants and camels and donkeys, then they began
to smite each other, and the whole earth quaked
because of them.
3 And as I was watching in the vision, see, one of
those four who had come forth, thrown from the
shamayim, and gathered and took all the great stars
whose members were like those of horses, and bound
them all hand and foot, and cast them in an abyss of
the earth.

89 And one of those four went to the white bull and
instructed him in a secret, without being terrified - he
was born a bull and became a man, and built for
himself a great vessel and dwelt upon it - and three
bulls dwelt with him in the vessel and they were
covered in.
2 And again I raised my eyes towards the shamayim
and saw a high roof, with seven water torrents upon
them, and those torrents flowed with much water into
an enclosure.
3 And I saw again, and see, fountains were opened
on the surface of the great enclosure, and the water
205

ENOCH

began to swell and rise upon the surface, and I saw
the enclosure till all its surface was covered with water.
4 And the water, the darkness, and mist increased
upon it; and as I looked at the height of the water, the
water had risen above the height of the enclosure, and
was streaming over the enclosure, and it stood upon
the earth.
5 And all the cattle of the enclosure were gathered
together until I saw how they sank and were swallowed
up and perished in the water.
6 But the vessel floated on the water, while all the
oxen and elephants and camels and donkeys sank to
the bottom with all the animals, so that I could no
longer see them, and they were not able to escape;
perished and sunk to the depths.
7 And again I saw in the vision till those water torrents
were removed from the high roof, and the chasms of
the earth were leveled up and other abysses were
opened.
8 Then the water began to run down into these, till
the earth became visible; but the vessel rested on the
earth, and the darkness withdrew and light appeared.
9 But the white bull which had become a man came
out of the vessel, and the three bulls with him, and one
of those three was white like the bull, and one of them
was red as blood, and one black, and the white bull
departed from them.
10 And they began to bring forth beasts of the field and
birds, so that there arose different kinds: lions, tigers,
wolves, dogs, hyenas, wild boars, foxes, squirrels,
pigs, hawks, vultures, hawks, eagles, and ravens; and
among them was born a white bull.
11 And they began to bite one another; but that white
bull which was born amongst them brought forth a wild
donkey and a white bull with it, and the wild donkeys
multiplied.
12 But the bull which was born from him brought forth
a black wild boar and a white sheep; and the former
brought forth many boars, but the sheep brought forth
twelve sheep.
206

ḤANOḴ

And when those twelve sheep had grown, they
gave up one of them to the donkeys, and those
donkeys again gave up that sheep to the wolves, and
the sheep grew up among the wolves.
14 And the Aḏon brought the eleven sheep to live with
it and to pasture with it among the wolves, and they
multiplied and became many flocks of sheep.
15 And the wolves began to terror them, and they
oppressed them until they cried aloud on account of
their little ones, and to complain unto their Aḏon.
16 And a sheep which had been saved from the
wolves fled and escaped to the wild donkeys; and I
saw the sheep how they lamented and cried, and
pleaded their Aḏon with all their might, till that Aḏon of
the sheep descended at the voice of the sheep from a
high abode, and came to them and pastured them.
17 And He called the sheep which had escaped the
wolves, and spoke with it concerning the wolves that it
should warn them not to touch the sheep.
18 And the sheep went to the wolves according to the
word of the Aḏon, and another sheep met it and went
with it, and the two went and entered together into the
assembly of those wolves, and spoke with them and
warned them not to touch the sheep from hereon.
19 And after that I saw the wolves, and how they
oppressed the sheep exceedingly with all their power;
and the sheep cried aloud.
20 And the Aḏon came to the sheep and they began
to smite those wolves; and the wolves began to make
lamentation, but the sheep became quiet and
immediately ceased to cry out.
21 And I saw the sheep till they departed from
amongst the wolves; but the eyes of the wolves were
blinded, and the wolves departed in pursuit of the
sheep with all their might.
22 And the Aḏon of the sheep went with them, as their
leader, and all His sheep followed Him, and His face
was dazzling and magnificent and awesome to look
upon.
13

207

ENOCH

But the wolves began to pursue the sheep till they
reached a sea of water.
24 And the sea was divided, and the water stood on
this side and on that before their face, and their Aḏon
led them and placed Himself between them and the
wolves.
25 And as the wolves did not yet see the sheep; they
proceeded into the midst of the sea, and the wolves
followed the sheep, and the wolves ran after them into
the sea.
26 And when they saw the Aḏon of the sheep, they
turned to flee before His face, but the sea gathered
itself together, and became as it had been created,
and the water swelled and rose till it covered the
wolves.
27 And I saw till all the wolves who pursued the sheep
perished and were drowned.
28 But the sheep escaped from the water and went
forth into a wilderness, where there was no water and
no grass; and they began to open their eyes and to
see; and I saw the Aḏon of the sheep pasturing them
and giving them water and grass, and that sheep going
and leading them.
29 And that sheep ascended to the summit of that high
rock, and the Aḏon of the sheep sent it to them.
30 And after that I saw the Aḏon of the sheep who
stood before them, and His appearance was great and
awesome and majestic, and all the sheep saw Him and
were afraid before His face.
31 And they all feared and trembled because of Him,
and they cried to that sheep with them which was
amongst them, “We are not able to stand before our
Aḏon or to look upon Him.”
32 And that sheep which led them again ascended to
the summit of the rock, but the sheep began to be
blinded and to wander from the way which he had
showed them, but that sheep was not thereof.
33 And the Aḏon of the sheep was wrathful
exceedingly against them, and that sheep discovered
it, and went down from the summit of the rock, and
23

208

ḤANOḴ

came to the sheep, and found the greatest part of them
blinded and fallen away.
34 And when they saw it they feared and trembled at
its presence, and desired to return to their folds.
35 And that sheep took other sheep with it, and came
to those sheep which had fallen away, and began to
slay them; and the sheep feared its presence, and thus
that sheep brought back those sheep that had fallen
away, and they returned to their folds.
36 And I saw in this vision till that sheep became a
man and built a house for the Aḏon of the sheep, and
placed all the sheep in the house.
37 And I saw till this sheep which had met that sheep
which led them fell asleep: and I saw till all the great
sheep perished and little ones arose in their place, and
they came to a pasture, and approached a stream of
water.
38 Then that sheep, their leader which had become a
man, withdrew from them and fell asleep, and all the
sheep sought it and cried over it with a great crying.
39 And I saw till they ceased crying for that sheep and
crossed the stream of water, and there arose the two
sheep as leaders in the place of those which had led
them and fallen asleep.
40 And I saw till the sheep came to a pleasant place,
and a pleasant and magnificent land, and I saw till
those sheep were satisfied; and the house stood
amongst them in the pleasant land.
41 And sometimes their eyes were opened, and
sometimes blinded, till another sheep arose and led
them and brought them all back, and their eyes were
opened.
42 And the dogs and the foxes and the wild boars
began to devour those sheep till the Aḏon of the sheep
raised up another sheep; a ram from their midst, which
led them.
43 And the ram began to butt on either side those
dogs, foxes, and wild boars till he had destroyed them
all.
209

ENOCH

And that sheep whose eyes were opened saw the
ram, which was amongst the sheep, till it forsook its
esteem and began to butt those sheep, and trampled
upon them, and behaved itself indecently.
45 And the Aḏon of the sheep sent the lamb to another
lamb and raised it to being a ram and leader of the
sheep instead of that ram which had forsaken its
esteem.
46 And it went to it and spoke to it alone, and raised it
to being a ram, and made it the prince and leader of
the sheep; but during all these, those dogs oppressed
the sheep.
47 And the first ram pursued the second ram, and the
second ram arose and fled before it; and I saw till the
dogs pulled down the first ram.
48 And the second ram arose and led the little sheep.
49 And those sheep grew and multiplied; but all the
dogs, and foxes, and wild boars feared and fled before
it, and the ram butted and killed the wild beasts, and
those wild beasts had no longer any power among the
sheep and robbed them no more. And the ram brought
forth many sheep and fell asleep; and a little sheep
became a ram in its place, and became prince and
leader of those sheep.
50 And the house became great and broad, and it was
built for those sheep. A tower high and great was built
on the house for the Aḏon of the sheep, and the house
was low, but the tower was elevated and high, and the
Aḏon of the sheep stood on the tower and they offered
a full table before Him.
51 And again I saw the sheep that they again strayed
and went many ways, and forsook that, their house,
and the Aḏon of the sheep called some from amongst
the sheep and sent them to the sheep, but the sheep
began to slay them.
52 And one of them was saved and was not slain, and
it sped away and cried aloud over the sheep; and they
sought to slay it, but the Aḏon of the sheep saved it
from the sheep, and brought it up to me, and caused it
to dwell there.
44

210

ḤANOḴ

And many other sheep He sent to those sheep to
witness to them and lament over them.
54 And after that I saw that when they forsook the
house of the Aḏon and His tower they fell away
entirely, and their eyes were blinded; and I saw the
Aḏon of the sheep how He wrought much slaughter
amongst them in their herds until those sheep invited
that slaughter and betrayed His place.
55 And He gave them over into the hands of the lions
and tigers, and wolves and hyenas, and into the hand
the foxes, and to all the wild beasts, and those wild
beasts began to tear in pieces those sheep.
56 And I saw that He forsook their house and their
tower and gave them all into the hand of the lions, to
tear and devour them, into the hand of all the wild
beasts.
57 And I began to cry aloud with all my might, and to
appeal to the Aḏon of the sheep, and to represent to
Him in regard to the sheep that they were devoured by
all the wild beasts.
58 But He remained unmoved, though He saw it, and
rejoiced that they were devoured and swallowed and
robbed, and left them to be devoured in the hand of all
the beasts.
59 And He called seventy shepherds, and cast those
sheep to them that they might pasture them, and He
spoke to the shepherds and their companions, “Let
each individual of you pasture the sheep hereon, and
all that I shall Command you; that do.
60 “And I will deliver them over to you duly numbered,
and tell you which of them are to be destroyed, and
them you destroy.” And He gave over to them those
sheep.
61 And He called another and spoke to him, “Observe
and mark all that the shepherds will do to the sheep;
for they will destroy more of them than I have
Commanded them.
62 “And every excess and the destruction which will be
wrought through the shepherds, record how many they
destroy according to my Command, and how many
53

211

ENOCH

according to their own desire. Record against every
individual shepherd all the destruction he effects.
63 “And read out before Me by number how many they
destroy, and how many they deliver over for
destruction, that I may have this as a witness against
them, and know every deed of the shepherds, that I
may know and see what they do, whether or not they
live by My Command which I have Commanded them.
64 “But they shall not know it, and you shall not declare
it to them, nor admonish them, but only record against
each individual all the destruction which the shepherds
effect, each in his time and lay it all before Me.”
65 And I saw till the shepherds pastured in their
season, and they began to slay and to destroy more
than they were ordered, and they delivered the sheep
into the hand of the lions.
66 And the lions and tigers ate and devoured the
greater part of the sheep, and the wild boars ate along
with them; and they burnt the tower and demolished
the house.
67 And I became exceedingly sorrowful over the tower
because the house of the sheep was demolished, and
afterwards I was unable to see if the sheep entered the
house.
68 And the shepherds and their associates delivered
over the sheep to all the wild beasts, to devour them,
and each one of them received in his time a definite
number: it was written by the other in a book how many
each one of them destroyed of them.
69 And each one slew and destroyed many more than
was prescribed; and I began to weep and lament on
account of those sheep.
70 And thus in the vision I saw the one who wrote, how
he wrote down every one that was destroyed by those
shepherds, day by day, and carried up and laid down
and even showed the whole book to the Aḏon of the
sheep - all that they had done, and all that each one of
them had made away with, and all that they had given
over to destruction.
212

ḤANOḴ

And the book was read before the Aḏon of the
sheep, and He took the book from his hand and read
it and sealed it and laid it down.
72 And immediately I saw how the shepherds
pastured for twelve hours, and see, three of those
sheep turned back and came and entered and began
to build up all that had fallen down of the house; but
the wild boars tried to prevent them, but they were not
able.
73 And they began again to build as before, and they
raised up the tower, and it was named the high tower;
and they began again to place a table before the tower,
but all the bread on it was polluted and not pure.
74 And as regarding all this, the eyes of the sheep
were blinded so that they did not see, and their
shepherds likewise; and they delivered them in large
numbers to their shepherds for destruction, and they
trampled the sheep with their feet and devoured them.
75 And the Aḏon of the sheep remained unmoved till
all the sheep were dispersed over the field and mingled
with them, and they did not save them out of the hand
of the beasts.
76 And the one who wrote the book carried it up, and
showed it and read it before the Aḏon of the sheep,
and implored Him on their account, and pleaded with
Him on their account as he showed Him all the doings
of the shepherds, and gave witness before Him
against all the shepherds. And he took the actual book
and laid it down beside Him and departed.
71

90 And I saw till that in this manner, thirty-five
shepherds undertook the pasturing, and by number
they completed their periods as did the first; and others
received them into their hands, to pasture them for
their period, each shepherd in his own period.
2 And after that I saw in my vision all the birds of the
shamayim coming, the eagles, the vultures, the hawks,
the ravens; but the eagles led all the birds; and they
began to devour those sheep, and to peck out their
eyes and to devour their flesh.
213

ENOCH

And the sheep cried out because their flesh was
being devoured by the birds; and as for me I looked
and lamented in my sleep over the shepherd who
pastured the sheep.
4 And I saw until the sheep were devoured by the
dogs and eagles and hawks, and they left neither flesh
nor skin nor sinew remaining on them till only their
bones stood there; and their bones too fell to the earth
and the sheep became few.
5 And I saw until the twenty-three had undertaken the
pasturing and completed in their numbered periods
fifty-eight times.
6 But see, lambs were borne by those white sheep,
and they began to open their eyes and to see, and to
cry to the sheep.
7 Therefore, they cried to them, but they did not listen
to what they said to them, but were exceedingly deaf,
and their eyes were exceedingly blinded.
8 And I saw in the vision how the ravens flew upon
those lambs and took one of those lambs, and dashed
the sheep in pieces and devoured them.
9 And I saw till horns grew upon those lambs, and the
ravens cast down their horns; and I saw till there
sprouted a great horn of one of those sheep, and their
eyes were opened.
10 And it looked at them and their eyes opened, and it
cried to the sheep, and the rams saw it and all ran to
it.
11 And notwithstanding all this, the eagles and
vultures and ravens and hawks still kept tearing the
sheep and swooping down upon them and devouring
them: still the sheep remained silent, but the rams
lamented and cried out.
12 And those ravens fought and battled with it and
sought to lay low its horn, but they had no power over
it.
13 And I saw till the shepherds and eagles and the
vultures and kites came, and they cried to the ravens
that they should break the horn of the ram. And they
3

214

ḤANOḴ

battled and fought with it, and it battled with them and
cried that its help might come.
14 And I saw till the man, who wrote down the names
of the shepherds and lifted up into the presence of the
Aḏon of the sheep.
15 And I saw till the Aḏon of the sheep came to them
in wrath, and all who saw Him fled, and they all fell from
before His face.
16 All the eagles and vultures and ravens and hawks
were gathered together, and there came with them all
the sheep of the field, even all came together, and
helped each other to break the horn of the ram.
17 And I saw the man, who wrote the Book according
to the Command of HWHY, till he opened the Book
concerning the destruction which those twelve last
shepherds had wrought, and showed that they had
destroyed much more than their predecessors, before
the Aḏon of the sheep.
18 And I saw till the Aḏon of the sheep came to them
and took in His hand the staff of His wrath, and smote
the earth, and the earth broke apart, and all the beasts
and all the birds of the shamayim fell from among the
sheep, and were swallowed up in the earth and it
covered them.
19 And I saw till a great sword was given to the sheep,
and the sheep proceeded against all the beasts of the
field to slay them, and all the beasts and the birds of
the shamayim fled before their face.
20 And I saw till a throne was erected in the pleasant
land, and the Aḏon of the sheep sat Himself upon it,
and the other took the sealed Books and opened those
Books before the Aḏon of the sheep.
21 And the Aḏon called those men, the seven first
white ones, and commanded that they should bring
before Him, beginning with the first star which led the
way, all the stars whose members were like those of
horses, and they brought them all before Him.
22 And He said to the man who wrote before Him,
being one of those seven white ones, and said to him,
“Take those seventy shepherds to whom I delivered
215

ENOCH

the sheep, and who, taking them on their own authority
slew more than I commanded them.”
23 And see, they were all bound, I saw, and they all
stood before Him.
24 And the judgment was held first over the stars, and
they were judged and found guilty, and went to the
place of condemnation, and they were cast into an
abyss, full of fire and flaming, and full of pillars of fire.
25 And those seventy shepherds were judged and
found guilty, and they were cast into the fiery abyss.
26 And I saw at that time how, like an abyss was
opened in the midst of the earth, full of fire, and they
brought those blinded sheep, and they were all judged
and found guilty and cast into this fiery abyss, and they
burned - now this abyss was to the right of the house.
27 And I saw the sheep burning and their bones
burning.
28 And I stood up to see till they folded up the old
house, and carried off all the pillars, and all the beams
and ornaments of the house that were at the same time
folded up with it, and they carried it off and laid it in a
place in the south of the land.
29 And I saw till the Aḏon of the sheep brought a new
house greater and higher than that first, and put it up
in the place of the first which had been folded up. All
its pillars were new, and its ornaments were new and
larger than those of the first - the old one which He had
taken away - and all the sheep were within it.
30 And I saw all the sheep which had been left, and all
the beasts on the earth, and all the birds of the
shamayim, falling down and doing obeisance to those
sheep and making petition to, and obeying them in
every matter.
31 And after this, those three who were clothed in
white and had seized me by my hand who had taken
me up before, and the hand of the ram also seizing
hold of me, they took me up and put me down in the
midst of the sheep before the judgment took place.
32 And the sheep were all white, and their wool was
abundant and clean.
216

ḤANOḴ

And all that had been destroyed and dispersed, and
all the beasts of the field, and all the birds of the
shamayim, assembled in the house, and the Aḏon of
the sheep rejoiced with great joy because they were all
good and had returned to His house.
34 And I saw till they laid down the sword, which had
been given to the sheep, and they brought it back into
the house, and it was sealed before the presence of
the Aḏon, and all the sheep were invited into the
house, but it did not hold them.
35 And the eyes of them all were opened, and they
saw the good, and there was not one among them that
did not see.
36 And I saw that the house was large and broad and
very full.
37 And I saw that a white bull was born, with large
horns and all the beasts of the field and all the birds of
the shamayim feared him and made petition to him all
the time.
38 And I saw till all their generations were
transformed, and they all became white bulls; and the
first among them became a lamb, and that lamb
became a great animal and had great black horns on
its head; and the Aḏon of the sheep rejoiced over it and
over all the oxen.
39 And I slept in their midst, and I awoke and saw all
matters.
40 This is the vision which I saw while I slept, and I
awoke and baraḵ HWHY of righteousness and gave Him
esteem.
41 Then I wept with a great weeping and my tears did
not cease till I could no longer endure. When I saw,
they flowed on account of what I had seen; for all
matters shall come and be fulfilled, and all the deeds
of men in their order were shown to me.
42 On that night I remembered the first vision, and
because of it I wept and was troubled because I had
seen that vision.
33

EPISTLE OF HANOK
217

ENOCH

91 And now, my son Methushelaḥ, call to me all your
brothers and gather together to me all the sons of your
mother; for the Word calls me, and the Ruaḥ is poured
out upon me, that I may show you all matters that shall
befall you forever.
2 And therefore Methushelaḥ went and summoned to
him all his brothers and assembled his relatives.
3 And he spoke to all the children of righteousness
and said, “Hear, you sons of Ḥanoḵ, all the words of
your father, and hear the voice of my mouth; for I urge
you and say unto you, beloved,
4 ‘Love uprightness and walk in it and do not draw
near to uprightness with a double heart, and do not
associate with those of a double heart, but walk in
righteousness my sons. And it shall guide you on good
paths, and righteousness shall be your companion.’
5 “For I know that violence must increase on the
earth, and a great chastisement be executed on the
earth, and all unrighteousness come to an end.
Therefore, it shall be cut off from its roots, and its whole
structure be destroyed.
6 “And unrighteousness shall again be consummated
on the earth, and all the deeds of unrighteousness and
of violence and transgression shall prevail in a double
amount.
7 “And
when sin and unrighteousness and
blasphemy and violence in all kinds of deeds increase,
and apostasy and transgression and uncleanness
increase, a great chastisement shall come from the
shamayim upon all these, and the Qodesh Aḏon will
come forth with wrath and chastisement to execute
judgment on earth.
8 “In those days, violence shall be cut off from its
roots, and the roots of unrighteousness together with
deceit, and they shall be destroyed from under the
shamayim.
9 “And all the idols of the nations shall be abandoned,
and the temples burned with fire, and they shall
remove them from the whole earth, and they shall be
218

ḤANOḴ

cast into the judgment of fire, and shall perish in wrath
and in grievous judgment forever.
10 “And the righteous shall arise from their sleep, and
wisdom shall arise and be given unto them.
11 “And after that, the roots of unrighteousness shall
be cut off, and the sinners shall be destroyed by the
sword, and the blasphemers destroyed in every place.
12 “And those who plan violence, and those who
commit blasphemy shall perish by the sword.
13 “And now I tell you, my sons, and show you the
paths of righteousness and the paths of violence.
Therefore, I will show them to you again that you may
know what will come to pass.
14 “And now, hear me, my sons, and walk in the paths
of righteousness, and do not walk in the paths of
violence; for all who walk in the paths of
unrighteousness shall perish forever.”

92 The book written by Ḥanoḵ. Ḥanoḵ indeed wrote
this complete instruction of wisdom; praised of all men
and a judge of all the earth for all my children who shall
dwell on the earth. And for the generations to come
who shall observe uprightness and peace.
2 Let not your spirit be troubled on account of the
times, for the Qadosh and Great One has appointed
days for all matters.
3 And the righteous one shall arise from sleep; shall
arise and walk in the paths of righteousness, and all
his way and conversation shall be in eternal goodness
and favour.
4 He will show favour to the righteous and give him
eternal uprightness, and He will give him power so that
he shall be in goodness and righteousness, and he
shall walk in eternal light.
5 And sin shall perish in darkness forever, and shall
be seen no more from that day to everlasting.

93 And after that Ḥanoḵ both gave and began to
recount from the books. And Ḥanoḵ said, “Concerning
the children of righteousness and concerning the elect
of the world, and concerning the plant of uprightness,
219

ENOCH

I will speak these matters, therefore I Ḥanoḵ will
declare unto you, my sons,
2 according to that which appeared to me in the
vision of the shamayim, and which I have known
through the word of the qodesh messengers, and have
learned from the tablets of the shamayim.”
3 And Ḥanoḵ began to recount from the books and
said, “I was born the seventh in the first week, while
judgment and righteousness still endured.
4 “And after me there shall arise in the second week
great wickedness, and deceit shall have sprung up;
and in it there shall be the first end. And in it a man
shall be saved; and after it is ended, unrighteousness
shall grow up, and a Law shall be made for the sinners.
5 “And after that in the third week, at its close, a man
shall be elected as the plant of righteous judgment,
and his posterity shall become the plant of
righteousness for everlasting.
6 “And after that in the fourth week, at its close,
visions of the qodesh and righteous shall be seen, and
a Law for all generations and an enclosure shall be
made for them.
7 “And after that in the fifth week, at its close, the
house of esteem and dominion shall be built forever.
8 “And after that in the sixth week, all who live in it
shall be blinded, and the hearts of all of them shall
wickedly forsake wisdom. And in it a man shall ascend;
and at its close the house of dominion shall be burnt
with fire, and the whole race of the chosen root shall
be dispersed.
9 “And after that in the seventh week, shall an
apostate generation arise, and its deeds shall be
many, and all its deeds shall be apostate.
10 “And at its close shall be elected the elect righteous
of the eternal plant of righteousness, to receive
sevenfold instruction concerning all His creation.
11 “For who is there of all the children of men that is
able to hear the voice of the Qadosh One without being
troubled? And who can think His thoughts, and who is
220

ḤANOḴ

there that can look upon all the works of the
shamayim?
12 And how should there be one who could look upon
the shamayim, and who is there that could understand
the matters of the shamayim and see a being or a spirit
and could tell of it, or ascend and see all their ends and
think them, or do like them?
13 And who is there of all men that could know what is
the breadth and the length of the earth, and to whom
has been shown the measure of all of them?
14 Or is there anyone who could discern the length of
the shamayim and how great is its height, and upon
what it is founded, and how great is the number of the
stars, and where all the lights rest?”

94 And now I say unto you, my sons, “love
righteousness and walk in it; for the paths of
righteousness are worth our acceptance, but the paths
of unrighteousness shall suddenly be destroyed and
vanish.
2 “And to certain men of a generation shall the paths
of violence and of death be revealed, and they shall
hold themselves far from them, and shall not follow
them.”
3 And now I say unto you the righteous, “Do not walk
in the paths of wickedness, nor in the paths of death,
and do not draw near to them, lest you be destroyed.
4 “But seek and choose for yourselves righteousness
and an elect life, and walk in the paths of peace, and
you shall live and prosper.
5 “And hold fast my words in the thoughts of your
hearts, and do not allow them to be erased from your
hearts; for I know that sinners will tempt men to evilly
entreat wisdom, so that no place may be found for her,
and no manner of temptation may diminish.”
6 Woe to those who build unrighteousness and
oppression, and lay deceit as a foundation; for they
shall be suddenly overthrown, and they shall have no
peace.
7 Woe to those who build their houses with sin; for
from all their foundations they shall be overthrown, and
221

ENOCH

by the sword they shall fall. And those who acquire
gold and silver in judgment shall suddenly perish.
8 Woe to you, you rich, for you have trusted in your
riches, and by your riches you shall stray, because you
have not remembered the Most High in the days of
your riches.
9 You
have
committed
blasphemy
and
unrighteousness, and have become ready for the day
of slaughter, and the day of darkness and the Day of
the great judgment.
10 Thus I speak and declare unto you, “He who has
created you will overthrow you, and for your fall there
shall be no compassion, and your Creator will rejoice
at your destruction.
11 “And your righteous ones in those days shall be a
rebuke to the sinners and the wicked.”

95 Oh that my eyes were a cloud of waters that I
might weep over you, and pour down my tears as a
cloud of waters: so that I might rest from my trouble of
heart!
2 Who has permitted you to practice reproaches and
wickedness? And so judgment shall overtake you,
sinners.
3 Do not fear the sinners, you righteous; for again
HWHY will deliver them into your hands, that you may
execute judgment upon them according to your
desires.
4 Woe to you who speak out curses which cannot be
reversed: healing shall therefore be far from you
because of your sins.
5 Woe to you who reward your neighbour with evil;
for you shall be rewarded according to your works.
6 Woe to you, lying witnesses, and to those who
weigh out injustice, for suddenly you shall perish.
7 Woe to you, sinners, for you persecute the
righteous; for you shall be delivered up and persecuted
because of injustice, and its yoke shall be heavy upon
you.

222

ḤANOḴ

96 Be expectant, you righteous; for suddenly the
sinners shall perish before you, and you shall have
authority over them according to your desires.
2 And in the day of the tribulation of the sinners, your
children shall arise and rise as eagles, and higher than
the vultures will be your nest, and you shall ascend and
enter the crevices of the earth, and the clefts of the
rock forever as rabbits before the unrighteous, and the
demons shall sigh because of you, and weep.
3 Therefore fear not, you that have suffered; for
healing shall be your portion, and a bright light shall
enlighten you, and the voice of rest you shall hear from
the shamayim.
4 Woe unto you, you sinners, for your riches make
you appear like the righteous, but your hearts convict
you of being sinners, and this fact shall be a witness
against you for a remembrance of evil deeds.
5 Woe to you who devour the finest of the wheat, and
drink wine in large bowls, and tread the lowly under
foot with your might.
6 Woe to you who drink water from every fountain, for
suddenly you shall be consumed and wither away,
because you have forsaken the fountain of ḥai.
7 Woe to you who work unrighteousness and deceit
and blasphemy: it shall be a remembrance against you
for evil.
8 Woe to you, you mighty, who with might oppress
the righteous; for the day of your destruction is coming.
In those days many and good days shall come to the
righteous in the day of your judgment.

97 Believe, you righteous, that the sinners will
become a shame and perish in the day of
unrighteousness.
2 Be it known unto you that the Most High is mindful
of your destruction, and the messengers of the
shamayim rejoice over your destruction.
3 What will you do, you sinners, and where will you
flee on that day of judgment, when you hear the voice
of the prayer of the righteous?
223

ENOCH

Therefore, you shall be like them against whom this
word shall be a witness, “You have been companions
of sinners.”
5 And in those days the prayer of the righteous shall
reach unto HWHY, and for you the days of your
judgment shall come.
6 And all the words of your unrighteousness shall be
read out before the Great Qadosh One, and your faces
shall be covered with shame, and He will reject every
work which is grounded on unrighteousness.
7 Woe to you, you sinners, who live on the mid ocean
and on the dry land, whose remembrance is evil
against you.
8 Woe to you who acquire silver and gold in
unrighteousness and say, “We have become rich with
riches and have possessions; and have acquired all
we have desired.
9 “And now let us do what we schemed: for we have
gathered silver, and the farmers are many in our
houses, and our granaries are full as with water.”
10 Therefore like water your lies shall flow away; for
your riches shall not endure, but speedily depart from
you; for you have acquired it all in unrighteousness,
and you shall be given over to a great curse.
4

98 And now I swear unto you, to the wise and to the
foolish, for you shall have many experiences on the
earth.
2 For you men shall put on more adornments than a
woman, and more coloured garments than a maiden:
in royalty and in splendour and in power, and in silver
and in gold and in purple, and in splendour and in food
they shall be poured out as water.
3 Therefore they shall be lacking in instruction and
wisdom, and they shall perish thereby together with
their possessions; and with all their esteem and their
splendour, and in shame and in slaughter and in great
destitution, their spirits shall be cast into the furnace of
fire.
4 I have sworn unto you, you sinners, as a mountain
has not become a slave, and a hill does not become
224

ḤANOḴ

the handmaid of a woman, even so sin has not been
sent upon the earth, but man of himself has created it,
and under a great curse they who commit it shall fall.
5 And barrenness has not been given to the woman,
but on account of the deeds of her own hands she dies
without children.
6 I have sworn unto you, you sinners, by the Qadosh
Great One, that all your evil deeds are revealed in the
shamayim, and that none of your deeds of oppression
are covered and hidden.
7 And do not think in your spirit nor say in your heart
that you do not know, and that you do not see that
every sin is recorded in the shamayim every day in the
presence of the Most High.
8 From hereon you know that all your oppression with
which you oppress is written down every day till the
day of your judgment.
9 Woe to you, you fools, for through your folly you
shall perish, and you transgress against the wise, and
so goodness shall not be your portion!
10 And now, know that you are prepared for the day of
destruction: therefore do not expect to live, you
sinners, but you shall depart and die; for you know no
ransom; for you are prepared for the Day of the great
judgment, for the day of tribulation and great shame for
your spirits.
11 Woe to you, you obstinate of heart, who work
wickedness and eat blood! From where have you good
to eat and to drink and be filled? From all the good
which HWHY the Most High has placed in abundance
on the earth; therefore you shall have no peace.
12 Woe
to you who love the deeds of
unrighteousness! Why do you wait for good to happen
unto yourselves? Know that you shall be delivered into
the hands of the righteous, and they shall cut off your
necks and slay you, and have no compassion upon
you.
13 Woe to you who rejoice in the tribulation of the
righteous; for no grave shall be dug for you!
225

ENOCH

Woe to you who bring to naught the words of the
righteous; for you shall have no expectancy of ḥai!
15 Woe to you who write down lying and wicked
words; for they write down their lies that men may hear
them and act wickedly towards neighbour! Therefore
they shall have no peace but die a sudden death.”
14

99 Woe to you who work wickedness, and exult in
lying and exalt them! You shall perish, and no baruḵ
ḥai shall be yours.
2 Woe to them who pervert the Words of uprightness,
and transgress the eternal Law, and transform
themselves into what they were not - into sinners! They
shall be trodden under foot upon the earth.
3 In those days prepare, you righteous, to raise your
prayers as a remembrance, and place them as a
witness before the messengers, that they may place
the sin of the sinners for a remembrance before the
Most High.
4 In those days the nations shall be stirred up, and
the clans of the nations shall rise on the day of
destruction.
5 And in those days the destitute shall go forth and
carry off their children, and they shall abandon them,
so that their children shall perish through them. Also
they shall abandon their nursing infants, and not return
to them, and shall have no pity on their beloved ones.
6 And again I swear to you, you sinners, that sin is
prepared for a day of unceasing bloodshed.
7 And they who worship stones, and graven images
of gold and silver and wood and clay, and those who
worship impure spirits and demons, and all kinds of
idols not according to knowledge, shall get no manner
of help from them.
8 And they shall become wicked because of the
wickedness of their hearts, and their eyes shall be
blinded through the fear of their hearts and through
visions in their dreams.
9 Through these they shall become wicked and
fearful; for they shall have wrought all their work in a
226

ḤANOḴ

lie, and shall have worshipped a stone. Therefore in an
instant shall they perish.
10 But in those days baruḵ are all they who accept the
Words of wisdom, and understand them, and observe
the Ways of the Most High, and walk in the path of His
righteousness, and do not become wicked with the
unrighteous; for they shall be saved.
11 Woe to you who spread evil to your neighbors; for
you shall be slain in Gĕy-Hinnom.
12 Woe to you who make deceitful and false
measures, and who cause bitterness on the earth! For
thereby they shall be utterly consumed.
13 Woe to you who build your houses through the
grievous toil of others, and all their building materials
are the bricks and stones of sin! I tell you: you shall
have no peace.
14 Woe to them who reject the measure and eternal
heritage of their fathers and whose beings follow after
idols! For they shall have no rest.
15 Woe to them who work unrighteousness and help
oppression, and slay their neighbors until the Day of
the great judgment!
16 For He shall cast down your esteem, and bring
affliction on your hearts, and shall arouse His fierce
indignation and destroy you all with the sword; and all
the qodesh and righteous shall remember your sins.

100 And in those days, in one place, the fathers
together with their sons shall be smitten, and brothers
one with another shall fall in death till the streams flow
with their blood.
2 For a man shall not withhold his hand from slaying
his sons and his son’s sons, and the sinner shall not
withhold his hand from his honoured brother. From
dawn till sundown they shall slay one another.
3 And the horse shall walk up to the breast in the
blood of sinners, and the chariot shall be submerged
to its height.
4 In those days the messengers shall descend into
the secret places and gather together into one place
all those who brought down sin and the Most High will
227

ENOCH

arise on that Day of judgment to execute great
judgment amongst sinners.
5 And over all the righteous and qodesh He will
appoint guardians from amongst the qodesh
messengers to guard them as the apple of an eye, until
He makes an end of all wickedness and all sin, and
though the righteous sleep a long sleep, they have
naught to fear.
6 And the children of the earth shall see the wise in
security, and shall understand all the words of this
book, and recognise that their riches shall not be able
to save them in the overthrow of their sins.
7 Woe to you, sinners, on the day of strong anguish,
you who afflict the righteous and burn them with fire!
You shall be rewarded according to your works.
8 Woe to you, you obstinate of heart, who watch in
order to devise wickedness! Therefore fear shall come
upon you and there shall be none to help you.
9 Woe to you, you sinners, on account of the words
of your mouth, and on account of the deeds of your
hands which your wickedness has wrought! In blazing
flames burning worse than fire you shall burn.
10 And now, know that from the messengers He will
inquire as to your deeds in the shamayim, from the sun
and from the moon and from the stars in reference to
your sins because upon the earth you execute
judgment on the righteous.
11 And He will summon to witness against you every
cloud and mist and dew and rain; for they shall all be
withheld because of you from descending upon you,
and they shall be mindful of your sins.
12 And now give presents to the rain that it be not
withheld from descending upon you, nor even the dew,
when it has received gold and silver from you that it
may descend.
13 When the frost and snow with their chilliness, and
all the snow-storms with all their plagues fall upon you,
in those days you shall not be able to stand before
them.
228

ḤANOḴ

101 Observe the shamayim, you children of the
shamayim, and every work of the Most High, and
revere Him and work no evil in His presence.
2 If He closes the windows of the shamayim, and
withholds the rain and the dew from descending on the
earth on your account, what will you do then?
3 And if He sends His anger upon you because of
your deeds, you cannot petition Him; for you spoke
proud and insolent words against His righteousness:
therefore you shall have no peace.
4 And do you not see the sailors of the ships, how
their ships are tossed to and fro by the waves, and are
shaken by the winds, and are in much trouble?
5 And therefore they fear because all their pleasant
possessions go upon the sea with them, and they have
evil forebodings of heart that the sea will swallow them
and they will perish therein.
6 Are not the entire sea and all its waters, and all its
movements, the work of the Most High, and has He not
appointed limits to its doings, and confined it
throughout by the sand?
7 And at His rebuke it is afraid and dries up, and all
its fish die and all that is in it; but you sinners that are
on the earth do not revere Him.
8 Has He not made the shamayim and the earth, and
all that is in them; who has given understanding and
wisdom to all that moves on the earth and in the sea?
9 Do not the sailors of the ships revere the sea? Yet
sinners do not revere the Most High.

102 In those days when He has brought a grievous
fire upon you, where will you flee, and where will you
find deliverance? And when He launches forth His
Word against you, will you not be frightened and
revere?
2 And all the lights shall be frightened with great fear,
and all the earth shall be frightened and tremble and
be alarmed.
3 And all the messengers shall execute their
commands and shall seek to hide themselves from the
229

ENOCH

presence of the Great Esteem, and the children of
earth shall tremble and quake; and you sinners shall
be cursed forever, and you shall have no peace.
4 Fear not, you beings of the righteous, and have
expectancy you that have died in righteousness.
5 And do not grieve if your being has descended into
the grave in grief, and that in your life your body did not
fare according to your goodness. But wait for the Day
of the judgment of sinners and for the day of cursing
and chastisement.
6 And yet when you die, the sinners speak over you,
“As we die, so the righteous die, and what benefit do
they reap for their deeds?
7 “See, even as we, so they die in grief and darkness,
and what have they more than we? From hereon we
are equal.
8 “And what will they receive and what will they see
forever? See, they too have died, and hereon, forever
they shall see no light.”
9 I tell you, you sinners, you are content to eat and
drink, and rob and sin, and strip men naked, and
acquire wealth and see good days.
10 Have you seen the righteous how their end comes
to pass, that no manner of violence is found in them till
their death?
11 Nevertheless they perished and became as though
they had not been, and their spirits descended into the
grave in tribulation.

103 Now, therefore, I swear to you, the righteous,
by the esteem of the Great and Honoured and Ĕl
Shaddai in dominion, and by His greatness I swear to
you.
2 I know a mystery and have read the tablets of the
shamayim, and have seen the qodesh Books, and
have found the writing in them, and written regarding
them:
3 That all goodness and joy and esteem are prepared
for them, and written down for the spirits of those who
have died in righteousness, and that much good shall
230

ḤANOḴ

be given to you in reward for your labours, and that
your lot is abundantly beyond the lot of the living.
4 And the spirits of you who have died in
righteousness shall live and rejoice, and their spirits
shall not perish, nor their remembrance from before
the face of the Great One unto all the generations of
the world: therefore no longer fear their revilings.
5 Woe to you, you sinners, when you have died, if
you die in the wealth of your sins! And those who are
like you say regarding you, “Baruḵ are the sinners.
They have seen all their days.
6 “And how they have died in prosperity and in
wealth, and have not seen tribulation or murder in their
life; and they have died in honour, and judgment has
not been executed on them during their life.”
7 Know that their beings will be made to descend into
the grave and they shall be wretched in their great
tribulation.
8 And into darkness and chains and a burning flame
where there is grievous judgment your spirits shall
enter; and the great judgment shall be for all the
generations of the world. Woe to you, for you shall
have no peace!
9 Do not say in regard to the righteous and good who
are in life, “In our troubled days we have toiled
labouriously and experienced every trouble, and met
with much evil and been consumed, and have become
few and our spirit small.
10 “And we have been destroyed and have not found
any to help us even with a word. We have been
tortured and destroyed, and not expected to see life
from day to day.
11 “We hoped to be the head and have become the
tail. We have toiled labouriously and had no
satisfaction in our toil; and we have become the food
of the sinners and the unrighteous, and they have laid
their yoke heavily upon us.
12 “They have had dominion over us and hated us and
smote us; and to those that hated us we have bowed
our necks but they did not pity us.
231

ENOCH

“We desired to get away from them that we might
escape and be at rest, but found no place where we
should flee and be safe from them.
14 “And we complained to the rulers in our tribulation,
and cried out against those who devoured us, but they
did not attend to our cries and would not hear our
voice.
15 “And they helped those who robbed us and
devoured us and those who made us few; and they
concealed their oppression, and they did not remove
from us the yoke of those that devoured us and
dispersed us and murdered us, and they concealed
their murder, and did not remember that they had lifted
up their hands against us.”
13

104 I swear unto you that in the shamayim the
messengers remember you for good before the
esteem of the Great One, and your names are written
before the esteem of the Great One.
2 Have expectancy; for beforehand you were put to
shame through ill and affliction; but now you shall shine
as the lights of the shamayim, you shall shine and you
shall be seen, and the doors of the shamayim shall be
opened to you.
3 And in your cry, cry for judgment, and it shall
appear to you; for all your tribulation shall be visited on
the rulers, and on all who helped those who plundered
you.
4 Have expectancy, and do not cast away your
expectancies, for you shall have great joy as the
messengers of the shamayim.
5 What shall you be obliged to do? You shall not have
to hide on the day of the great judgment and you shall
not be found as sinners, and the eternal judgment shall
be far from you for all the generations of the world.
6 And now, do not fear you righteous, when you see
the sinners growing strong and prospering in their
ways. Do not be companions with them, but keep far
from their violence; for you shall become companions
of the hosts of the shamayim.
232

ḤANOḴ

And, although you sinners say, “All our sins shall
not be searched out and be written down,”
nevertheless they shall write down all your sins every
day.
8 And now I show unto you that light and darkness,
day and night, see all your sins.
9 Do not be wicked in your hearts, and do not lie and
do not alter the Words of uprightness, nor charge with
lying the Words of the Qodesh Great One, nor take
account of your idols; for all your lying and all your
wickedness do not come forth in righteousness but in
great sin.
10 And now I know this mystery, that sinners will
change and pervert the Words of righteousness in
many ways, and will speak wicked words, and lie, and
practice great deceits, and write books concerning
their words.
11 But when they write down truthfully all my words in
their languages, and do not change or diminish ought
from my words but write them all down truthfully - all
that I first witnessed concerning them.
12 Then, I know another mystery, that books will be
given to the righteous and the wise to become a cause
of joy and uprightness and much wisdom.
13 “And to them shall the books be given, and they
shall believe in them and rejoice over them, and then
all the righteous who have learned from them - all the
paths of uprightness - shall be recompensed.”
7

105 In those days HWHY spoke to summon and
witness to the children of earth concerning their
wisdom, “Show unto them; for you are their guides,
and a recompense over the whole earth.
2 For I and My Bĕn will be united with them forever in
the paths of uprightness in their lives; and you shall
have peace. Rejoice, you children of uprightness.
Amen.”
THE FRAGMENT OF
THE BOOK OF NOAḤ

233

ENOCH

106 And after some days my son Methushelaḥ took
a wife for his son Lemeḵ, and she became pregnant by
him and bore a son.
2 And his body was white as snow and red as the
blooming of a rose, and the hair of his head and his
long locks were white as wool, and his eyes, pleasant.
3 And when he opened his eyes, he lit up the whole
house like the sun, and the whole house was very
bright. And after that he rose in the hands of the
midwife, opened his mouth, and conversed with HWHY
of righteousness.
4 And his father Lemeḵ was afraid of him and fled,
and came to his father Methushelaḥ.
5 And he said to him, “I have begotten a strange son,
different from and unlike man, and resembling the
sons of the Eloah of the shamayim; and his nature is
different and he is not like us, and his eyes are as the
rays of the sun, and his face is magnificent.
6 “And it seems to me that he is not brought forth from
me but from the messengers, and I fear that in his days
a wonder may be wrought on the earth.
7 “And now, my father, I am here to petition you and
implore you that you may go to Ḥanoḵ, our father, and
learn from him the truth, for his dwelling-place is
amongst the messengers.”
8 And when Methushelaḥ heard the words of his son,
he came to me to the ends of the earth; for he had
heard that I was there, and he cried aloud, and I heard
his voice and I came to him. And I said to him, “See,
here I am, my son, why have you come to me?”
9 And he answered and said, “Because of a great
cause of anxiety I have come to you, and because of
a disturbing vision I have approached.
10 “And now, my father, hear me, “Unto Lemeḵ my son
there has been born a son, the like of whom there is
none, and his nature is not like man’s nature, and the
colour of his body is whiter than snow and redder than
the bloom of a rose, and the hair of his head is whiter
than white wool, and his eyes are like the rays of the
234

ḤANOḴ

sun, and he opened his eyes and after that lit up the
whole house.
11 “And he rose in the hands of the midwife, and
opened his mouth and baraḵ HWHY of the shamayim.
12 “And his father Lemeḵ became afraid and fled to
me, and did not believe that he was brought forth from
him, but that he was in the likeness of the messengers
of the shamayim; and see, I have come to you that you
may make known to me the truth.”
13 And I, Ḥanoḵ, answered and said to him, “HWHY will
do a new matter on the earth, and this I have already
seen in a vision, and make known to you that in the
generation of my father Yereḏ some of the
messengers of the shamayim transgressed the Word
of HWHY.
14 “And see, they commit sin and transgress the Law,
and have united themselves with women and commit
sin with them, and have married some of them, and
have brought forth children by them.
15 “And they shall produce on the earth giants, not
according to the spirit, but according to the flesh, and
there shall be a great punishment on the earth, and the
earth shall be cleansed from all impurity.
16 “Therefore, there shall come a great destruction
over the whole earth, and there shall be a flood and a
great destruction for one year.
17 “And this son who has been born unto you shall be
left on the earth, and his three children shall be saved
with him. When all mankind that are on the earth shall
die he and his sons shall be saved.
18 “And now make known to your son Lemeḵ that he
who has been born, is in truth his son, and call his
name Noaḥ for he shall be left to you, and he and his
sons shall be saved from the destruction which shall
come upon the earth on account of all the sin, and all
the unrighteousness which shall be consummated on
the earth in his days.
19 “And after that there shall be still more
unrighteousness than that which was first
consummated on the earth; for I know the mysteries of
235

ENOCH

the qodeshim; for He, HWHY, has showed me and
informed me, and I have read in the tablets of the
shamayim.

107 “And I saw written on them that generation upon
generation shall transgress, till a generation of
righteousness arises, and transgression is destroyed
and sin passes away from the earth, and all manner of
good comes upon it.
2 And now, my son, go and make known to your son
Lemeḵ that this son, which has been born, is in truth
his son, and that is no lie.”
3 And when Methushelaḥ had heard the words of his
father Ḥanoḵ - for he had shown to him all matters in
secret, he returned and showed to him and called the
name of that son Noaḥ; for he will comfort the earth
after all the destruction.

APPENDIX TO
THE BOOK OF ḤANOḴ

108 Another book which Ḥanoḵ wrote for his son
Methushelaḥ and for those who will come after him,
and keep the Law in the last days.
2 You who have done good shall wait for those days
till an end is made of those who work evil; and an end
of the might of the transgressors.
3 And wait indeed till sin has passed away, for their
names shall be blotted out of the Book of Ḥai and out
of the qodesh Books, and their seed shall be destroyed
forever, and their spirits shall be slain, and they shall
cry and make lamentation in a place that is a
wilderness of confusion, and in the fire they shall burn;
for there is no earth there.
4 And I saw there what looked like an invisible cloud;
for because of its depth I could not look over, and I saw
a flame of fire blazing brightly, and like shining
mountains circling and sweeping to and fro.
236

ḤANOḴ

And I asked one of the qodesh Messengers who
was with me and said to Him, “What is this shining?
For it is not the shamayim, but only the flame of a
blazing fire, and the voice of weeping and crying and
lamentation and strong pain.”
6 And He said to me, “This place which you see, here
are cast the spirits of sinners and blasphemers, and of
those who work wickedness, and of those who pervert
all matters that HWHY has spoken through the mouth of
the neḇi’im - the matters that shall be.
7 “For some of them are written and inscribed above
in the shamayim, in order that the messengers may
read them and know that which shall befall the sinners,
and the spirits of the humble, and of those who have
afflicted their bodies, and been recompensed by
Elohim; and of those who have been put to shame by
wicked men,
8 who love Elohim and loved neither gold nor silver
nor any of the pleasures which are in the world, but
gave over their bodies to torture.
9 “Who, since they came into being, did not long after
earthly food, but regarded all matters as a passing
breath, and lived accordingly, and HWHY tried them
much, and their spirits were found pure so that they
should baraḵ His Name.
10 “And all the bireḵoth destined for them I have
recounted in the Books. And He has assigned them
their recompense, because they have been found to
be such as loved the shamayim more than their life in
the world, and though they were trodden under foot of
wicked men, and experienced abuse and reviling from
them and were put to shame, yet they baraḵ Me.
11 “And now I will summon the spirits of the good who
belong to the generation of light, and I will transform
those who were born in darkness, who in the flesh
were not recompensed with such honour as their
trustworthiness deserved.
12 “And I will bring forth in shining light those who have
loved My Qodesh Name, and I will seat each on the
throne of his honour.
5

237

ENOCH

“And they shall be resplendent for generations
without number; for righteousness is the judgment of
Elohim; for to the trustworthy, He will give
trustworthiness in the dwelling of upright paths.
14 “And they shall see those who were born in
darkness, led into darkness, while the righteous shall
be resplendent.
15 “And the sinners shall cry aloud and see them
resplendent, and they indeed will go where days and
seasons are prescribed for them.”
13

238

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

THE WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM
‫ ספר אברהם‬mhRBA Rps

1 Behold my son, I have caused to come into thine
hands a fragment of the writings of Aḇraham in which
he hath left a record of his sojourn among men and of
the bireḵoth of HWHY unto him. This I have brought to
thee that thou might restore that which is lost that the
fullness of the record in its original purity might be
found again among the sons of Elohim.
2 Behold, these things are sacred, wherefore, send
them not forth unto the children of men but let them be
for the edification of the elect that your hearts may be
turned unto the Fathers and ye may draw close to them
and they to you.
3 Thus will the veil be withdrawn and ye will
commune with the General Assembly of the First-born
and shall even be ushered back unto my presence.
4 Go now and do this work which I have placed in
thine hands. Amĕn.

2 I, Aḇraham, was born the son of Teraḥ who was
Prime Minister to Nimroḏ who reigned in Ur of the
Kasdim.
2 Now this Nimroḏ was a wicked man and an idolater
and my father - Teraḥ - was led to follow after his
abominations.
3 Moreover, Nimroḏ was a man of mighty power for
he was Master Mahan and had in his hands the secrets
of the ancients as they had come down from Qayin
wherein he knew the words of power and the signs for
using them and he had the qodesh garments which
had been given unto Aḏam in the garden in which was
great power.
4 All of this power did Nimroḏ use to get gain after the
manner of the secret combination.
239

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

With his power he had set out to build a tower which
would reach to the shamayim, even the city of my
father Ḥanoḵ which had been taken up, that he,
Nimroḏ, might depose Elohim from His throne for
Elohim had taken up His abode among the people of
Ḥanoḵ.
6 But Elohim frustrated the plans of Nimroḏ by
confounding the language of him and his people that
they could no longer remember the sacred words and
they scattered forth over the face of the earth.
7 At that time Nimroḏ came and established the city
of Ur which is the City of Light, for he yet retained his
determination to build a city to rival the city of Elohim
that the light and power might center in him.
8 And through the ministration of Satan he did
receive again some of the words of power and did
reorganize the secret combination among his people;
but he had not power as at the first for the fullness of
the pure language was not restored to him according
to the decree of the Most High Elohim.
9 Now, in all the wickedness of Nimroḏ, my father
stood by his side for he was deceived by the subtle
cunning and power which Nimroḏ possessed.
5

3 My father Teraḥ was the son of Naḥor and Naḥor
was the son of Seruḡ and Seruḡ was the son of Re’u
and Re’u was the son of Peleḡ in whose days the earth
was divided.
2 Peleḡ was the son of Ĕḇer who was the son of
Shelaḥ who was the son of Arpaḵshaḏ the son of
Shĕm, who was Melchizedek, which by interpretation
is sovereign kohĕn, for he was a sovereign and a
kohĕn of the Most High Elohim.

4 Noaḥ was the son of Lemeḵ, the son of
Methushelaḥ, the son of Ḥanoḵ, who was taken up with
his city that they might minister unto those in the flesh
240

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

who sought a higher law than was available to them on
the earth.
2 Now the birth of Noaḥ was after this manner: While
his father Lemeḵ was journeying toward his home from
preaching the besorah among the sons of men, most
of whom had rejected his testimony, a messenger of
HWHY appeared unto him and saluted him, saying, Hail
Lemeḵ, thou favored one of Elohim, for according to
the promise of HWHY Elohim to thy father Ḥanoḵ, thou
hast been chosen to be father to him though whom the
seed of man will be preserved through the great flood
which Elohim will send upon the earth in judgment, for
all the sons of men have gone astray through the
corruptions of those messengers who fell from among
the shamayim and mingled their seed with the
daughters of men and begat sons of great strength and
mighty wickedness.
3 Yea, these have caused all flesh to corrupt their
way before HWHY; wherefore they shall be destroyed,
save thy son who shall be the seed of the future
generations.

5 The mother of Noaḥ was also the daughter of
Methushelaḥ for Lemeḵ and his wife had the same
father but different mothers.
2 And when Noaḥ was born, his body was full of light,
which thing caused great consternation to his father
and mother and his father’s wives and children and all
his house.
3 Moreover, the child stood upon his feet when he
had come forth from the womb and his tongue was
loosed and he did sing praises unto HWHY saying, I will
praise thee, O HWHY, for thou art the source of all
power, yea, the wellspring whence it floweth unto the
sons of Elohim, and thou art also abounding in wisdom
and great and mighty counsel unto thy servants.
241

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Nevertheless, though thou art a Elohim who is longsuffering in judgment, the sins of the children of men
have come up before thy face and thy fury hath waxed
strong and will be visited with judgments upon the
earth.
5 Thy mercies, O HWHY, are beyond number, but thou
art Elohim that visiteth wrongdoing upon the children
of men who the fullness of their iniquity hath come
upon them.
6 Therefore shall the earth be destroyed according to
the word of Elohim which cannot fail. For the waters of
the flood shall come upon the earth and all things shall
perish from before thy face, O HWHY.
7 Nevertheless, in thee do we put our trust for in
whatsoever thou doest, O HWHY, thou hast ever done
justly. Amĕn.
4

6 These things were a source of amazement and
concern unto Lemeḵ who thereupon went unto his
father, Methushelaḥ, and finding him in the Hĕyḵal he
said, My father, this day did my wife, thy daughter, bear
a man child.
2 And at his birth the room was full of light so that we
could not look upon him and when we could look upon
him, behold, the child’s hair was white and fire seemed
to come from his eyes and then he stood upon his feet
and sang a hymn of praise unto HWHY and lo, he
seemed to have the tongue of a messenger.
3 Tell me now the meaning of these things and how
can I raise such a son?

7 Hearing these words, Methushelaḥ, too, was
troubled and said, Fear not, my son, for although I
know not the meaning of these things, I will go unto my
father, Ḥanoḵ, for he is privy to the messengers and
he will be able to explain all things to us.
242

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Whereupon, Methushelaḥ traveled to the top of the
highest mountain whence he could speak unto his
father, Ḥanoḵ, and he said unto him, My father, my
daughter, who is the wife of my son Lemeḵ, hath this
day brought forth a man-child.
3 And at his birth the room was full of light so that
they could not look upon him and when they could look
upon him, behold the child’s hair was white and fire
seemed to come from his eyes and then he stood upon
his feet and sang a hymn of praise unto HWHY and lo,
he seemed to have the tongue of a messenger.
4 Thus saith my son Lemeḵ, who is greatly perplexed
as to the meaning of these things and how he can raise
such a son.
2

8 Hearing this report, Ḥanoḵ comforted his son
Methushelaḥ, saying, Fear not, my son, nor fret thyself
about this matter for did not a qodesh messenger visit
thy son Lemeḵ and tell him that this should be the seed
of the future generations? And was it not so?
2 For this cause have these things happened; but on
the eighth day when the child is circumcised, he shall
be covered and shall appear as other men except that
his hair shall remain white as a token that through him
HWHY will do a mighty work.
3 This word did Methushelaḥ return to his son Lemeḵ
and he was comforted.

9 And on the eighth day when the child was
circumcised, he was covered that he became as other
men except that his hair remained white and they
called his name Noaḥ, which by interpretation is
comfort, because, Lemeḵ said, My heart is comforted
to know that my seed shall be preserved through the
great flood.

10 And the child grew and waxed strong in wisdom
and mighty in the power of the kehunnah for he was
243

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

initiated into the Order of the Ancients in his childhood
and learned the rites and ordinances and the powers
of the kehunnah with the signs and tokens and key
words wherewith he could call upon the powers of the
shamayim to combat the forces of the adversary.
2 And when he was come of age, he took twelve
wives and begat many sons and daughters who grew
up in righteousness and served HWHY all their days and
some died and others were caught up unto the city of
Ḥanoḵ.
3 But in the next generation they corrupted
themselves, for the daughters of Noaḥ’s sons did go
forth and lay with the sons of men, which thing was an
abomination in the eyes of Elohim.
4 Wherefore, HWHY said unto Noaḥ, Behold, the
daughters of thy sons have sold themselves, for
behold, My anger is kindled against the sons of men,
for they will not hearken to My voice; wherefore, all
those who go in unto them will be destroyed with them.

11 And when Noaḥ was four hundred and fifty years
old, he begat a son and he called his name Yepheth.
2 Forty-two years later he begat another son of her
who was the mother of Yepheth, and he called his
name Shĕm.
3 Eight years later Noaḥ begat a son of his wife
Na’amah, who was of the seed of Qayin, and he called
his name Ḥam, for he said, Through him will the curse
be preserved in the land.

12 Now Noaḥ had taken a wife of the seed of Qayin,
and she was a righteous woman; nevertheless, the
curse remained with her seed according to the word of
Elohim.
2 And Noaḥ took her on this wise: For the word of
HWHY came unto Noaḥ, saying, Take unto thyself
Na’amah, the daughter of Lemeḵ, who dwelleth here
244

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

in the city of thy fathers, for she hath been faithful to
My Besorah, wherefore I shall preserve through her
the seed of Qayin through the flood.
3 This Lemeḵ who was the father of Na’amah was of
the seed of Qayin being the son of Methusa’ĕl, the son
of Meḥuya’ĕl, the son of Iraḏ, the son of Ḥanoḵ, the
son of Qayin.
4 Lemeḵ had married Aḏah and Tsillah, the
daughters of Kena’an, the son of Enosh, the son of
Shĕth, the son of Aḏam. Aḏah bare children unto
Lemeḵ, but Tsillah was barren until her old age when
HWHY opened her womb, and she conceived and bare
a son and a daughter.
5 Her son she named Tuḇal-Qayin, saying, After I
had withered away have I obtained him from the
Almighty Elohim.
6 Her daughter she named Na’amah, saying, After I
had withered away have I obtained pleasure and
delight.

13 While Na’amah was yet a child, great
consternation fell upon the seed of Qayin, for Iraḏ the
son of Ḥanoḵ, the son of Qayin, had become a
member of the secret combination and was privy to all
it secrets until one night when HWHY appeared to him
in a dream saying, Iraḏ, thou hast done evil instead of
good and hast followed after Satan rather than Elohim;
wherefore, I shall destroy thee and thine house when I
send in the floods upon the earth.
2 But Iraḏ was pricked in his heart and pled with
HWHY to show mercy and preserve his seed through
the great flood.
3 Seeing that his penitence was true, HWHY said to
him, Iraḏ, if thou wilt repent and reveal the evils of the
secret combination unto the sons of Shĕth, I will have
mercy upon thee and I will join thy seed unto the seed
245

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

of Shĕth that it may be preserved through the great
flood.
4 Wherefore, Iraḏ went forth and began to reveal the
secrets of the sons of Qayin unto the sons of Shĕth.
5 Lemeḵ, being Master Mahan at that time, found
Iraḏ sitting in his garden with Yoram, the young son of
Iraḏ, and slew him.
6 Thus Lemeḵ slew Iraḏ for the sake of the oath of
the secret combination and he slew Iraḏ’s son with
him.
7 But Tuḇal-Qayin, the son of Lemeḵ, had followed
him and viewed his evil deed which he had committed
and he revealed it unto his mother Tsillah and she unto
her sister Aḏah.
8 Wherefore, Aḏah and Tsillah confronted Lemeḵ
with his evil and cursed him in the name of HWHY for
having slain Iraḏ who had repented of his wickedness
from among the sons of men.
9 And Lemeḵ said unto his wives Aḏah and Tsillah,
Hear my voice, ye wives of Lemeḵ; hearken unto my
speech, for I have slain a man to my wounding and a
young man to my hurt.
10 If Qayin shall be avenged seven-fold, truly Lemeḵ
shall be seventy and seven-fold.
11 Lemeḵ’s wives, therefore, feared to confront him
further, but Lemeḵ repented not of his evil deeds and
finding his son Tuḇal-Qayin at prayer, he slew him for
having revealed his murders.
12 When Aḏah and Tsillah, the wives of Lemeḵ,
learned of this, they took their remaining sons and
daughters and went unto their father Kena’an’s city
and revealed the remainder of the secrets of this evil
combination among the sons of Aḏam.
13 Thus did Na’amah come to dwell among the sons
of Aḏam and she grew up before HWHY in
righteousness and was known for her tender care
toward the sick and the unfortunate.
246

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Nevertheless, she had not husband because she
was of the forbidden race.
14

14 When the word of HWHY came unto Noaḥ, saying,
Take unto thyself Na’amah, the daughter of Lemeḵ
who dwelleth here in the city of thy fathers, for she hath
been faithful to My Besorah, wherefore, I shall
preserve through her the seed of Qayin through the
flood, Noaḥ went unto his father, Methushelaḥ.
2 Methushelaḥ inquired of HWHY and returned this
word unto his son Lemeḵ: Verily, thus saith HWHY, My
handmaiden Na’amah have I given unto My son Noaḥ
that the seed of Qayin might be preserved through the
great flood which I will send upon the earth.
3 Wherefore, let not My son Noaḥ fear to take her to
wife, for in so doing he shall be baruḵ for through him
will come all nations.
4 Wherefore, say unto him, Noaḥ, My son, I have
looked upon the evils of the sons of men which have
come up before Me, for they have corrupted the whole
earth save only this city in which thou dwellest.
5 Therefore, I will send in the floods upon the earth
but thou and thy seed will I preserve through the flood,
for I will send My messengers to instruct thee in the
building of an ark wherein ye shall be saved.
6 Behold, I shall establish thy seed before Me forever
and I will spread them abroad over the earth as
numerous as the sand upon the seashore.
7 Thy seed shall not cease as long as the earth shall
stand but through thee and thy kehunnah which will be
preserved in thy seed shall all nations be baruḵ.

15 When Lemeḵ returned this word to his son, Noaḥ
rejoiced and praised HWHY saying, I give thanks unto
thee, O HWHY, for thou hast been unto me a strong wall
against all that would seek my destruction.
247

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Yea, thou hast promised to shelter me from the
disasters which are coming upon the earth, that the
floods shall not come in upon me to destroy my seed
from the earth.
3 Thou hast set my foot upon a rock that the sons of
men shall not prevail against me.
4 Yea, I will walk in the way of the Ancients; in the
paths which thou hast appointed will I spend my days
for thou art my Shield and my Deliverer and in Thee
will I trust all the days on my life. Amĕn.
2

16 Thus did Noaḥ take to wife Na’amah, the daughter
of Tsillah, the wife of Lemeḵ of the seed of Qayin, and
she bare him a son whom he named Ḥam, and thus
was the curse preserved in the land through the great
flood.
2 For when the patience of Elohim was ended in
which He did grant a space of time for repentance unto
the sons of men, the floods came in upon the earth and
destroyed all flesh from off the face of the earth save
eight souls only, for Noaḥ and his youngest wife Aḏah,
and his three sons Shĕm, Yepheth, and Ḥam and one
of each of their wives were preserved in the ark which
the messengers had instructed Noaḥ in building.
3 The remainder of the righteous had died or been
caught up into Ḥanoḵ’s city prior to the time of the
flood, and these eight were saved.

17 Now when the flood had abated and the ark had
come to rest upon the top of a mountain, Noaḥ and his
family descended the mountain and after offering
sacrifices unto HWHY and dedicating the land, they
began to till the ground and raise all manner of crops.
2 And when the grape harvest was come in, Noaḥ
made wine and drank of the new wine in his tent and
his heart was made glad and he rejoiced before HWHY
for the bounty which HWHY had given him.
248

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And it was upon the Feast of Shaḇuoth when Noaḥ
drank of the new wine before HWHY and lay down
naked in his tent to sleep.
4 When Ḥam, the son of Noaḥ, entered the tent he
saw his father sleeping naked upon his bed with the
sacred garments which had been given to Aḏam in the
garden of Ĕḏen laying nearby.
5 Ḥam knew that he and his posterity could not bear
the kehunnah because of the curse of Qayin which
was upon them and knowing there was great power in
the sacred garments, he stole them from his father
Noaḥ and hurried to his tents.
6 Rousing his family, Ḥam instructed them to strike
their tents and led them away to the plain of Shin’ar
where he dwelt and where Ḥam died.
7 Now Ḥam’s wife was named Zeptah and she was
also of the seed of Qayin and they had a daughter
named Zeptah.
8 This daughter, after the death of Ḥam, led a body
of his people westward until they reached a body of
water in the land of Zeptah, which is Mitsrayim, where
they settled and as the waters receded from off the
land, they spread out and built many cities and
temples.
3

18 Before the death of Ḥam, the sacred garments
were given secretly by him to his son Kush.
2 Kush also kept them hidden and in his old age gave
them unto his son Nimroḏ and when Nimroḏ was
twenty years of age, he put on the garments and he
derived great strength and power from them.
3 Moreover, Nimroḏ was instructed in all the secrets
of the evil combination by his father.
4 Wherefore, Nimroḏ became a mighty man among
the sons of men and established his reign and grew
stronger and stronger in wickedness after the order of
the secret combination which was from the beginning,
249

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

for Nimroḏ spread his dominion over all mankind save
those in the city of Shalom.

19 Shĕm ruled in the city of Shalom and he was
called Melchizedek, for he reigned as sovereign under
his father Noaḥ, and was a kohĕn of the Most High
Elohim.
2 After the departure of Ḥam from the presence of his
father Noaḥ, Shĕm and Yepheth dwelt together in
peace under the benign rule of Noaḥ; but in time,
conflict arose among them and Noaḥ led the seed of
Shĕm to a new land which HWHY showed him where
they built a city which they called Shalom, the City of
Peace.
3 Noaḥ invested his son Shĕm with authority to reign
as Prince of Peace, and Noaḥ devoted his days to
instructing his people after the Order of the Ancients.
4 And his people dwelt in righteousness and
worshipped HWHY their Elohim and served Him.
5 They established the order of the shamayim among
them and sought after the City of Ḥanoḵ and HWHY
came among them and ministered to them and those
who sought for the gain of this world went out from
among them, for they held all things common after the
order of Ḥanoḵ and no man was above his neighbor.

20 Among those who went forth from the city of
Shalom was Peleḡ, who traveled to the northwest and
established a city after the order of his father Noaḥ, for
Peleḡ was the son of Ĕḇer, the son of Shelaḥ, the son
of Arpaḵshaḏ, the son of Shĕm; and his people sought
after the order of the shamayim and obtained it for they
were caught up like the City of Ḥanoḵ.
2 But Seruḡ, the son of Re’u, the son of Peleḡ,
followed not after the way of his fathers, for he sought
after gain for himself; wherefore, he led those who
were of a like mind with himself out from the City of
250

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Peleḡ and they journeyed even unto the land of Shin’ar
and became confederate with Nimroḏ.
3 Under the direction of Nimroḏ, Seruḡ and his
companions entered into the secret combination and
became men of power and wealth in Nimroḏ’s reign.
4 In the land of Shin’ar, Seruḡ begat Naḥor, and
Naḥor begat Teraḥ, my father.
5 And Teraḥ became great in the eyes of Nimroḏ, and
Nimroḏ elevated him over all his people to stand at his
right hand and advise him on all matters.

21 Now, my father Teraḥ took many wives and begat
many children.
2 And when he was sixty-five years of age, he took to
wife Amthelo, the daughter of Korneḇo, the son of
Seruḡ, and she was a young woman of fifteen years.
3 And when Teraḥ was seventy years old, his wife
Amthelo conceived and bare him a son whom he
named Aḇram, which the interpretation is Exalted
Father, for he said, Nimroḏ hath raised me on high
over all his host, wherefore, my seed shall reign as
mighty ones forever.
4 Now this neḇuah he spake, not knowing that it was
of HWHY Elohim.

22 On the night that I was born, there were great
signs in the shamayim, and when Nimroḏ’s astrologers
saw them, they were astonished and they spake evil
of me to the sovereign, saying that surely I should
overthrow his reign.
2 Wherefore, they counseled the sovereign to
purchase me of my father that they might slay me and
thus frustrate the plans of Elohim.
3 Sovereign Nimroḏ thereupon sent for my father,
Teraḥ, and spake unto him of the words of the
astrologers and asked for his son in return for a great
sum of gold and silver.
251

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

But the Ruaḥ of HWHY wrought upon my father that
he was loathe to give me up to the sovereign.
5 On the night that I was born, a son was also born
unto one of my father’s concubines and this child my
father took unto the sovereign and the sovereign slew
him in my stead, for thus had Elohim ordained that I
might grow up to serve Him, the only wise and true
Elohim, and strive to establish His order in the earth all
my days.
4

23 Thus was my life saved by my father Teraḥ, and
he took me with my mother, Amthelo, and my nurse,
Eḏna, unto a cave hidden in the mountains some
distance from the city of Ur where he secreted us and
visited us each month at the New Moon.
2 For my father thus informed the sovereign that he
went each month on the New Moon to a spot sacred
to his family deity.
3 For in the reign of Nimroḏ, each man worshipped
mighty ones of his own make, mighty ones of wood
and stone, each after the imagination of his own heart.
4 Thus did I dwell in the cave with my mother,
Amthelo, and my nurse, Eḏna, and knew no other man
save my father, Teraḥ, and my elder brothers, Haran
and Naḥor, who accompanied my father on his visits.

24 When I was three years of age, HWHY visited me
in a dream of the night and he said unto me, Aḇram.
2 And I said, Here am I.
3 And He said unto me, Aḇram, I am the Elohim of
thy fathers Peleḡ and Shĕm and Noaḥ.
4 It is I who preserved thy life when the wicked
sovereign Nimroḏ would have destroyed thee, for I
softened the heart of thy father that he should hide
thee away.
5 This I did for I have a mighty work for thee to do in
establishing My order upon the earth, and, verily, I say
252

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

unto thee, in the end, through thee shall this wicked
Nimroḏ be destroyed from off the face of the earth.
6 Behold, thou shalt remain in this cave with thy
mother and thy nurse for yet seven years, and at the
end of that time thou shalt depart and I will send My
messenger to guide thee unto the city of thy father
Noaḥ where thou shalt be instructed in the way of ḥai.
7 And from that time forth HWHY instructed me often
in dreams of the night that my mind was opened to the
Ways of His Reign.

25 When I was ten years of age, I departed from the
cave by night while my mother and my nurse slept and
the messenger of Elohim met me and led me to the city
of Shalom where Noaḥ and his son Shĕm dwelt, and
no man knew where I was.
2 And I dwelt with Noaḥ and Shĕm for thirty-nine
years, being instructed in all the Ways of the Most High
Elohim.
3 And finding great happiness and peace and rest
therein, I sought for the bireḵoth of the Fathers and I
received, under the direction of Noaḥ and Shĕm, those
instructions whereby I might enter into the Order of the
Ancients and I became a rightful heir and kohĕn
ha’gadol, holding the right belonging to the Fathers.
For I was ushered into the Assembly of the First-born
and tasted the fruits of ḥai of the shamayim.

26 In my fiftieth year, Father Shĕm called me into his
presence and instructed me to return to the house of
my father, for there were many there now who were
seeking after light and truth for they had seen the
foolishness of worshipping mighty ones of wood and
stone, but they knew not where to find the true Elohim.
2 And Father Shĕm baraḵ me saying, Baruḵ art thou
Aḇram of the Most High Elohim for He hath looked
upon thee and found thine heart right before Him.
253

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

For this cause, the Most High shall visit thee and
thou shalt stand at the head and be the father of a
multitude, for many nations shall spring forth from thy
loins.
4 Behold, in thy father’s house dwelleth she to whom
the promises belong, for she is a princess in the house
of the Most High and shall reign as a queen over thy
posterity forever.
5 Seek after her and take her to wife for she will be
the mother of the promised seed.
6 The bireḵoth of the Elohim of Noaḥ attend thee, my
son, as thou journey on thy way for, from this time
forth, thou shalt be a wanderer in the earth until thy
seed shall come in to inherit this land by the power of
Elohim and the sword of His might.
7 Be faithful always, preach the truth in soberness
and be valiant in the cause of Elohim, and thou shalt
be baruḵ forevermore. Amĕn.
3

27 With this beraḵah resting upon me, I gathered
together my family, for I had taken seven wives in the
city of Shalom who had borne me fifty daughters.
2 And although I had no sons of mine own flesh, yet
I had adopted twelve sons of those who were faithful
to the Order of the Ancients and foremost among these
was Eli’ezer of Dammeseq who had come to the city
of Shalom seeking after the bireḵoth of the Fathers and
had remained as my son.
3 Him I appointed as steward over all I possessed for
this journey, for he stood as my heir for I loved him as
my son and brother.
4 But Father Shĕm said unto me, Eli’ezer is a good
and righteous man and he shall be greatly baruḵ in
time and in eternity, but he shall not be thine heir, for
another shall be thine heir who shall come forth from
the womb of thy wife whom thou shall take in the house
254

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

of thy father, for she is ordained to be thy queen of
queens and the mother of thine heir.
5 Wherefore, as I have said, I gathered together my
wives and my daughters and my adopted sons and
their wives and children and I said unto them, Hear my
words, beloved and hearken unto my speech, for I
have been sent with a mission unto the house of my
father in the land of Shin’ar to gather out the pure in
heart who are seeking after the true Elohim.
6 Gather together all your goods and make you tents
in which to dwell and saddle your donkeys to travel
upon for the Most High Elohim hath declared that we
shall be wanderers upon the earth from this time forth
until our seed shall come in to inherit this land by the
power of Elohim and the sword of His might.

28 Then commenced they their preparations and on
the appointed day, all was in readiness for our
departure.
2 And when father Shĕm came forth to baraḵ us,
father Noaḥ came also with him.
3 Now father Noaḥ dwelt in the Hĕyḵal in the heart of
the city of Shalom and seldom came out of the qodesh
place, for I had never seen him without its sacred
precincts.
4 But he came forth at this time and lifted up his
hands and baraḵ us in the name of the Most High
Elohim and we departed from his house.

29 We journeyed slowly for the sake of the women
and children and we journeyed not upon the Shabbath
day nor upon any of the qodesh days, for we thought
it better to worship HWHY our Elohim according to the
pattern of the shamayim than to proceed rapidly upon
our way, and we did know that HWHY prospered us in
our journey and protected us from the power of all our
enemies because we did faithfully serve Him and
255

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

worship before His throne according to the divine
pattern.
2 But at length we did arrive in the land of Shin’ar at
the city of Ur.
3 Now the size of this city was immense.
4 Its buildings were grand and beautiful with gardens
upon the rooftops and rivers of water running down
from level to level.
5 The streets were wide and smooth and the
inhabitants wealthy, dwelling in luxury.
6 Merchant caravans continually entered and left her
gates and the great of all nations came here to pay
homage to the mighty Sovereign Nimroḏ.
7 Nevertheless, the wealth of this great city was built
upon sin for the people served many mighty ones and
offered upon their altars men, women, and children
after the same manner as the Mitsrites.
8 And they had numerous slaves who were kept
down in bondage and poverty and were driven like
dumb beasts to provide the luxury in which their
masters dwelt.
9 Behold, the inhabitants of the city did delight in
whoredom and adultery and murder and all manner of
evil, whereby they might get gain.
10 And the anger of HWHY was kindled against them.
11 Nevertheless, He did let them go on that they might
be fully ripened in iniquity before the fullness of his
wrath should fall upon them.
12 All of these things did HWHY Elohim show unto me
in a dream on the night before we entered into the city
of Ur; and He said unto me, Aḇram, this city is vile and
corrupt, but in it are some few souls who have not
bowed the knee to their mighty ones and it is because
of their prayers that I have brought you here, that they
might be taught to worship the true Elohim after the
order of the shamayim and be led out from wickedness
and bondage.
256

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Wherefore, go unto thy father’s house, for thy
mother hath sorrowed for these many years, and I
have softened the heart of thy father toward these that
he shall make thee welcome and will protect these
against the anger of the sovereign such that thou shalt
be able to accomplish thy mission.
14 Behold, Aḇram, I am HWHY Elohim of thy fathers
Shĕm and Noaḥ, and of all the righteous fathers back
to Aḏam.
15 Wherefore, I will remain with thee and confirm upon
thee all the bireḵoth of the Fathers and thou shalt stand
at the head of a multitude. Amĕn.
13

30 In the morning before entering the city, I gathered
my family together consisting of my seven wives, my
fifty daughters, my twelve adopted sons, and three
hundred and fifty menservants whom Shĕm had sent
with their families, being in all six thousand three
hundred and seventy souls.
2 And I said unto them, Behold, this great city is
steeped in wickedness and sin for the secret
combinations which was from the beginning doth hold
her sway.
3 Wherefore, ye shall remain here under the direction
of Eli’ezer while I go alone into the city unto my father’s
house, for HWHY Elohim of Shĕm and of Noaḥ hath
promised me that He will protect me against the anger
of the sovereign such that I shall be able to accomplish
my mission.
4 I led my family in prayer before HWHY, kissed them
all and departing from them, entered into the city.

31 Being led by the Ruaḥ of HWHY, I found my father’s
house, and entering the gate, addressed the guard
who was standing there, saying, Behold, I am Aḇram,
son of Teraḥ, who hath spent these forty years in the
house of Shĕm.
257

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Take me now to my father.
3 The guard stood as one dumbfounded, knowing not
what to make of such a greeting, but at length called a
boy whom he dispatched to locate my father.
4 At length the lad returned, followed closely by my
father who was greatly surprised to see me, but who
recognized me as his son by the inspiration of the
Ruaḥ of HWHY.
5 By this time my arrival had caused great excitement
throughout my father’s household, which was very
large, and my mother, having heard of my coming,
hastened to the place where we were, weeping and
rejoicing for she had thought that I had wandered from
the cave and been slain by wild beasts in the
wilderness.
6 At length she led me away to her chamber to talk
with me and I told her of all that had transpired with me
since my leaving the cave of my being led by the
messenger to the city of Shalom, of being instructed
under the direction of Shĕm, of the increase of my
family and of the mercies of the true Elohim of the
shamayim exercised in my behalf.
7 I talked to her of the futility of worshipping mighty
ones of wood and stone made by men’s hands which
have no power in them and of the Order of the Ancients
which was preserved in the city of Shalom under Noaḥ
and Shĕm which I had been sent to proclaim in the
great city of Ur.
2

32 My mother heard all my words and rejoiced in
them for she was one whose heart had been turned
from the worship of dumb mighty ones to the worship
of the unknown Elohim.
2 Moreover, a small body of like believers numbering
about one hundred souls met secretly in my father’s
house to worship the unseen Elohim and pray for
further light concerning His Ways, among whom were
258

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

my brother Haran, with his son Lot and his daughters
Milkah and Sarai, and my brother Naḥor.
3 Now, when my mother had heard my words, she
bade me remain with her until evening when the
believers were to meet in her rooms.
4 Wherefore, that night I met with those who had
rejected the idolatry of their fathers and they were all
of the seed of those who had come out from the city of
Peleḡ.
5 Wherefore, I rehearsed unto them all the things I
had told unto my mother and they likewise rejoiced
therein.
6 But unto my father I spake not of these things at
this time for he was yet privy to Nimroḏ and was
steeped in his evil ways.

33 When I had dwelt in my father’s house for seven
days teaching the word of ḥai unto the believers, I went
unto my father as he sat in his outer court with his
servants attending to affairs of state.
2 And when he would hear me, I said unto him,
father, where is the Elohim who created the shamayim
and earth and all the hosts of them?
3 My father Teraḥ answered me and said, Behold,
my son, those mighty ones who created all things are
here with us in the house.
4 My father, show them to me I pray thee, I
exclaimed.
5 Whereupon my father Teraḥ led me unto a
chamber in the center of his house wherein were
twelve great mighty ones and numerous smaller ones.
6 And my father said unto me, Behold, my son, these
twelve great ones are rulers among the mighty ones
and this largest one is ruler above all and these others
were their assistants in creating all things.
7 And my father Teraḥ bowed down and worshipped
before his mighty ones and we departed from them.
259

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

34 When I departed from the presence of my father,
I went unto my mother and said unto her, My mother,
there is a great evil in this place for my father keepeth
a room full of mighty ones in the center of his house
which thing is contrary to the Commandments of
Elohim, wherefore the wrath of Elohim shall not depart
from this house until they are destroyed.
2 Let one of the young men be sent, therefore, to
fetch a kid of the goats and make thereof savory meat
for therewith shall I destroy these mighty ones in which
is neither life nor power.
3 My mother, therefore, summoned one of the young
men who was with her in the house and sent him to
fetch a kid of the goats whereof she made savory
meat.
4 When it was prepared, I took the savory meat from
her and went unto the room where my father kept his
mighty ones and I prayed there unto HWHY my Elohim
saying, O HWHY Elohim of Shĕm and of Noaḥ, look
upon me here in my weakness and strengthen mine
arm that I may destroy these false mighty ones and
give me the wisdom and strength to go through all that
follows and endure unto the end in service unto my
Elohim.
5 When I had said these words, the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell
upon me, even the Ruaḥ of Neḇuah, and I was led to
exclaim, Woe unto my father and this wicked and
corrupt people among whom he dwelleth, whose
hearts are all inclined to vanity, for they serve mighty
ones of wood and stone, the workmanship of their own
hands, which neither eat nor smell nor hear nor speak,
for there is no power in them and those who serve
them shall likewise be powerless to escape when the
wrath of Elohim shall overtake them in a day they think
not.
260

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

35 At this time the Ruaḥ of Elohim fell upon me in
mighty power to strengthen mine arm, and picking up
a hatchet which I had brought with me for that purpose,
I destroyed all my father’s mighty ones, both wood and
stone, by the power of Elohim which was in me, except
for the largest in whose hand I placed the hatchet.
2 Then going to my father I said unto him, My father,
I have seen a wondrous thing for my mother did make
me savory meat this day to offer before the mighty
ones who created all things.
3 And when I took the meat in unto them, they all
reached forth their hands to partake thereof.
4 When the one who is ruler above all saw their
words, he being angered left the room and returned
with a hatchet wherewith he destroyed the other
mighty ones, both wood and stone; and behold, he
standeth there even now with the hatchet in his hand
and the savory meat before him.

36 Hearing these words, my father hastened unto the
room of his mighty ones and found it even as I had
said, and his anger was kindled against me and he
said, This is an idle tale thou hast told me and false.
2 Why hast thou done this thing and lied unto me?
3 These mighty ones have no life in them to do these
things for they are wood and stone, and behold, I
myself have had them made by the craftsmen.
4 Why hast thou then come into my house to destroy
my mighty ones?

37 The Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon me at this time that I
should answer my father and I said unto him, How is it
thou serves these mighty ones of wood and stone, the
handiwork of the craftsmen in which is neither life nor
power to act?
2 Can these which cannot deliver themselves from
the hatchet deliver thee from the power of the enemy?
261

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Can they hear thy prayers when thou callest upon
them from out of the midst of thine afflictions?
4 Surely it is an evil thing that thou and thy people
should serve these false mighty ones, for HWHY, He is
the Elohim who created the shamayim and earth and
all that in them is, and He hath commanded all men to
worship Him only and to serve Him all their days.
5 Behold, your fathers in the days before the great
flood worshipped false mighty ones after the same evil
combination into which ye have entered, and because
of their perversions, they were destroyed.
6 Will ye also go on in their wickedness to bring down
the wrath of the Most High Elohim upon you that ye,
too, should be destroyed from under the shamayim?
7 Nay, my father, but repent of this evil and turn unto
HWHY thy Elohim and live.
8 So saying, I took the hatchet from the hands of the
remaining mighty ones and smote him with it until he
was destroyed.
3

38 My father, hearing my words and seeing what I
had done, increased in anger against me and
hastened from his house unto the sovereign, for he
had access to Sovereign Nimroḏ both day and night.
2 When he had entered the sovereigns’ presence, he
bowed down before him and he saith unto him, My
sovereign, fifty years ago a man-child was born unto
my wife Amthelo, and when he was ten years old, we
went on the new Moon to worship our ancestral mighty
one when my son wandered off into the desert and was
lost.
3 But he was found by the people of the desert and
raised by them and he hath recently found his way
back into my house and I have received him with honor
as my son.
4 Notwithstanding this, he did this day enter into the
room of my mighty ones and destroy them and hath
262

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

spoken against our mighty ones and against that
ancient order which hath been handed down from our
first father whereunto we are called.
5 Now, therefore, my sovereign, send for him that he
may be judged according to our law that this evil may
be put away from among us.
6 The sovereign thereupon sent three of his mighty
men who fetched me from my father’s house and
brought me before the sovereign.

39 When I appeared before Sovereign Nimroḏ, he
was seated upon his throne in all his glory, but it was
as darkness to me.
2 At his right hand sat my father Teraḥ and around
them sat the princes and noble ones of his realm.
3 And the sovereign said unto me, What is this thing
that thy father saith unto me, that thou didst this day
enter into the room of his mighty ones and destroy
them and that thou hast spoken against our mighty
ones and against that ancient order which hath been
handed down from our first father whereunto we are
called?

40 I answered the sovereign saying, Why dost thou
go on in wickedness to worship these dumb mighty
ones in which there is no power even to save
themselves?
2 Not only this, but thou hast led others to worship
them and to enter into that order which is most
abominable in the eyes of the Most High Elohim, for
your father from whence it cometh is the devil and it is
full of lies and blasphemies and all manner of evil that
men should lie and murder to get gain.
3 Why wilt thou not serve the Most High Elohim who
created all things in the shamayim and on earth, who
hath created these and holdeth the power to sustain
thy life or to destroy thee?
263

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

O foolish, ignorant, wicked sovereign, woe shall be
unto thee forever and ever for thou art the son of
Perdition for it is he who is thy father.
5 Thou hast corrupted the earth with thy sins and with
the sins of thy people who follow thee.
6 It was for entering into this wicked combination to
get gain that your ancestors were destroyed in the
flood when only eight souls were saved.
7 Wilt thou and thy people follow in their paths?
8 Then the wrath of the Most High Elohim will
descend upon thee to smite thee from before His face.
9 Now put away these evil ways and turn unto the
Most High Elohim and serve Him that there may be
hope for thee.
10 But behold, I see that thine heart is hardened in
iniquity that there is no repentance for thee, for the evil
one has sealed those who are his; wherefore all thy
ways shall come to naught and thou and thy people
shall be destroyed from off the face of the earth.
4

41 Then I lifted up my hands to the shamayim and
prayed saying, O HWHY Elohim, thou who sees all the
ways of the wicked and will bring every evil deed into
judgment, look upon these evil ones and destroy them
that the whole earth be not corrupted by them and
brought to destruction.

42 When the sovereign heard my words and the
prayer which I uttered, he ordered me to be cast into
the prison house until he had determined what to do
with me.
2 And after ten days, the sovereign gathered together
all his counselors and rehearsed unto them all things
concerning me.
3 And when he had rehearsed all things unto them,
he asked them, saying, What judgment shall such one
264

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

receive who hath reviled the sovereign and our mighty
ones and our holy order?
4 And they returned judgment unto him saying, The
man who revileth the sovereign should be hanged from
a tree until he is dead and the tree then felled to the
ground while all the people shall shout, Thus shall it
befall him who revileth the sovereign.
5 But this man hath not only reviled the sovereign but
also our mighty ones and our holy order, and according
to our law, such one shall be cast into a furnace of fire
until he be consumed that naught remain of him in the
earth.
6 Let therefore the fire be increased in the
sovereign’s furnace which is in Kasdim where the
sovereign’s bricks are made and let this blasphemer
be cast into the fire that he be consumed.

43 The sovereign so commanded and for three days
and three nights was the fire preparing in Kasdim and
at the end of that time I was brought forth from the
prison to be cast therein.
2 Nevertheless, while I was in the prison HWHY sent
His messengers to minister unto me and to comfort me
and they said unto me, Fear not, Aḇram, for thy work
is not yet finished for thou shalt yet become the father
of many nations and thou shalt preach the Besorah in
far places, even in the land of Mitsrayim shalt thou
declare the mysteries of thy Elohim.
3 And though they cast thee into the furnace, is not
HWHY able to deliver thee therefrom?
4 For through thy deliverance shall many be brought
to bow down and worship HWHY thy Elohim and forsake
the evils of Nimroḏ.

44 Therefore, I came forth from the prison confident
in the power of my Elohim and in His promise that I
should be delivered from the fire.
265

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

But as I came forth, the astrologers of the sovereign
looked upon me and by the power of Satan they
recognized me, for they saw me clothed in light.
3 And they cried out unto the sovereign saying, O
sovereign of all the earth, surely this is the man of
whom we spake unto thee fifty years ago that he
should rise up to overthrow thy reign.
4 Wherefore was he not slain?
2

45 Hearing these words, the sovereign was greatly
troubled, and calling my father Teraḥ before him, he
exclaimed, is this then thy son who was to have been
slain?
2 And what child then did I slay at his birth?
3 Speak now the truth and thou shalt go free; but if
thou speakest not the truth, thou shalt die with thy son.
4 And Nimroḏ caused my father to swear concerning
the matter.

46 And my father answered the sovereign saying, My
sovereign, I am guilty.
2 For because of my tender feelings toward my son,
I did substitute for him the son of my concubine who
was born on the same night.
3 The sovereign’s wrath mounted and in his anger he
cried, Who advised thee to do this thing?
4 Surely that man shall die.
5 My father, being terrified at the sovereigns’ anger
said, It was my son Haran who so advised me.
6 Now Haran had not advised my father of anything,
but the Ruaḥ of HWHY had wrought upon my father that
he was loathe to give me up to the sovereign.
7 Nevertheless, Haran was privy to what my father
had done and Haran was one of the believers in the
true Elohim of the shamayim, but his heart was not firm
nor his faith sure.
266

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Wherefore, Haran said in his heart, If Aḇram be
delivered from the furnace, then shall I know that the
Elohim of Aḇram is indeed the true Elohim.
9 Wherefore, Haran wavered in his faith and his
confidence waxed not great in the Most High Elohim,
but my confidence was secure, for I knew that it rested
upon the Rock of my deliverance and that the Word of
Elohim faileth not.
8

47 Now when the sovereign heard the words of my
father, he caused that Haran should also be taken with
me, and leading us to the valley of Kasdim, they
stripped us of all our clothing and bound us with cords
and cast us into the fire.
2 Now Haran, because his faith was not perfect in
HWHY his Elohim, was consumed in the fire that no
trace of his body remained, but my faith remained firm
in HWHY and He sent His messengers to sustain me
and release me from my bonds and I was three days
and three nights in the furnace with the messengers,
conversing with them and being instructed by them.

48 After the third day, the sovereign sent his servants
to govern the fire that it might again be used for making
brick.
2 But when they came up to the furnace, behold, I
was sitting therein conversing with the messengers
whom Elohim had sent.
3 Therefore, the servants of the sovereign, being
greatly astonished, went and told him of this matter,
but he would not believe them.
4 However, when the men persisted in their tale and
showed great consternation, Sovereign Nimroḏ
himself came unto the furnace, but the messengers
had departed and I sat alone in the flames.
5 When he saw me therein unconsumed, the
sovereign cried out in alarm, O Aḇram, art thou a
267

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

sorcerer greater than ours that thou shouldst live in the
flames unconsumed?
6 But I answered him, Not so, O sovereign, but
Elohim of the shamayim who is the true Elohim above
all hath sent His messengers unto me and hath
preserved me from this fire.
7 Being much amazed the sovereign exclaimed,
Come forth then from the fire for I see that no power of
mine can harm thee.

49 Whereupon, I ascended from the furnace and
stood before the sovereign and his counselors who
examined me closely, but behold, even my hair was
not singed.
2 Wherefore, the sovereign caused garments from
his own wardrobe to be brought and I was clothed
therein and he caused me to be seated upon a throne
at his right hand where my father used to sit and he
said unto me, What of Haran thy brother who was cast
into the furnace with thee?
3 Did the messengers carry him away to some far
place that he might be saved?
4 But I replied unto him, Nay, but the faith of my
brother was not perfect in the Most High Elohim;
wherefore he was consumed in the flames.
5 Upon hearing this, the sovereign marveled and
permitted me to speak in his court concerning the Most
High Elohim and the redemption which should be
wrought in behalf of those who believed on His Name.
6 Nevertheless, the heart of the sovereign was not
changed, for he gloried in power and he thought to
learn from my power by permitting me to speak.
7 But about three hundred men of those who sat in
the sovereign’s court were converted unto HWHY and
followed no more after the evil order of Nimroḏ,
wherefore, they were cast out of the sovereign’s
presence; but as for me, the sovereign gave me many
268

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

gifts and sent me away in peace and many were joined
unto the believers in HWHY from that day.
8 For having heard of my salvation from the fire,
multitudes came to my father’s house to hear of Elohim
who could do such mighty things and many were
converted unto the truth.

50 Now, among the believers were Lot, the son of
Haran, and Haran’s daughters, Milkah and Sarai.
2 Milkah was fair, but Sarai was beautiful above all
women.
3 Her face was as that of a messenger filled with light,
her cheeks as two roses in full bloom, her hair as spun
gold which men treasure above all, her eyes as pools
of blue reflecting the glory of Elohim’s sky, her nose
delicate and lovely, and her countenance truly was fair
as the sun.
4 Her breasts like two mountains rising above the
plain of Shin’ar were fair to behold, and her complexion
truly like the clouds in purity.
5 Her arms were comely, her hands perfect and
delightful to behold, always in the service of those in
need and quick to hasten to the service of HWHY her
Elohim.
6 Her palms were lovely, unmarred by her constant
labor, her fingers long and slender.
7 Her feet were comely and always set in the path of
truth.
8 Her thighs were well-rounded and soft, yet never
failing to sustain her in her labor of love in behalf of the
servants of Elohim.
9 Truly no maiden was fairer than Sarai, the daughter
of Haran, for her beauty was greater than all other
women and she excelled them all.
10 But with her beauty was great wisdom and perfect
faith in HWHY and constant service in behalf of the
269

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

saints, for her hands never cease from beraḵah the
people of Elohim.
11 Wherefore, my brother Naḥor took Milkah, the
daughter of Haran, to wife, but I Aḇram, took Sarai at
the direction of HWHY and I found great joy in her.

51 But, behold, Satan was not content to have me
continue to disrupt his reign in peace; therefore, he
sent a dream unto sovereign Nimroḏ in which the
sovereign did see that I should be the destruction of
himself and of his reign.
2 Moreover, it was shown the sovereign in his dream
that three of his own household, even Zeptah, Lilith,
and Nefritiri, daughters to Onitah, the son of Nimroḏ,
who were virgins, had joined the believers of the Most
High Elohim.
3 When the sovereign awoke from his sleep, he was
angry and he caused that I, with these three virgins,
Zeptah, Lilith, and Nefritiri, should be seized and
bound and carried to Photiphar’s hill at the head of the
plain of Olishem to be sacrificed unto the mighty one
of Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim.
4 And these three virgins did the priest of Pharaoh
offer up upon the altar and they died singing praises to
HWHY and bearing witness to the truth, wherefore, they
shall be baruḵ forever for they have entered into the
rest of HWHY.

52 And when these virgins were slain, the priests of
Pharaoh took me also and laid me upon the altar to
slay me. But I cried unto HWHY my Elohim for I knew
that my mission was not yet ended.
2 And HWHY heard my voice and sent His messenger
to loose the cords wherewith I was bound.
3 And I saw HWHY seated upon His throne and He
said to me, Aḇram, Aḇram, behold, My Name is HWHY,
and I have heard thee and have come down to deliver
270

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

thee and to take thee away from thy father’s house and
from all thy kindred into a land which is unknown to
thee, a land which I have promised unto Noaḥ should
be an eternal inheritance unto the promised seed.
4 Behold, I will lead thee by My hand and will put
upon thee My Name that thou shalt bear the kehunnah
of the fathers and the power thereof.
5 As it was with Noaḥ, so shall it be with thee that
through thy ministry and the ministry of thy seed
bearing this kehunnah, My Name shall be known in the
earth forever, for I am thy Elohim.
6 And HWHY broke down the altar of the idol mighty
ones by an earthquake and smote their priests that
they were all destroyed.

53 But I hastened to my father’s house where all the
believers were gathered, fasting and praying for me
and I said unto them, Up, for this day we shall depart
from this city that HWHY may visit it in wrath and
vengeance.
2 Wherefore, all the believers gathered together and
followed me out of the city to my camp.
3 And we struck our tents and departed from the land
of Shin’ar to go to the city of Shalom to confer with
father Shĕm.
4 And my father also, seeing that the sovereign’s
face would be set against him, gathered together his
goods and followed after me.
5 We journeyed slowly, for I had with me many souls,
both women and children and women with child.

54 When at length we arrived at the city of Shalom,
father Shĕm came forth to greet us, bearing bread and
wine which he baraḵ and gave to us and he said unto
me, Baruḵ art thou, Aḇram, for the Most High Elohim
hath multiplied thee and behold, thy seed shall be even
as the sand upon the seashore without number.
271

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Go now with this great multitude into the land of
Kena’an for unto thee and thy seed will I give this land
for an everlasting inheritance, saith HWHY Elohim
Almighty. Amĕn.
2

55 Thus we departed from the presence of Shĕm and
moved to the vicinity of Ludor which city we
denominated Ḥaran.
2 And we dwelt in the suburbs of Ḥaran for three
years for there was much pasture there and a space
large enough for the multitude which accompanied me.
3 And I preached the Besorah in Ḥaran and many
souls were added unto the faithful in that place.

56 And there was a famine in the land, but the land
of Ḥaran was baraḵ for our sakes that the famine there
was light.
2 But at the end of three years, the famine abated
throughout the land; wherefore Lot, my brother’s son,
and I went before HWHY in prayer after the manner of
the ancients, and in answer to our prayer HWHY
appeared unto me and said, Arise, Aḇram, and take
Lot with thee and all who follow after thee, for I have
purposed to take thee out of Ḥaran and to make of thee
a minister to bear My Name in a strange land which I
will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting
possession when they hearken to my voice.
3 For I am HWHY thy Elohim.
4 I dwell in the shamayim; the earth is My footstool
for I shall surely walk upon it when I come to redeem
My people from their sins.
5 My Name is HWHY and I know the end from the
beginning; therefore, My hand shall be over thee and I
will make of thee a great nation and I will baraḵ thee
above measure and make thy name great among all
nations and thou shalt be a beraḵah unto thy seed after
thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry
272

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

and kehunnah, even the kehunnah of the fathers after
the Qodesh Order of Elohim, unto all nations.
6 And I will baraḵ all them, even as many as shall
receive this Besorah through thy name, for they shall
be called after thy name, even the seed of Aḇram, as
though they were the seed of thine own flesh, and they
shall rise up and baraḵ thee as their father.
7 For I will baraḵ them who baraḵ thee and curse
them who curse thee.
8 In thee, through the kehunnah which thou barest,
and in thy seed, through thy kehunnah which they shall
bear which cometh down from the fathers, shall all the
families of the earth be baruḵ with the bireḵoth of the
Besorah which are the bireḵoth of deliverance, even of
eternal ḥai.
9 For I give thee this promise, that thy seed shall
sprinkle all nations that through them the right to this
kehunnah may encompass all mankind, that all may
be brought into the covenant through obedience to the
Torah and ordinances of the Besorah.

57 Now when HWHY had ceased speaking with me, I
praised HWHY saying, Thy servant hath sought thee
earnestly; now have I found thee.
2 Thou didst send these messengers to deliver me
from death many times; shall I not do all things which
HWHY my Elohim requireth of me?
3 Baruḵ art thou, O HWHY, who bestowest thy love
without measure upon the righteous but hatest all
iniquity.
4 But I have kept thy statutes to walk therein and
have received thine ordinances unto myself, wherein
thou hast baraḵ me with the Ruaḥ of knowledge and
truth.
5 For my part, I will love thee freely with all my heart
and soul.
273

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

I will cleave to thine qodesh Torah to not turn aside
therefrom in all thou hast commanded.
7 I have learned through the gift of thine Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh that no man is able to choose his own way
nor direct his own steps for all such will fall into the pit.
8 In thine hand is the shaping of each man’s soul
which thou hast foreordained to conform to the image
of thy Bĕn.
9 Wherefore, I will embrace the Bĕn and call upon
Elohim for mercy for evermore. Amĕn.
6

58 Therefore, I took Sarai and Lot and all my family
and all Lot’s family and all the souls who had joined us
in Ur and in Ḥaran who would come and we departed
out of the land of Kena’an.
2 But my father had departed not from his idolatry;
wherefore, he remained in the land of Ḥaran and
Naḥor also remained with some others who departed
not from the truth of the living Elohim.

59 When we had come into the land of Kena’an, I
built an altar in the plains of Moreh and offered
sacrifice unto HWHY.
2 And HWHY appeared unto me and said, This is the
land which I will give unto thee and to thy seed after
thee forever.
3 I will make thy seed like the stars of the shamayim
and I will give unto them for an inheritance all the land
which belongeth unto the Kena’anites for surely I will
destroy them from off the face for the land when their
wickedness is full.
4 Wherefore, I praise HWHY for His mercy and we
departed from that place and journeyed toward Bĕyth
Ĕl.

60 And when I reached Ḥeḇron, I tarried there for
two years, but the famine again waxed great in the
land.
274

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Hearing that there was no famine in Mitsrayim, I
determined to journey into that land, remembering the
word of HWHY unto me in Ur that I should declare the
mysteries of my Elohim in the land of Mitsrayim.
3 And, behold, HWHY baraḵ us on our journey that it
was made light unto us and we journeyed until we
reached the Kirmyon, one of the branches of the river
of Mitsrayim, where we rested form our journey for a
season, for here the famine was not so severe.
4 But remembering the word of HWHY my Elohim unto
me, when we were recovered from our journey, I
determined to move forward across the seven
branches of the river of Mitsrayim into the heart of the
country of the Mitsrites.
2

61 But on the night before I entered into Mitsrayim, I
dreamed a dream.
2 And behold, in my dream I saw a cedar and a palm
tree and the branches of the palm tree were wrapped
around the cedar.
3 Suddenly, a group of men approached, seeking to
cut down the cedar and leave the palm tree to stand
alone.
4 But the palm tree cried out saying, Cut not down
the cedar for whosoever seeketh to fell it shall find the
curse of Elohim resting upon him.
5 So the men desisted and the cedar was spared by
the act of the palm tree.

62 When the dream was ended, I awoke from my
sleep and wondered at it.
2 Wherefore, I went before HWHY in prayer and
besought Him saying, O HWHY, show me the
interpretation of this dream which I have had this night.
3 And HWHY said unto me, Behold, Sarai thy wife is a
beautiful woman to look upon above all the women of
the earth.
275

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Therefore, it shall come to pass that when the
Mitsrites shall see her, they will say, She is his wife,
and they will seek to slay thee for the sake of obtaining
thy wife.
5 Let Sarai thy wife, therefore, say unto them, He is
my kinsman, and thy soul shall live.
6 For thou art the cedar, O Aḇram, and Sarai is the
palm tree and this is the interpretation of the dream; for
through the act of thy wife, thou shall be saved and the
way will be opened for thee to preach the mysteries of
reverence in the court of Pharaoh, sovereign of
Mitsrayim, for these Mitsrites are thy kindred of the
seed of Ĕḇer, and it is My Will that the truths of the
everlasting Besorah should be brought to them.
4

63 Now I had heard while I dwelt in Ḥaran that some
of seed of Ĕḇer had entered into Mitsrayim and driven
the seed of Ḥam to the south and taken possession of
the land.
2 But these followed not after the Elohim of their
father Ĕḇer, but worshipped mighty ones, even as did
my father Teraḥ, but they followed not after the
abominations of Nimroḏ.
3 Now these Iḇri were of the seed of Haḏoram, the
son of Yoqtan, the son of Ĕḇer.
4 And Yoqtan was the brother of Peleḡ.
5 And Ĕḇer was the son of Shelaḥ, the son of
Arpaḵshaḏ, the son of Shĕm.
6 Wherefore, HWHY had sent me to preach the
Besorah unto these who had departed from the Elohim
of their fathers.

64 Wherefore, I awakened my wife Sarai and I said
unto her, I have had a dream of HWHY.
2 Tell it to me, she said, that I may know what it is.
3 Therefore, I related unto her the dream and all that
HWHY had said to me concerning it and I added, When
276

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

the men of the land shall inquire of thee saying, Who
is this who accompanieth thee, say unto them simply,
He is my kinsman.
4 Thus shall my soul live and HWHY will use their love
for thee as a means whereby the Besorah shall be
preached among them.
5 Fear not to do this thing for they will neither defile
thee, contrary to thy covenants, nor slay me, but all
shall come to pass to the glory of our Elohim.

65 Sarai, my wife, was fearful when she heard of the
danger through which we must pass and wept that
night before HWHY, but she placed her trust in Him and
was comforted by His Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
2 The next day we moved on across the seven
branches of the river and proceeded toward Foan
where Pharaoh dwelt.
3 But I kept Sarai hidden until we reached Foan, for
it was in the home of Pharaoh that HWHY purposed to
use her great beauty to open the heart of Pharaoh unto
the work of Elohim.
4 When we reached the city of Foan, three of
Pharaoh’s officers met us and I brought Sarai forth to
sit at my right hand while I gave them audience.
5 And according to the word of HWHY, while I
attempted to explain unto them our having come there
because of the famine in the land of Kena’an and that
we sojourned among them, they kept bestowing
compliments upon Sarai for her great beauty and
wisdom and the luster of her countenance.

66 When the men departed from me, they went
directly into the presence of Pharaoh and when they
had eaten with him, he had good wine brought forth.
2 While they drank together, they began to speak
unto him of what had transpired, but all they could
speak of were the beauties of Sarai.
277

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

How beautiful is the woman Sarai, they said, who
sitteth at Aḇram’s right hand.
4 How comely is the shape of her face; how delicate
and finespun are her tresses.
5 How beautiful her eyes. How delicate is her nose
and the whole luster of her countenance.
6 How fair are her breasts and how comely with all is
her complexion.
7 How comely, too, are her arms and how perfect her
hands.
8 How pleasing are her hands to behold; how lovely
her palms, how long and slender her fingers.
9 How comely are her feet. How well rounded her
thighs.
10 None of the maidens and none of the brides that
enter the bridechamber are fairer than she.
11 Her beauty is greater than all other women and she
excels them all.
12 Moreover, along with all this beauty, she hath great
wisdom and the workmanship of her hands is fair
indeed.
3

67 When he heard these words, Pharaoh lusted after
Sarai and he sent his servants to fetch her to him.
2 Knowing it to be the Will of HWHY, I let her go
although my heart was grieved within me.
3 When Pharaoh saw her, his lust grew within him,
for he was overcome by her beauty and he took her
into his household as his wife and sent men to slay me
that I might not rise up to claim her.
4 But Sarai, seeing these things said unto Pharaoh,
He is but my kinsman; wherefore, Pharaoh called back
his men and my life was spared.

68 But Lot and I and all our household spent that
night in prayer before HWHY for Sarai that she might
278

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

accomplish her mission and that she might not be
defiled contrary to her covenants.
2 And I stood with my arms stretched out toward the
shamayim after the Qodesh Order of Elohim and I said,
Baruḵ art thou, O HWHY the Most High Elohim, Aḏonai
of all worlds and Aḏonai and Ruler over all things.
3 I know that thou dost rule over all the sovereigns of
the earth, executing judgment upon them in
righteousness even as thou didst save me from the evil
designs of the mighty Sovereign Nimroḏ.
4 Now do I complain before thee concerning Pharaoh
of Foan, sovereign of Mitsrayim, who hath violently
abducted my wife Sarai from me.
5 Wreak justice upon him in my behalf and let me
behold Thine hand wax mighty against him and
against all his household and let him not be able this
night to defile my wife contrary to her covenants.
6 Let them come to know, O HWHY, that thou art HWHY
of all the sovereigns of the earth and the Ruler of all
men, for this cause did I suffer Sarai to go among them
according to Thy counsel.

69 And Elohim hearkened unto my prayer and
withheld His Ruaḥ from the Mitsrites that none of them
were able to come at their wives that night.
2 In the morning, consternation reigned throughout
the land of Mitsrayim, for no man had been able to lie
with his wife all that night.
3 Pharaoh also was greatly perplexed, for although
his lust toward Sarai had grown throughout the night,
he had been unable to satisfy that lust because of the
curse of Elohim which rested upon him.
4 Therefore, he summoned all of his wise men and
the physicians of his household, but none could heal
him and all had suffered the same affliction.

279

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

70 Then the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon Sarai and she
said, My master, it is indeed a sad matter that this
affliction should be upon thee.
2 My kinsman Aḇram is a man full of wisdom and of
the Ruaḥ of our Elohim.
3 Send for him, therefore, and he shall tell thee how
to be delivered from these bonds that thou mayest
freely take me to thyself.
4 Now this she said at the direction of HWHY our
Elohim and HWHY softened Pharaoh’s heart that he
hearkened unto her words and he sent Shulem, one of
his chief ministers, unto my camp.

71 When Shulem arrived in camp, he was, according
to my directions, went to the tent of Lot, and when he
had entered the tent, he bowed before Lot and said,
My master Pharaoh and all the males of the land of
Mitsrayim have been cursed that they are unable to
come at their wives.
2 But it hath been told Pharaoh by his handmaiden
Sarai that her kinsman Aḇram is a man full of wisdom
and of the Ruaḥ of your Elohim.
3 Let him, therefore, come and lay his hands upon
my master Pharaoh and pray for him that he may be
healed and live.
4 But Lot said to him, As long as his wife Sarai
remains with the sovereign, my uncle Aḇram will not
be able to pray for him.
5 Be off thou and tell the sovereign to release the
woman to her husband.
6 Then he will pray for him and he will be healed.

72 When Shulem heard these words, he was
amazed and he went straightway to the sovereign.
2 My sovereign, said he, This curse hath come on
account of Sarai the wife of Aḇram.
280

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Let Sarai be but restored to her husband Aḇram
and this curse will be lifted from off all the males of
Mitsrayim.
4 Upon hearing these words, the sovereign asked
Sarai saying, Is this thing so?
5 Yea, my master, she replied, and it is done that
thou mightest behold the power of Elohim.
6 For when thine heart lusted after me, thou shouldst
have asked and not taken me by force.
7 But this is done that the glory of Elohim might be
revealed that thou shouldst turn from the worship of
dumb mighty ones to the worship of the true and living
Elohim.
3

73 Hearing these words, Pharaoh summoned me to
him and when I entered his presence he asked, What
is this that hath been done?
2 For I have taken Sarai to wife while she was yet
your wife and for this thing a curse hath fallen upon me
and all males in the land of Mitsrayim.
3 Therefore, pray for me that this curse may be
removed from us.
4 According to Pharaoh’s request, I laid my hands
upon him and prayed over him and he and all the
males of Mitsrayim were healed.

74 When the sovereign had been baraḵ, he was
recovered and he praised HWHY for his recovery.
2 Wherefore, I took him into his garden and
immersed him in the Name of HWHY and all his
household with him.
3 And when I had baraḵ him again, Sarai came
before him and he knew that he had been healed for
the Ruaḥ of Elohim fell upon him with this testimony
and the witness thereof was sure.

281

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

75 Then Pharaoh arose and praised HWHY and
proclaimed to all his people that they should worship
the Most High Elohim who had healed them.
2
And he desired to enter into a covenant of eternal
brotherhood with me that I should be his father and he
should be my son.
3 Wherefore, I said unto Pharaoh, Put forth thine
hand upon my thigh and I will make thee swear before
HWHY, the Elohim of the shamayim and earth, that thou
shalt be true to me and thine heirs to mine heirs
forever, and I shall receive thee unto myself to be my
son and brother to inherit all the bireḵoth of mine house
and to bear my kehunnah forever.
4 Wherefore, Pharaoh put his hand upon my thigh
and swore to me according to this oath.
5 And when he had sworn, Lot sealed him mine that
he should be my son in time and eternity and Pharaoh
rejoiced therein.

76 And the sovereign clothed me in his own robes
and seated me upon his throne, placing his own crown
upon my head and his sceptre in my hand.
2 And I did teach him and his people in all the
mysteries of reverence from first to last.
3 For Pharaoh did introduce me into the Hĕyḵal
which had been built by the fathers, commenced by
father Shĕth and completed by father Shĕm after the
great flood and therein I did officiate in the rites and
ordinances of the house of HWHY.
4 And Pharaoh made all matters right with Sarai, and
he baraḵ her with the outpouring of his spirit and she
was baruḵ in his presence.
5 And he gave unto her Haḡar, his own daughter,
also, to be her companion and to Haḡar he gave many
gifts.
282

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And I was seven years in the land of Mitsrayim
teaching the Besorah and administering unto Pharaoh
and his household and all the Mitsrites the bireḵoth,
rites, and ordinances of the Besorah with the power
thereof.
7 And I established among them the order of the
fathers and the kehunnah thereof until the Name of
HWHY was glorified throughout the land of Mitsrayim.
8 And I taught the people the nature of the shamayim
and of the earth and the plan of deliverance and the
bireḵoth of HWHY unto those who serve him in purity of
heart and to believe on the Bĕn of Elohim who should
come to make an atonement for their sins.
9 And so great was the power of Elohim among us
that in time all of the Mitsrites had turned from their
idolatry to the worship of the true Elohim and I and my
people had cause to rejoice in the fruits of labors.
6

77 At the end of seven years, HWHY visited me and
he said unto me, Baruḵ art thou, Aḇram, servant of the
Most High, for thy joy shall be great in my mansion with
this multitude which thou hast brought unto me;
wherefore, thy name shall no more be called Aḇram
but Aḇraham shalt thou be called, which is by
interpretation, Father of a Multitude.
2 Moreover, thy wife Sarai shall no longer be called
by that name, but Sarah shall she be called, which
signifieth a Queen.
3 For Sarah have I chosen and appointed to be thy
queen of queens for from her shall issue the promised
seed, even him who shall be thine heir.
4 Behold, the day cometh when the seed of Ḥam
shall again rule in this land and at that day thy seed
shall be in bondage to them, but I will raise up a prince
from among the Mitsrites who shall lead them out of
bondage and they shall inherit the land of Kena’an,
283

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

even that land which I have promised unto thee and to
thy seed after thee for an everlasting inheritance.
5 Moreover, from the loins of thine heir shall proceed
ha’Mashiaḥ, even the Bĕn of Elohim, who shall walk
upon the earth ministering to the poor and lowly, who
shall be lifted up that the price might be paid for the
original sin of Aḏam and for the sins of all mankind,
that all who will believe on His Name and receive His
ordinances and keep His Commandments should not
perish but inherit everlasting life.
6 Moreover, in the last days I will raise up out of the
loins of thine heir a choice seer through whom the
fullness of My Besorah shall be restored to the earth
and all things shall be restored as in the beginning.
7 For upon him shall rest the kehunnah of his fathers
and he shall commence the organization of that
qodesh order which was in the beginning of the world
which shall be consummated before the Bĕn of Elohim
shall walk again upon the earth.
8 These promises are thine, my son, and I say unto
thee, Thou shalt be exalted and dwell with Me in the
mansion of My Father.
9 Now take thy people and return into the land of
Kena’an, for there have I a mission for thee and there
shall the promises come to pass in thy behalf.

78 When I had received this Word of HWHY and He
had departed from me, I went unto Pharaoh and told
him that I must depart from his realm as HWHY had a
work for me to do in the land of Kena’an.
2 Though he was loathe to see me go, Pharaoh
bowed to the Will of Elohim and appointed men from
his own bodyguard to escort me to the borders of
Mitsrayim and he gave me gifts of cattle and silver and
gold and fine cloth and precious jewels of every kind.

284

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

79 So I went up out of Mitsrayim and Lot
accompanied me who had taken three wives while in
Mitsrayim, namely, Yennifer, daughter of Eli’ezer of
Dammeseq, Deḇorah, daughter of Kumen who had
come out of the city of Ur, and Asterah, daughter of
Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim.

80 Traveling slowly and stopping often to camp upon
our way, we eventually reached Bĕyth Ĕl, where yet
stood an altar that I had built there at the first.
2 I restored it to its perfect form and offered sacrifices
thereon to the Most High Elohim.
3 And I called there upon the Name of HWHY of all
worlds and offered praise to the Name of Elohim and
baraḵ Elohim and gave thanks before Him for all the
possessions bestowed upon us and for the many souls
we had won in Mitsrayim and for having brought us
back safely from that land.

81 Now after our departure from Mitsrayim, a faction
arose among our people upon seeing the great wealth
which Pharaoh had entrusted to us, for they desired
property which they could call their own.
2 Lot also was among them, which thing grieved me
greatly, but seeing they would not be reconciled, we
gave unto them a portion of the common property and
they departed from us under Lot’s direction and settled
in the Valley of the Yardĕn River.
3 There they went from place to place as their flocks
needed pasture until they reached the city of Seḏom
where they mingled with the inhabitants and became
one with them.
4 Lot also built a house in Seḏom and settled there,
but of all that company that went out from us, only Lot
maintained his integrity and did not violate the
covenants of his kehunnah nor bow to mighty ones.
285

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Nevertheless, Lot did not walk perfectly in the Way
of the Fathers for he dwelt not among the people of
Elohim but built his own house and he coveted his own
property that he should govern it rather than holding all
things common with the qodeshim.
6 Nevertheless, Lot did continue to serve HWHY and
HWHY loved him and his family and his property grew
very large.
7 But I was grieved in my heart that Lot had parted
from me for he had stood at my right hand and had
been instructed in a better way.
5

82 Meanwhile, I with my people dwelt in Bĕyth Ĕl
where we did worship HWHY our Elohim after the Order
of the Ancients and did strive diligently to establish the
Qodesh Order of Elohim among us in ever increasing
perfection.
2 Wherefore, we did banish from among us all
contention, all covetousness, all selfishness, and we
were of one heart and of one mind and dedicated in all
our service unto HWHY and held all things common, for
no man called anything his own.

83 One-night Elohim appeared to me in a vision and
said, Go up to the top of Ḥatsor and lift up thine eyes
and gaze eastward and westward and southward and
northward and behold all this land for, behold, unto
thee and to thy seed after thee shall I give it for an
everlasting inheritance.
2 The next day I ascended Ḥatsor as HWHY had
commanded me and I gazed upon all the land from the
river of Mitsrayim unto Leḇanon and Senir, from the
Great Sea unto Ḥawran, the whole area of Sĕ’ir as far
as Qaḏĕsh, the whole of the great wilderness which
lieth east of the Ḥawran ran and the region of Senir as
far as the Perath.
286

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And as I beheld the land, HWHY my Elohim spake in
my heart, saying, Baruḵ Aḇraham, I have chosen thee
to stand at the head of a multitude.
4 Wherefore, unto thee and to thy seed after thee I
will give this land, even all that thine eye be holdeth,
that ye may possess it forever.
5 And I shall multiply thy seed like the dust of the
earth, for even as no man can count the dust of the
earth, so shall thy seed be without number.
6 Rise up, now, and compass this land.
7 Behold the length of it and the breadth of it, for I will
give it unto thee and to thy seed after thee forever.
3

84 Even so, I, Aḇraham, descended from the high
place and set out to behold all the land.
2 I commenced at the river of Mitsrayim and came to
the shore of the lake beside which I traveled until I
reached the mountain of the ox.
3 Thence, I turned from the great lake which is by
Seḏom and walked across the breadth of the land until
I reached Perath.
4 Thence, I journeyed even unto the Sea of Reeds
which I followed unto its head.
5 Thence, I went onward to the river of Mitsrayim
again, having compassed the whole land according to
the command of HWHY.
6 When I had completed my journey, I bowed down
and praised HWHY and returned safely unto my family
where I found everyone well.

85 Not many days thence, under the direction of
HWHY, I departed from Bĕyth Ĕl and settled in the
plains of Mamrĕ on the northeast of Ḥeḇron and there
I built an altar and offered an offering unto the Most
High Elohim and dedicated that land unto HWHY.
2 And I held a great feast unto HWHY for the time of
the Pesaḥ had come and together with all the men of
287

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

my household, invited Mamrĕ, Aneram, and Eshkol,
my friends who were wanderers in the land as we were
and who had joined the believers in the Most High
Elohim, into the Solemn Assembly.
3
And after this all my people ate and drank together
with me before HWHY.

86 At this feast, the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon me and
laying aside my garments, I danced before HWHY and
sang unto HWHY a new song, saying, Baruḵ are Thou,
O HWHY, who hast given unto man knowledge of Thy
Ways that he might understand Thy truths and see
Thine abundant mercies.
2 Baruḵ art Thou, O Elohim, who art full of
compassion and grace, for the greatness of Thy
power, the abundance of Thy truth, the profusion of
Thy mercies over all Thy works.
3 Rejoice the soul of Thy servant in Thy truth and
through Thy righteousness make me clean before
Thee.
4 Baruḵ art Thou, O HWHY, for Thou has placed in the
mouth of Thy servant the sacred words of power that I
might stand as Thy minister continually that I may
confer Thy grace upon Thy children and that I myself
may return to Thy presence.

87 Sarah also rose up, full of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
and danced and sang before HWHY.
2 And this is the song of Sarah: In Thee, O HWHY, will
my soul be raised up for Thou hast bestowed upon me
Thy grace whereby I am restored to Thy presence for
I have entered into Thine Qodesh House and received
the sacred rites of Thy presence.
3 Surely in my tent at night I will sing songs of joy unto
HWHY as I am overshadowed by the kehunnah and
lifted up in the foreshadowing of eternity
288

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Surely in receiving Thy Ruaḥ through the
overshadowing of the kehunnah, I have received
deliverance.
5 Wherefore, in the midst of Thy people, those who
reverence Thine Qodesh Name, I will praise Thee and
glorify Thy Name forever.
4

88 My wife Kadar also arose and proceeded to
dance and sing before HWHY.
2 And her song was: Baraḵ HWHY, O my soul; exalt
His Name among the people.
3 I will praise Thee, O HWHY, upon my bed when the
wellsprings of my joy are opened up.
4 I will praise Thee at all times and seasons.
5 When the sun riseth upon the earth, I will praise
Thine Qodesh Name.
6 When in its ordered course, day reacheth its turning
point at the meridian, I shall not fail to praise Thee.
7 Again in the evening when the daylight departeth, I
will marvel at Thy wonders and glorify Thy Name.

89 Then rose up my wife Yahuḏith who danced and
sang, saying, Praise HWHY who hath shown me the
wonders of His Ways.
2 For as I lay upon my bed enwrapped in the
ecstasies of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, when the Ruaḥ
rushed into me, I saw the vision of the Almighty and
heard that which is unlawful to be spoken.
3 Yea, O HWHY, Thou hast visited me and I have
heard Thy wondrous secret and I know that it is true.
Through Thine Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, through the rites of
Thine qodesh kehunnah, through the glorious inner
vision to which Thou didst open my mind in the
moment of passion, Thou has caused a spring of
knowledge to well up within me, a fountain of strength
and power, of loving kindness and glory in my Elohim.
289

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Thou has put an end to the darkness of the world
in me and the splendor of Thy glory hath become in
me an eternal light.
5 Wherefore, I will praise Thy Name forever and give
myself unto Thee.
4

90 When Yahuḏith had finished her song, all the
congregation, being filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
arose to their feet and began to dance and sing and
praise HWHY and to neḇuah in His Name.
2 Some saw qodesh messengers in our midst and
others saw the shamayim opened and beheld Elohim
seated upon His throne and all were filled with His
Ruaḥ and shouted praises to HWHY in joyousness until
dawn.
3 Then we all rose up before HWHY and praised His
Name for this great outpouring and worshipped Him all
that day.
4 And we rejoiced in the grace of HWHY our Elohim.

91 Previous to this time, Amraphel, son of Nimroḏ,
sovereign of Shin’ar, Keḏorla’omer, sovereign of
Ĕylam, Aryoḵ, sovereign of Ellasar, and Tiḏ’al,
sovereign of Goyim in Paddan Aram, had waged war
against Bera, sovereign of Seḏom, Birsha, sovereign
of Amorah, Shinaḇ, sovereign of Aḏmah, Shem’ĕḇer,
sovereign of Tseḇoyim, and the sovereign of Bela.
2 They assembled for combat in the valley of Siddim
and the sovereign of Shin’ar and his royal allies
overcame the sovereign of Seḏom and his
confederates and imposed tribute upon them.
3 For twelve years they paid their tribute to the
sovereign of Shin’ar, but in the thirteenth year they
revolted against him.
4 In the fourteenth year the sovereign of Shin’ar led
forth all his allies and they went up along the way of
290

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

the wilderness, attacking and plundering all who were
confederate with the sovereign of Seḏom.
5 But the sovereign of Seḏom, the sovereign of
Amorah, the sovereign of Aḏmah, the sovereign of
Tseḇoyim, and the sovereign of Bela came forth to
battle and met Amraphel and his allies in the valley of
Siddim.
6 However, Amraphel and his allies prevailed against
them and Bera, sovereign of Seḏom turned and fled
and Birsha, sovereign of Amorah fell into the slime pits
which were in the valley of Siddim and perished there.
7 The remainder of the sovereigns fled unto the
mountain which was called Hanabal and tarried there
in great fear.

92 But one of Lot’s servants who dwelt in his house
escaped and came to me in Ḥeḇron and told me that
Lot, my brother’s son, had been taken with all his
possessions, but that he yet lived.
2 He showed me, moreover, the route which the
sovereigns had taken toward the land of Dammeseq.
3 When I heard this news, my heart melted within me
for Lot who had stood at my right hand had been as a
brother to me in the place of my brother Haran, who
had been slain in the Land of Shin’ar.
4 O, that Lot had stayed among the body of qodeshim
of the Most High Elohim, I thought, and not go off to
possess his own property apart.
5 Then these circumstances would never have
befallen him that he should be in the hands of
Amraphel, son of Nimroḏ, sovereign of Shin’ar and his
host.
6 But as I thus mourned over Lot, the Word of HWHY
came unto me, saying, Up, arouse thee, O Aḇraham.
Take three hundred and eighty of the young men of the
strength of thine house and also thy friends Aneram,
Eshkol, and Mamrĕ each with one hundred and five of
291

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

the strength of his house and also Eli’ezer of
Dammeseq who is with thee in the tent and pursue
after Amraphel, son of Nimroḏ, sovereign of Shin’ar,
for truly I shall deliver his hosts into your hands.

93 Wherefore, we did according to all that HWHY had
commanded me, having all seven hundred men and
we pursued after them even unto the valley of Dan
where we found them encamped.
2 And falling upon them by night from all four
directions, we commenced the work of death and
continued wreaking slaughter among them and
discomforting them all that night.
3 And with the rising of the sun, they fled from before
us until they reached Ḥoḇah which is situated to the
left of Dammeseq where we did again overtake them
and conquer them.
4 There we did strip them of all that they had taken
as plunder and loot and likewise of all their won goods.
5 Lot also and his family we rescued from their hands
and restoring to him all his possessions and all that
they had taken from him as spoil, we restored him to
his home in peace.

94 When the sovereign of Seḏom heard that I had
returned from the conquest of Amraphel, son of
Nimroḏ, sovereign of Shin’ar, he came forth to meet
me at the valley of Shawĕh which is west of the city of
Shalom where Noaḥ and Malkitseḏeq dwelt.
2 And Malkitseḏeq brought forth bread and wine from
the city of Shalom unto the valley of Shawĕh where we
were encamped.
3 And he being the kohĕn ha’gadol after the Order of
the Most High Elohim, brake the bread and baraḵ it and
he baraḵ the wine also and he distributed them unto
me and those who were with me, and we partook and
were filled.
292

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And Malkitseḏeq lifted up his hands to the
shamayim and baraḵ me, and said, Baruḵ Aḇraham,
thou art a man of the Most High Elohim, possessor of
the shamayim and of earth, wherefore, His Name and
kehunnah shall not depart from thee and thy seed after
thee while the earth shall stand and even in eternity
shall it remain with thee.
5 And baruḵ is the Name of the Most High Elohim and
almighty His power, which hath delivered thine
enemies into thine hand.
6 And I, Aḇraham, gave into the hand of Malkitseḏeq,
tithes of all I had taken, for he was the presiding kohĕn
ha’gadol after the Order of the Most High Elohim, the
first of the fathers unto me, and he reigned under his
father Noaḥ.
4

95 And when the sovereign of Seḏom had come unto
me, he said unto me, Aḇraham, give me the persons
who are not thine but who are with thee whom thou
hast rescued from the hand of Amraphel, son of
Nimroḏ, sovereign of Shin’ar, but let all the property be
left with thee.
2 But I said unto him, This day do I, Aḇraham, lift up
my hand before the Most High Elohim, before His
qodesh messengers and before these witnesses who
are with us and declare that I will not take even so
much as a thread or a shoe’s latchet which is not mine,
lest thou shouldst say that all Aḇraham’s wealth
cometh really from their possession.
3 Only that which the young men who are with me
have eaten and that which Aneram, Eshkol, and
Mamrĕ, these three stalwarts who went with me, have
received as their share shall be excepted of all that I
took from Amraphel, son of Nimroḏ, sovereign of
Shin’ar that was thine.
4 The rest I return freely unto thee.
5 Now go thy way in peace.
293

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Thereupon, I returned all the possessions and all
the spoil and gave them unto the sovereign of Seḏom
and I released all the captives and sent them away
rejoicing.
6

96 And when I had done this, Malkitseḏeq again
lifted up his voice and baraḵ me saying, Baruḵ art thou,
Aḇraham, for the Most High Elohim shall visit thee and
shall bestow upon thee riches and honor and lands for
an everlasting possession because thou hast been
true and faithful to the covenants which thou hast
entered before Him.
2 Wherefore, thou shalt continue to increase, worlds
without end, and the glory of HWHY shall never depart
from thee. The bireḵoth of thy Fathers shall rest upon
thee and thou shalt stand at the head and in thee and
in thy seed after thee, those who shall bear thy
kehunnah, shall all the nations of the earth be baruḵ.

97 Therewith, I departed from Malkitseḏeq, rejoicing
in his beraḵah, for he was a man of faith who wrought
righteousness and as child he feared Elohim and by
his faith he stopped the mouths of lions and quenched
the violence of fire when those of the evil combination
sought to destroy him from off the face of the earth.
2 Therefore, having been approved of Elohim, he
was ordained a kohĕn ha’gadol after the order of the
Covenant which Elohim made with Ḥanoḵ which is
after the order of the First-born, even our Father Aḏam.
3 For this qodesh order came not by man nor the will
of man, neither by father nor mother, neither by
beginning of days nor end of years, but of Elohim.
4 For it was established in the beginning of the earth
by the Ancients of days, wherefore it is called the Order
of the Ancients, and it was delivered unto men from the
beginning by the calling of Elohim’s own voice
according to His own will through the voice of His
294

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

kehunnah, unto as many as believed on His Name and
were faithful until they had obtained.

98 Behold, these could transcend the veil, according
to the Will of Elohim, and commune with the General
Assembly and Ekklesia of the First-born in the
shamayim and many were caught up to be with them.
2 For Elohim had sworn unto Ḥanoḵ and unto his
seed with an oath by Himself that every one being
ordained after this order and calling should have power
by faith to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry
up waters, to turn them out of their course, to put at
defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to
break every band, to stand in the presence of Elohim,
to do all things according to His Will according to His
Command, subdue principalities and powers, and this
by the Will of the Bĕn of the Only Begotten of the
Father which was from before the foundation of the
world.
3 And men having this faith and coming up unto this
order of Elohim could be translated and taken up into
the shamayim.

99 Now Malkitseḏeq was a kohĕn after this order
which is the Qodesh Order of Elohim; therefore he
obtained peace in Shalom and was called the prince
of peace.
2 And his people wrought righteousness and
obtained the shamayim for they sought for the city of
Ḥanoḵ which Elohim had before taken, separating it
from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days
or the end of the world.
3 For Elohim hath said and sworn with an oath that
the shamayim and the earth should come together
again and the sons of Elohim be tried even by fire.
4 And
thus Malkitseḏeq, having established
righteousness, was called the sovereign of the
295

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

shamayim by his people or, in other words, the
sovereign of peace.
5 And they communed with those in the city of Ḥanoḵ
and in the city of Peleḡ and had access to them and
were baruḵ all their days.

100 After these things Elohim appeared to me in a
vision and He said unto me, Behold Aḇraham, it is ten
full years since thou camest into this land from Ḥaran.
2 Two years didst thou remain then in the land, seven
years wast thou in Mitsrayim and one year hath passed
since thy return from Mitsrayim.
3 Now, number all that thou hast and see how it hath
increased to double that which went out with thee in
the day thou camest forth from Ḥaran.
4 Therefore, fear not, for I am with thee and will be
thine help and the source of thy strength.
5 I will be thy shield and thine exceeding great reward
and thy wealth and thy possessions shall I increase
exceedingly.

101 And I said unto Him, My HWHY Elohim, truly my
wealth and my possessions have increased, but
behold, Eli’ezer of Dammeseq standeth as my heir,
whereas, prior to my departure from the city of Shalom,
father Shĕm said unto me, Eli’ezer is a good and
righteous man and he shall be greatly baruḵ in time
and in eternity, but he shall not be thine heir, for
another shall be thine heir who shall come forth from
the womb of thy wife whom thou shalt take in the house
of thy father for she is ordained to be thy queen of
queens and the mother of thine heir.
2 Wherefore then doth Sarah remain barren, having
neither son nor daughter?
3 Nay, replied Elohim, fear not, for none shall be thine
heir save he that shall come forth from the womb of thy
296

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

wife Sarah for she is ordained to be thy queen of
queens and the mother of thine heir.
4 Therefore is her name called Sarah.

102 And HWHY took me out of the camp and He said,
Look now toward the shamayim and tell the stars, if
thou be able to number them.
2 And He said unto me, So shall thy seed be.
3 And I said unto him, HWHY Elohim, how wilt Thou
give me this land for an everlasting inheritance?
4 And HWHY replied, Though thou wast dead, yet am
I not able to give it thee?
5 And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for
the day cometh that the Bĕn of Aḏam shall live but how
can He live if He be not dead?
6 He must first be quickened.
7 And HWHY touched the eyes of my understanding
that they were opened and I beheld the days of the
Bĕn of Aḏam, for I beheld Him ministering unto my
seed, teaching them the Torah of Elohim, healing the
sick, casting out devils and doing many wonderful
works.
8 I saw also the Bĕn of Aḏam lifted up upon the stake
for the sins of men; wherefore I wept for the
wickedness of man which could crucify the Bĕn of
Elohim.
9 Nevertheless, I saw also that He should rise again
from the dead, wherein my heart did rejoice and my
soul found rest in the knowledge that though I should
die, yet again in the flesh should I see Elohim and dwell
in the land of my inheritance.
10 For I saw also the days of the coming of the Bĕn of
Aḏam upon the earth in the last days when He shall
descend with ten thousands of His saints according to
the neḇuah of father Ḥanoḵ and the earth shall be
cleansed by fire.
297

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Then all shall rise to stand before Elohim, both the
just and the unjust, to be judged according to their
works.
11

103 And HWHY said unto me, I, HWHY thy Elohim,
saved thee from the fire in the land of Shin’ar and from
the hand of the wicked priest and from all the evil
intentions of Sovereign Nimroḏ and I brought thee into
this land that I might give it to thee as an everlasting
inheritance.
2 Now, I knew that the word of HWHY was true.
Nevertheless, I desired to know more of this
inheritance which HWHY had provided me.
3 Wherefore, I said, HWHY, how shall it be that I shall
inherit this land wherein I am a stranger?
4 And HWHY said unto me, Take Me a heifer of three
years old and a she goat of three years old and a ram
of three years old and a turtle dove and a young
pigeon.
5 Divide each of these in the midst and lay one half
on each side of an open place, except the birds thou
shalt not divide but lay one on each side.
6 Wherefore, I went and did according to all that
HWHY had commanded me and when the fowls came
down upon the carcasses, I drove them away.
7 And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep
fell upon me and lo, in the sleep was a great horror of
darkness.
8 And I cried unto HWHY, saying, O HWHY, what
meaneth this great horror of darkness?
9 And HWHY said unto me, Know of a surety that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land which shall not be
theirs and shall be in bondage to strangers, even to the
seed of Ḥam who shall again overrun the land of
Mitsrayim.
10 And thy seed shall be afflicted and serve them four
hundred years.
298

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

But at that time, I shall judge the seed of Ḥam and
thy seed shall come up out of the land of Mitsrayim
with great substance.
12 And as for thee, thou shalt die and go to thy fathers
in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
13 But in the fourth generation thy seed shall come
higher again for the iniquity of the Kena’anites is not
yet full.
11

104 And it came to pass that when the sun was
down and it was dark, behold, two personages passed
between those pieces which I had divided.
2 And their countenance was as fire such that I could
hardly look upon them and the one said to me, Behold,
of thy seed shall ha’Mashiaḥ come who shall redeem
all those who believe on His Name and walk in His
footsteps.
3 Wherefore, repent and call upon the Name of the
Bĕn all thy days that in the end thou mayest dwell with
Me in My mansion.

105 Now when Sarah saw that she bare neither son
nor daughter, it grieved her heart.
2 And she said unto me, Take therefore Haḡar,
daughter of Pharaoh, to be thy wife, for she is a woman
now.
3 And let her come into my bed and let her womb be
unto thee in the place of mine to raise up seed unto
thee.
4 Haḡar also was willing to enter this covenant and it
was according to the voice of the Ruaḥ of Elohim;
wherefore, Sarah gave Haḡar to be my wife and Sarah
and Haḡar were as one wife unto that the seed of
Haḡar might be also the seed of Sarah.
5 For Haḡar had been raised by Sarah and been
taught by her and had followed Sarah in ways of
righteousness.
299

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

106 And when I came into Haḡar in Sarah’s bed, she
conceived.
2 And when Haḡar saw that she had conceived, she
rejoiced greatly and began to be lifted up in pride and
to despise Sarah and she taunted Sarah, saying,
Surely I am better than thee for in all the years thy
aḏonai hath lain with thee, thou hast not conceived, but
lo, in this short time, I have conceived from the seed of
my aḏonai.
3 And Sarah was grieved in her heart and she said
unto me, Surely Haḡar hath wronged me and thou also
hast contributed to her wrong, for she hath spoken
despitefully to me in thy presence, yet thou hast done
nothing to correct her.
4 But I replied to Sarah, Surely Haḡar is thy child for
thou hast instructed her from her youth.
5 Correct her, therefore, as seemeth thee good.

107 However, when Sarah attempted to correct
Haḡar, Haḡar grew angry and determined to return
unto her father’s people; wherefore, she departed into
the wilderness.
2 But a messenger of HWHY met her by a well where
she stopped to rest and he said unto her, Haḡar,
daughter of Sarah, who gave thee unto her husband
Aḇraham and took thee into her own bed that thou
mightest raise up seed unto her, why art thou thus
fleeing into the wilderness from the camp of Aḇraham?
3 And Haḡar replied, I am returning to the land of my
father for it grieveth me to be bound to Sarah.
4 And the messenger of HWHY said to her, Return
unto Sarah and be subject unto her for she is given to
thee to be a mother unto thee and this seed is hers as
well as yours.
5 HWHY will multiply thy seed exceedingly so that it
shall not be numbered for multitude and thou shalt
300

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

bear a son and shall call his name Yishma’ĕl, because
HWHY hath heard thy prayers and answered them.
6 He will be a man of the desert and a man of war;
nevertheless, many shall join themselves unto him and
his people shall be great.

108 Haḡar replied, What shall I say is the name of
him who beareth these glad tidings.
2 And the messenger replied, Be’ĕr Laḥai Ro’i, for
know thou that Elohim seest thee in all places
whithersoever thou shalt be.
3 And Haḡar said, I know that Elohim seest me, for
He hath this day sent His messenger to minister unto
me.
4 Wherefore, Haḡar returned unto the tent of Sarah
and at the appointed time she bare unto me a son and
I called his name Yishma’ĕl, according to the word of
the messenger.
5 And I was four score and six years old when Haḡar
bare Yishma’ĕl unto me.

109 At the end of thirteen years, HWHY appeared
unto me and He said unto me, Aḇraham, because thou
hast been faithful in all things unto me from the time
thou wast three years old, and behold, now thou art
ninety and nine, therefore, I will establish My Covenant
with thee for with thee I shall commence a new
dispensation of the Besorah that from this time forth all
those who would be sealed into Me must be sealed
into thee.
2 Wherefore, I will send Noaḥ unto thee in the
Mishkan, and he will bestow upon thee the keys of this
kehunnah, for the city of Malkitseḏeq will I take up from
off the earth and there will be a new beginning in thee.
3 For I will greatly multiply thy seed and I will make
them My ministers that through thy kehunnah all the
peoples of the earth shall be baruḵ.
301

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Therefore, from this time forth shall every male
child among you be circumcised in that his foreskin
shall be opened in token of the opening of his heart to
the light of the Besorah.
5 And on the eighth day shall ye do it that ye may
remember that on the eighth day they shall be
immersed that the beraḵah of the besorah may come
upon them.
6 This is according to the Covenant I made with
Aḏam in the garden Ĕḏen, but I instructed Noaḥ and
Shĕm not to administer this Covenant unto thee that
thou mightiest receive it in token of this new Covenant
which I make with thee.
7 Although I gave these ordinances in the beginning
unto Aḏam, yet the sons of men have continually gone
astray from my precepts and have not kept My
ordinances which I gave unto their fathers.
8 They have neglected the ordinance of immersion
which I commanded unto them in token of the burial of
the natural man and have ceased to receive the
anointing whereby they become sovereigns and kohĕn
unto me.
9 Yea, they have turned from My Commandments
and changed My ordinances and have replaced
immersion with the washing of children which they call
immersion.
10 But, behold, this is no immersion, for I will atone for
the fall of Aḏam; wherefore, little children are innocent
until they reach the age of accountability.
11 But the sons of men have rejected My atonement
wherein I will offer My Only Begotten Bĕn for the sins
of the world, for they say that the blood of righteous
Heḇel as shed for sins, thereby rejecting Me as their
Savior.
12 But thou hast upheld My ordinances. Therefore, thy
seed shall sprinkle all nations, for thou shalt be a father
of many nations.
4

302

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And thou shalt be fruitful and many nations shall
come of thee and sovereigns of nations shall be of thy
seed.
14 Moreover, ye shall not cut yourselves in your
foreskins after the manner of the heathen, for this is
the lesser law and applieth only to those who have had
part of the Besorah cut off from that which they have
received.
15 But your hearts are opened to the fullness of My
Besorah wherefore your foreskins shall be opened.
16 For if it were profitable for you to be without a
foreskin, then would your father beget you in your
mother without a foreskin.
17 Take not away what Elohim hath given.
18 But let your foreskins be opened, for this is the true
circumcision and it will be profitable unto you as a
covenant written in your flesh, which shall be an
everlasting Covenant.
19 Your daughters also shall be circumcised upon the
marriage bed when the matrix is opened by the
entrance of her husband, for this is a qodesh
ordinance, and it is completed at the birth of her firstborn; wherefore it is written that the first-born which
openeth the matrix is qodesh because it is an
instrument in the performance of a qodesh ordinance.
20 Now, go into the Mishkan and fast and pray until
Noaḥ cometh to bestow upon thee the keys of which I
have spoken.
13

110 When HWHY had departed from me, I went into
the Mishkan and I remained there fasting and praying
for three days.
2 And at the end of that time Noaḥ came to me and
he said, Hail, Aḇraham, for thou art highly favored of
HWHY.
3 Behold, I come to thee from the city of Ḥanoḵ my
father to bestow upon thee the keys which I received
303

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

from Ḥanoḵ many years ago, for thou shalt stand at the
head and thy posterity shall be without number and in
thee and in thy seed after thee shall all the nations of
the earth be baruḵ.
4 When Noaḥ had departed from me, I rose up and
was circumcised by Eli’ezer and all the males of my
house were circumcised with me, including my son
Yishma’ĕl who was thirteen years old at this time.
5 And I conferred upon my son Yishma’ĕl the
Kehunnah of Elias and ordained him to be a kohĕn that
he might minister before HWHY.
6 But Yishma’ĕl did not honor his kehunnah, taking it
to be a light thing, which thing was a grief of heart unto
me for I knew that in the shamayim he was counted as
having no kehunnah because he honored it not;
wherefore, I did not call upon him to act in the kohenim
office.

111 And HWHY appeared unto me in the plains of
Mamrĕ and he said unto me, Behold, Yishma’ĕl shall
not be thine heir, neither Eli’ezer, for Sarah will I baraḵ
and I will give thee a son of her.
2 She shall be the mother of nations and sovereigns
and people shall be of her.
3 Then I fell upon my face before HWHY and I rejoiced
and I said unto Him, O HWHY, it is a wondrous thing
that this promise should be fulfilled when I am a
hundred years old and Sarah is ninety.
4 And HWHY said, Prepare thine heart to receive it,
and He told me many secret things concerning the
conception of the child which are great mysteries to the
unenlightened, but the elect shall know them, and I
rejoiced therein.

112 When HWHY had told me these things, I thought
of my son Yishma’ĕl and I prayed, O Elohim, grant that
Yishma’ĕl might live uprightly before Thee.
304

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And HWHY Elohim replied, Sarah thy wife shall bear
thee a son and thou shalt call his name Yitsḥaq and I
will continue in him the Covenant which I have
established with thee to be an everlasting Covenant
with his seed after him.
3 And as for Yishma’ĕl, I have heard thee.
4 Behold, I have baraḵ him and will make him a great
nation.
5 But My Covenant will I establish with Yitsḥaq whom
Sarah shall bear unto thee at this same time in the next
year.
6 Then Elohim left me and I saw Him ascend up into
the shamayim and my heart rejoiced in the promises
of HWHY unto me.
2

113 Three months later HWHY sent unto me three of
His ministering messengers who were qodesh men of
Elohim from the city of Ḥanoḵ.
2 For I was sitting at the door of my tent and I lifted
up my eyes from my meditations, and behold, three
men in the distance were walking toward our camp.
3 And the Ruaḥ of HWHY whispered unto me that they
were qodesh men of Elohim who had a beraḵah for
me; wherefore, I rose up and ran to meet them; and
bowing down before them, I led them unto Sarah’s
tent.
4 Taking water from Sarah, I washed their feet and
spreading a carpet under the tree which was at the
door of Sarah’s tent, I spread cushions upon it and
caused them to sit down there.
5 And I called Eli’ezer and instructed him to send one
of the young men to fetch a young and tender calf and
supervise the preparation of it.
6 Sarah also supervised the young women in
preparing cakes and milk and cheese, mutton and beef
to eat until the calf was prepared.
305

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

114 When they had eaten, one of the qodesh men
said unto me, We shall return to thee nine months
hence, and behold, at that time Sarah shall bear a son.
2 Now, Sarah was listening at the door of the tent,
and when she heard these words, she laughed within
herself, knowing that she was past the age of bearing
and I also was very old.
3 But the qodesh man of Elohim rebuked her, saying,
Is anything too hard for HWHY?
4 Surely when we return here nine months hence,
thou shalt bear a son.
5 Whereupon the three qodesh men of Elohim
entered with me into Sarah’s tent and baraḵ her.
6 And the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh fell upon Sarah in mighty
power in the beraḵah and she conceived according to
the word of the man of Elohim.

115 Then the three qodesh men of Elohim departed
from our camp, and I walked with them to bring them
on their way toward Seḏom.
2 And the one who had before spoken, said unto me,
Aḇraham, we are from the city of Ḥanoḵ and are
ordained after the qodesh order of Elohim.
3 We have come not only to baraḵ Sarah that thou
mightest have seed raised up unto thee out of her, but
also on a mission which bringeth us sorrow.
4 Nevertheless, the Word of HWHY came unto me
saying, Shall I hide from Aḇraham that thing which I
will do?
5 Nay, surely for his integrity he shall know what I am
about to do.
6 Wherefore, Aḇraham, hast thou looked upon the
iniquities of Seḏom and her sister cities?
7 For
they have provoked HWHY with their
abominations.
306

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

For four times in each year they gather together to
sing and dance before their mighty ones and when
they are dancing every man layeth hold upon the wives
and daughters of his neighbors and lieth with them and
this they do without authority from Elohim, which thing
is an abomination in His sight.
9 But, behold, this is the least of their sins.
10 For no man is safe who entereth their city, for when
a stranger entereth there, they will take from him his
goods by force and they will abuse his body, for both
men and women will they bind and crowds of the
Seḏomites will gather about them and lie with them by
force until every one who desireth to lie with them hath
done so.
11 Now it is a wicked thing that men or women should
be forced to lie with another against their will, but here
the whole city uniteth to force this wicked thing.
12 Moreover, when they have stolen a man’s goods
and abused his flesh, they will torture him and when
they tire of torturing him, they will leave him naked and
without food or water to die in the streets of their city
and it is forbidden by the law for anyone to help such
a one by giving him food or drink.
13 Moreover, the people of these cities have
numerous mighty ones before which they practice
every kind of abomination without authority.
14 Wherefore, HWHY hath sent us to gather the
righteous out of the cities before they are destroyed.
15 So saying, the three embraced me and kissed me
and went on their way toward Seḏom.
8

116 But I remained a long time where they had
departed from me thinking on the things they had said,
for it grieved my heart that these great cities with all
their inhabitants should be destroyed.
2 Wherefore, I, too, went down to the vicinity of
Seḏom and I called upon the Name of HWHY there.
307

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

And when He answered me out of the shamayim, I
said unto Him, O HWHY Elohim, merciful and kind, wilt
thou destroy the inheritances of the righteous because
of the wicked?
4 Nay, O HWHY, far be it from Thee to do this thing.
Wilt Thou not spare the inheritances of the righteous?
5 Peradventure there may be fifty righteous in the
city, wilt Thou in thine anger destroy the city and not
spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous that
are in it?
6 Surely Thou wilt not destroy the inheritances of the
righteous because of the wicked.
7 Such a judgment should never be passed
according to the justice of Thine Qodesh Torah which
is in Thy bosom.
8 And HWHY said, If I find in these cities fifty righteous
who keep the Torah and precepts of Elohim and have
not partaken of the abominations of the Seḏomites,
then surely I will spare the whole country for their sake.
3

117 Nevertheless, I ventured to speak before HWHY
again, for I know that all His Ways are just.
2 And I said unto Him, O HWHY, suppose there shall
lack but five of the fifty righteous. Wilt Thou destroy the
whole land for the lack of five men?
3 And He said, If there be forty-five righteous in the
land, I will not destroy it.
4 And I spake unto HWHY again, saying, O HWHY, I
know that I am yet but dust and ashes, for although I
am, by the testimony of Thine own mouth, declared to
be a son of Elohim, yet I am not yet glorified to be like
Thee.
5 Nevertheless, be not displeased with me when I
plead on behalf of the righteous; for suppose there
shall be forty righteous in the land?
6 And He said, I will not destroy it if I find there forty.
308

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Then I said, O HWHY, Thou hast been patient
indeed with Thy servant; wherefore, I shall speak yet
again before Thee, Suppose there shall thirty
righteous be found there?
8 HWHY replied, I will not destroy it if I find thirty there.
9 Then I spake again saying, I have ventured to
speak before HWHY; shall I now cease lest the
righteous be destroyed with the wicked?
10 Suppose there shall be twenty righteous found in
the land?
11 And HWHY said, I will not destroy it for the sake of
twenty.
12 Finally I said, O, let not HWHY be displeased and I
will speak only once more.
13 Suppose ten righteous shall be found there?
14 And He said, I will not destroy it for the sake of ten.
15 But thou, Aḇraham, remain here in prayer and
fasting until My messengers return unto thee, for if ten
righteous be not found in the land, I shall gather out
those righteous who are found there and thou shalt be
caught up of the earth to call down fire and brimstone
upon the land by a qodesh ordinance inasmuch as
thou art a kohĕn and a sovereign forever after the
order of the Most High Elohim, having the right of the
First-born which hath come down from the fathers to
exercise absolute authority over thy posterity, even the
right of life and death under the direction of the Qodesh
One.
16 Nevertheless, remember that this authority can
only be exercised under the direction of the shamayim,
for when any man exerciseth his kehunnah contrary to
the will of the shamayim, his kehunnah is forfeited, his
authority passeth away and he can call upon the
powers of the shamayim to accomplish no work from
that day forward.
7

309

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Wherefore, let all men repent of the exercise of
unrighteous dominion and turn unto HWHY their Elohim,
that they be severed not from the rights of His House.
18 So saying, HWHY departed from me and I remained
in that place in fasting and praying, awaiting the return
of the three messengers.
17

118 This is the account which Lot told unto me,
Aḇraham, concerning the coming of the three
messengers unto him in Seḏom.
2 For Lot was sitting in the door of his house in the
city of Seḏom conversing with two of his sons-in-law
who were Seḏomites, when he saw three men
approaching down the street of the city.
3 And the Ruaḥ of HWHY whispered unto Lot, Behold
these are My messengers who bring tidings of
deliverance.
4 Lot, therefore, rose up to meet them and bowing
down before them, said, Behold now, my masters, turn
in, I pray you, into your servant’s house and tarry all
night that I may wash your feet and anoint your heads
and feed you, and in the morning ye may go on leaving
only a beraḵah upon the head of your servant.
5 And they said, Nay, but we will abide in the street
tonight for we have heard that it is not safe to enter into
the house of a Seḏomite lest we be abused and
tortured and killed and our property stolen from us.
6 But Lot replied, Not so, my masters, for I am no
Seḏomite, but a true worshiper of HWHY and I know that
ye are His messengers for His Ruaḥ hath shown me
this thing.
7 Then, when Lot had confessed his faith in HWHY,
the messengers entered with him into his house and
he did set before them a feast with unleavened bread
and wine and they baraḵ it and partook thereof and
Lot’s family also partook and were filled.
310

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

119 When Lot’s two sons-in-law saw him take the
strangers into his home, they went straightway unto
the magistrates of the city for it was unlawful in the city
of Seḏom to entertain a stranger in your home.
2 Wherefore, the people of Seḏom surrounded Lot’s
house, both young and old, all the people of the city.
3 And one of them called to Lot and said, Where are
the men whom thou tookest into thine house tonight?
4 Behold, thou knowest that it is contrary to our laws
to thus entertain strangers.
5 Nevertheless, we will forgive thee for thou art a
mighty prince among us; therefore, bring forth the men
unto us that we may lie with them and do unto them
according to all the desires of our hearts.
6 But Lot went out the door to the front of his house
and securing the door behind him, he confronted the
Seḏomites.
7 And Lot said to them, I pray you, my brethren, do
not these wicked things, for it is contrary to the Torah
of the Most High Elohim who is Sovereign over all, to
force anyone to lie with another.
8 Repent now, therefore, that the wrath of the Most
High Elohim fall not upon you and ye with your city be
destroyed.
9 But they were angry with Lot and they cried unto
him, Stand away from the door lest we take thee also.
10 Thou hast come in among us and partaken of the
good of our land and we have treated thee with honor
although thou wast a stranger. Dost thou now make
thyself a judge over us?
11 And their anger increased against Lot and they said
unto him, Behold, we will deal worse with thee than
with them.
12 Wherefore, we shall take thee and thy daughters
and the men who have come in unto thee and any
311

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

others in thine household who shall please us and we
will do with you according to all our desires.
13 But Lot replied, Behold now, I have two daughters
who have not lain with man.
14 Let me, I pray you, plead with you that ye take them
not according to this wickedness and abuse them
according to your abominations, for the Most High
Elohim will surely destroy this city if ye repent not.
15 Wherefore, ye shall do nothing unto me nor my
daughters nor the strangers that are within my gate nor
any of my household, for Elohim will smite you in the
attempt.
16 And their anger increased yet more against Lot and
they came near to break down the door, but the
messengers of Elohim who were qodesh men bearing
the Power of the Kehunnah after Elohim’s qodesh
order, put forth their hands, pulled Lot into the house
and shut the door behind him.
17 Then they smote the people of Seḏom with
blindness so that they could not find the door.

120 And one of these qodesh men said unto Lot,
Take now all that appertaineth unto thee, whether
persons or goods, out of this city, for the wrath of
Elohim is upon this place and tomorrow it shall be
destroyed because the cries of those who have been
abused here have risen unto the ears of HWHY of
Tsebaoth and the abominations of the Seḏomites have
come up before His face.
2 Wherefore, surely upon the morrow the vengeance
of HWHY shall fall upon Seḏom that neither root nor
branch shall be left here for the fullness of their iniquity
hath come upon them and in the fullness thereof they
shall be cut off.
3 Therefore, Lot went forth at that time and spake
unto his sons-in-law and his married daughters and all
who had gone forth with him from our camp, saying,
312

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

Up, get you out of this place for on the morrow HWHY
will destroy this city.
4 But his words were as foolishness unto them and
they mocked him.
5 And Lot returned unto his house in sorrow.

121 When morning came, the men of Elohim
hastened Lot saying, Arise, take thy wives and thy
daughters who are here with thee in the house and
depart hence lest ye be consumed by the wrath of
Elohim which shall be visited upon the iniquities of
Seḏom.
2 And while they were preparing to depart, Lot’s heart
being full of sorrow at leaving his daughters and his
daughters’ children to be destroyed, the men of Elohim
took him by the hand with his wives and his daughters,
for HWHY had mercy upon Lot because of his integrity,
because he had not bowed down unto false mighty
ones nor entered into the abominations of Seḏom.
3 And Lot thought to dwell in Tso’ar; wherefore, he
hastened there, but his wife Ado turned back unto the
city of Seḏom.
4 Ado was the daughter of Ĕli, the son of Eli’ezer,
which Ĕli had accompanied Lot to Seḏom.
5 And Ado thought upon her parents and her
daughters who remained in the city, her heart was
pained within her and she turned back unto them and
was lost.
6 But Lot entered with the rest of his family into Tso’ar
and was there when the cities of the plains were
overthrown.

122 Then the three qodesh men of Elohim came
unto me, Aḇraham, where I was fasting and praying
nigh unto Seḏom, and they lifted me up into the
shamayim and taught me the ordinances, the key
313

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

words, and the signs by which I might call down fire
and brimstone upon the cities.
2 And I did as I was commanded by the messengers
of Elohim and the cities were destroyed.
3 And when I saw the destruction of the land, my
heart was sorrowful, but HWHY said unto me, I have
had mercy upon Lot and have sent him out of the city
that he was not destroyed, for he was the only
righteous man in all the cities.
4 Wherefore, my heart was comforted.

123 And when the destruction was over, Lot feared
to continue dwelling in Tso’ar, lest it also should be
destroyed.
2 Wherefore, he took his family and went unto the
cave of Aḏullam and dwelt there.
3 And the word of HWHY came unto Lot saying, Go in
now unto thy two daughters who are with thee who
have not known man, for they shall conceive by thee
that thy posterity shall not be cut off from the earth.
4 So Lot went in unto his two daughters and lay with
them and they conceived by him.
5 And the first-born bare a son and called his name
Mo’aḇ.
6 And the younger also bare a son and she called his
name Ben-Ammi.
7 And Lot dwelt in the cave for five years and after
that he took his wives and his daughters and his sons
whom his daughters had borne unto him and dwelt on
the other side of Yardĕn.
8 And HWHY baraḵ him and prospered him and he
dwelt in safety.

124 After the destruction of the cities of the plains, I,
Aḇraham, journeyed to the south to the land of Gerar.
2 Now the sovereign of the land of Gerar was
Aḇimeleḵ, and he was one who worshipped the Most
314

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

High Elohim and he was just and upright in all his
ways.
3 And Aḇimeleḵ had entered the Qodesh Order of
Elohim and was a kohĕn and a sovereign after the
Order of the Most High Elohim and had received the
rites and ordinances of the Besorah.
4 As a youth he had dwelt with me in the city of
Shalom and he was as a brother unto me and we
shared all things.
5 When Sarah and I went in unto Aḇimeleḵ to
commune with him, the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon
Aḇimeleḵ and he baraḵ Sarah in great outpourings
after the Order of the Ancients and anointed her that
she might bear qodesh seed and we rejoiced in the
bireḵoth of HWHY unto Sarah through the three qodesh
men from the City of Ḥanoḵ and through His servant
Aḇimeleḵ.
6 And the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon me also and I baraḵ
her and anointed her that the Ruaḥ of HWHY might fall
upon her in a greater outpouring to the sanctification
of herself and her seed.
7 And we rejoiced together for three nights and two
days and worshipped HWHY our Elohim and were filled
with joy and peace in the bireḵoth of HWHY unto us.
8 And we were magnified in HWHY.

125 The next night, after Sarah and I had returned
to our camp, Aḇimeleḵ was seated upon his throne
praying when a sleep from HWHY fell upon him and he
slept there all that night.
2 And while he slept, he dreamed a dream in which a
messenger of HWHY with a drawn sword in his hand
came and stood above him.
3 And Aḇimeleḵ was frightened at the messenger,
but the messenger said unto him, Fear not, for
because thou hast faithfully entered into the rites and
ordinances of My Besorah and hast walked a qodesh
315

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

walk before Me and didst uphold Shĕm and Aḇraham
after him in the work which I have called them to do in
maintaining My qodesh order in the earth, behold, I am
sent to stand by thy side and shall protect thee against
all the power of the adversary.
4 For thy sins are forgiven thee and thine exaltation
is sure and thou shalt dwell forever in the presence of
thy Elohim.
5 So saying, the messenger departed from the vision
of Aḇimeleḵ, but he felt His presence near him from
that time forth and the adversary thereafter exercised
no power over him.

126 We had dwelt in Gerar nine months when the
three qodesh men of Elohim again visited us and
Sarah gave birth to a son.
2 And on the eighth day he was circumcised
according to the commandment of HWHY to me and I
called his name Yitsḥaq. The child grew and when he
was three years old he was weaned and I made a great
feast on the day he was weaned.
3 And Malkitseḏeq, sovereign of Shalom, with Ĕḇer
his heir and Aḇimeleḵ, sovereign of Gerar with his son,
Aḇimeleḵ, and Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim, father
to Haḡar and Yishma’ĕl, and all the mighty princes of
the land came to the feast which I prepared, for these
were the men whom I loved, with my brethren Aneram,
Eshkol, and Mamrĕ.
4 My father, Teraḥ, also, and my brother, Naḥor,
came unto the feast having heard that Sarah had
borne a son. And we all rejoiced before HWHY for many
days that my son Yitsḥaq had reached the age of
weaning from his mother.
5 And from that time forth Sarah and I introduced the
lad into the Mishkan and began to instruct him in the
mysteries of reverence that he might be prepared in
316

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

his youth to enter into the Most Qodesh Place and be
instructed there.
6 For Shĕm had instructed me in the city of Shalom
that children should be instructed in the Hĕyḵal from
the age of weaning which is three years old, that they
should be instructed in the Most Qodesh Place from
the age of puberty which is twelve years old, and that
they should be endowed with power from on high from
the age of maturity, which is fourteen years.
7 But inasmuch as I had not journeyed unto the city
of Shalom until I was ten years old, I was prepared for
the bireḵoth of HWHY’s House in only a few years.

127 My son Yishma’ĕl, I did not introduce into
HWHY’s House in his childhood because he was not
spiritual in his nature, but he was a hunter, proficient in
the use of the bow and other instruments of death.
2 Nevertheless, HWHY was with Yishma’ĕl and baraḵ
him for my sake in all to which he put his hand.
3 When Yitsḥaq was five years old, he was sitting
with Yishma’ĕl at the door of Haḡar’s tent where
Yishma’ĕl was sharpening his arrows, for Yishma’ĕl
was sixteen years old at this time.
4 As they thus sat at the door of Haḡar’s tent, Yitsḥaq
picked up one of Yishma’ĕl’s arrows and broke it.
5 Seeing this, Yishma’ĕl grew angry and taking
another arrow, he fitted it to his bow intending to slay
Yitsḥaq, but HWHY touched his heart so that he did not
slay him.
6 But Sarah saw this thing which Yishma’ĕl had
intended to do to Yitsḥaq and she was grieved at it.
7 That night when I entered the tent of Sarah, she
said to me, Let Haḡar and her son be sent to dwell
apart, for this day did Yishma’ĕl seek to slay Yitsḥaq.
8 Now these words caused me great sorrow for I did
not desire to see my family divided.
317

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

But that night a messenger of HWHY came unto me
in a dream, saying, Hearken unto the words of Sarah,
thy wife, and let Haḡar and her son Yishma’ĕl dwell
apart lest harm come upon thy son Yitsḥaq who shall
be thine heir.
9

128 Therefore, I arose early in the morning and took
Haḡar and my son Yishma’ĕl into the deserts of Araḇia
where dwelt a people who were friendly to me.
2 And there I built with Yishma’ĕl a Hĕyḵal unto HWHY
our Elohim that his seed might always be kept in
remembrance of HWHY.
3 And Haḡar and Yishma’ĕl dwelt among the people
of the desert and were content, and Yishma’ĕl was a
mighty hunter with the bow among them.
4 And every year at a certain time I went and dwelt
with my wife, Haḡar, and with my son, Yishma’ĕl.
5 And when Yishma’ĕl was twenty years of age, his
mother asked my consent to take him to the house of
her father in Mitsrayim, for she longed to see her family
again.
6 Wherefore, I gave them my beraḵah and they
departed into the land of Mitsrayim where they
remained one year.
7 And while they were in Mitsrayim, Yishma’ĕl took to
wife Meriḇah, daughter of Phanes, son of Pharaoh,
sovereign of Mitsrayim.
8 And after he had taken Meriḇah to wife, they
remained in the land of Mitsrayim yet ten years and
Meriḇah bare unto Yishma’ĕl four sons and two
daughters.
9 After this time, Yishma’ĕl took his mother and his
wife and his children and returned to the deserts of
Araḇia.
10 And HWHY baraḵ Yishma’ĕl for my sake and
increased him in flocks and in herds and in good
things.
318

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

129 When Yishma’ĕl had returned from the land of
Mitsrayim, I went as was my custom to stay with my
wife Haḡar and my son Yishma’ĕl.
2 And when Yishma’ĕl was away hunting, his wife
Meriḇah spake disrespectfully to me and complained
of my being in their tents.
3 Moreover, she abused her children and when I
chastised her for this thing, she rose up in anger
against me.
4 My wife Haḡar saw all these things, and when her
son Yishma’ĕl had returned from the hunt, she
complained unto him of the actions of Meriḇah toward
me.
5 And Yishma’ĕl came unto me and said, My father,
what shall I do with such a wife who abuseth my father
and my children and speaketh evil of me, for she had
spoken against her husband Yishma’ĕl, also.
6 And I said unto him, Such a one is not fit to be thy
wife nor the mother of thy children nor to dwell in thy
tents; wherefore, give her a bill of divorcement and
send her back to the home of her father in shame and
find another more worthy than she to be thy wife and
the mother of these children.
7 So Yishma’ĕl gave unto Meriḇah a bill of
divorcement and sent her back to her father Phanes in
the land Mitsrayim and his mother Haḡar raised his
children until he took another wife.

130 The next year Yishma’ĕl came to my camp and
when he had kissed me and we had eaten together,
he said unto me, My father, according to thine
instructions I did give unto my wife Meriḇah a bill of
divorcement and sent her back to the home of her
father in shame.
2 Now, therefore, I come unto thee to seek thy
counsel concerning obtaining another in her place.
319

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Now, it pleased me that my son Yishma’ĕl had
come to me regarding choosing a wife.
4 Therefore, I sought among the women of my camp
and found two who were desirous of being wife to
Yishma’ĕl, even Zola, the daughter of my wife Peleliah
and Naiomi, the daughter Kemu’ĕl, the son of Kish,
who had been among the believers who met in the
room of my mother in the city of Ur.
5 And I was pleased to give them unto my son
Yishma’ĕl because he had come to me for counsel and
because he had begun to magnify his kehunnah for he
did worship HWHY our Elohim and sought to overcome
his weaknesses.
6 And Yishma’ĕl and his family dwelt with me a long
time in Gerar and after that, when I moved my camp to
Be’ĕrsheḇa, which is by Ḥeḇron.
3

131 And Sarah and I continued to teach our son
Yitsḥaq and instruct him in the ways of the ancients
that he might be initiated into the Qodesh Order of
Elohim and receive the bireḵoth of eternal lives.
2 And Yitsḥaq did know HWHY and HWHY was with him
and did baraḵ him greatly because he was full of faith
and love and did good to all he met.

132 When Yitsḥaq was thirty-seven years old, he
was one day talking with his brother Yishma’ĕl.
2 And Yishma’ĕl was boasting of his righteousness,
saying, I was thirteen years old when HWHY spake to
my father to circumcise us, and from that time I have
consecrated my soul unto HWHY and kept His
Commandments as they have come unto me from my
father.
3 But Yitsḥaq answered him saying, Why dost thou
boast in thy righteousness, for none of us are without
sin and all mankind is as nothing before HWHY.
320

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And we must be prepared to be offered upon the
altar as a sacrifice to our Elohim with joy that we can
glorify Him before our calling and election is made
sure.
4

133 This saying of Yitsḥaq’s pleased HWHY and
HWHY visited me, saying, Thy son Yitsḥaq have I seen
and his heart is right before me and he is clean and
pure, an acceptable sacrifice unto HWHY.
2 And HWHY touched the eyes of my understanding
that they were opened and I saw the sons of Elohim
gathered in council with the Father and Hĕlĕl, also was
among them.
3 And HWHY said to Hĕlĕl, Surely thou hast been
abroad in the earth trying the hearts of men.
4 Whom hast thou found standing in his integrity who
should be further tried to know whether he be thine or
mine?
5 Hĕlĕl replied, Hast thou considered Aḇraham and
Sarah and Yitsḥaq? For I am unable to lead them into
sin in whatever matter I place before them.
6 They are united in perfect bonds of love and purity
and even Aḇraham hath united all his family again
which was divided.
7 Surely they should be tried to know whether they
are faithful only in their prosperity or whether they will
be faithful also in adversity.
8 And HWHY said unto Hĕlĕl, Were I to say unto
Aḇraham, Bring up Yitsḥaq thy son unto the high place
and offer him as a burnt offering unto me, he would not
withhold him from me nor would Yitsḥaq refuse to be
offered.
9 And Hĕlĕl answered HWHY, Speak now unto
Aḇraham as thou hast said and we shall see whether
his heart is perfect with HWHY or whether his end shall
be in my reign.
321

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

134 With these words, the vision was closed to my
mind and HWHY said unto me, Aḇraham, take now thy
son Yitsḥaq whom thou lovest and go to the land of
Moriyah and offer him there for a burnt offering upon
the mountain upon which thou shalt see the glory of
HWHY resting as a cloud.
2 And HWHY departed from me and left me to
consider these things.

135 Now Sarah’s heart was knit unto Yitsḥaq’s
insomuch that she did keep him by her side whenever
possible and he did sleep upon her bed at night.
2 Wherefore, I thought, How shall I separate Yitsḥaq
from his mother Sarah for such a journey lest her heart
be grieved and she die in her grief?
3 So I went in unto Sarah and comforted her and
afterwards I said unto her, Our son Yitsḥaq we have
taught these many years and I feel now that I should
take him unto Shĕm and Ĕḇer, his son, where he can
be instructed by the ancient ones in the mysteries of
the ancients that he may become a perfect servant of
HWHY our Elohim.
4 Sarah replied, Thou hast spoken well, my aḏon. Go
now and do all as thou hast said, only let the lad remain
not too long apart from me for my soul is bound to his
soul with a perfect love from Elohim.
5 And I answered Sarah saying, My daughter, let us
pray to HWHY our Elohim that we may yield to His Will
in all things and that all things will work together for our
good.

136 And Yitsḥaq slept with us that night and Sarah
kissed and embraced him and instructed him until
morning.
2 And she said to him, O my son, how can my soul
separate itself from thee?
322

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And she still kissed and embraced him until the time
of preparation had come.
4 Then Sarah took a beautiful and costly robe from
among those which Aḇimeleḵ had given her, for
Aḇimeleḵ had loved Sarah greatly and had given her
many precious things, but his love toward her was pure
in the sight of Elohim and according to the laws of the
shamayim.
5 With this robe which had never been worn, Sarah
clothed Yitsḥaq and put a turban upon his head in
which she wrapped a precious stone.
6 And she said unto him, Even this stone art thou
precious unto me, my son.
7 Nevertheless, I would have thee so conduct thy life
that when HWHY shall come to gather up his jewels,
thou wilt be among the number.
3

137 Thus, taking provisions for our journey, we
started out and Sarah and others of our people
accompanied us upon the road.
2 And when the time of parting had arrived, Sarah
wept bitterly and I also wept with her as did Yitsḥaq our
son and those who accompanied us.
3 And Sarah caught hold of Yitsḥaq and held him in
her arms and embraced him and kissed him and wept
over him and Sarah said unto him, Who knoweth if
after this day I shall ever see thee again?
4 Nevertheless, our hope is in HWHY in whom is life.
5 Therefore, if I see thee not again in this veil of tears,
yet surely we shall again embrace before the throne of
Elohim.
6 Elohim baraḵ thee, my son, and keep thee secure
in His Ways and I will be close to thee all thy days.
7 So saying, Sarah kissed Yitsḥaq again and turned
back to the camp with all who had accompanied us.

323

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

138 As we proceeded upon our journey, Satan
came to me in the form of an aged man, humble and
contrite, who said unto me, How canst thou think to do
so unto thy son?
2 Did not Elohim give thee this son by a qodesh
conception after the Order of the Ancients and dost
thou think so little of this precious gift that thou wilt take
his life as thou wouldst slaughter a dumb beast and
thus cut off thine only hope of a royal posterity in the
earth?
3 What evil hath he done unto thee that thou shouldst
do this thing?
4 Dost thou not understand that this thing cannot be
from HWHY?
5 Behold HWHY delighteth not in human sacrifice.
6 Did He not smite the priest of Nimroḏ for seeking to
take thy life in like manner?
7 Surely thou shouldst repent of this thy purpose and
return thy son unto the bed of his mother, Sarah.
8 But I knew that this was the word of Satan seeking
to prevent my obeying the Word of HWHY; wherefore, I
commanded him to depart by the authority of the
qodesh kehunnah in the Name of HWHY, and he
departed from me in haste.

139 A short time later, Satan came again, appearing
to Yitsḥaq in the form of a handsome and pleasing
young man.
2 And he said unto Yitsḥaq, Dost thou not understand
that thine old father in his foolishness bringeth thee to
be slain today for no purpose?
3 Now therefore, my brother, go not with him for it is
the foolishness of his old age that doeth this.
4 Therefore, let not thy precious life and thy beautiful
body be lost from the earth in such a manner, but come
324

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

with me and I will introduce thee to the pleasures of the
earth and thou shalt take pleasure therein all thy days.
5 When Yitsḥaq heard this, he saith unto me, My
father, surely this is Satan come to dissuade me from
obeying the Word of HWHY for thus doth he appear and
thus doth he say unto me.
6 Wherefore, my father, rebuke him in the Name of
HWHY that he shall cease from troubling me for I know
that thou art a servant of the Most High Elohim and that
it is to fulfill the Will of HWHY that we are come unto this
place.
7 Wherefore, I, Aḇraham, rebuked Satan in the Name
of HWHY, the Elohim of Noaḥ and of Shĕm, and he
departed from us in fear.

140 As we continued on our journey, we entered a
narrow ravine with high walls.
2 When we were in the midst of it, we heard a mighty
rumbling and the earth shook beneath our feet.
3 Looking back, we saw a great wall of water coming
down upon us bearing trees and boulders in a mighty
flood.
4 My heart was moved within me for my son Yitsḥaq
and he sought also to protect me, but, raising my
hands to the shamayim I called upon the Name of
HWHY and HWHY heard me out of the shamayim and
stopped the flood until we had ascended from the
ravine.
5 Thus did Satan seek to destroy us that we might
not offer an acceptable sacrifice unto HWHY our Elohim
but the power of our Elohim is mightier than that of
Satan; wherefore, Satan can do no harm unto the
children of men except HWHY Elohim allow him to do it.
6 Therefore, do all things, whether they be good or
evil, work together for the good of the qodeshim of
Elohim who serve Him and keep His Commandments.
325

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

141 And on the third day, we saw the place afar off
which HWHY had appointed for the sacrifice of my
beloved son Yitsḥaq.
2 And I knew the place because the glory of HWHY
was there as a pillar of fire and a glorious cloud.
3 And when I saw the place, I said unto my son
Yitsḥaq, My son, dost thou see aught upon yonder
mountain?
4 And Yitsḥaq replied, yea, my father, for the glory of
HWHY resteth upon it as a pillar of fire and a glorious
cloud.
5 Then I rejoiced that my son was found worthy to
see this sign also and we bowed down there and
worshipped HWHY our Elohim.

142 As we approached the mountain, Yitsḥaq said
unto me, My father, we have with us the fire and the
wood, but we have no lamb to serve as a burnt offering
unto HWHY.
2 Explain now unto me the mystery hidden in this
thing that I may be obedient unto all which HWHY thy
Elohim requireth of me.
3 Then I rejoiced, for I knew that HWHY had revealed
in the heart of my son Yitsḥaq that which we must do.
4 Therefore I said unto him, Yitsḥaq, my son, HWHY
hath chosen thee to be a perfect burnt offering unto
Him instead of the lamb.
5 And this thing is a type of Ruaḥoth of HWHY who is
our first Father and His Only Begotten Bĕn who is the
Lamb slain from before the foundation to the earth.
6 For surely Elohim will offer His only Bĕn as a
sacrifice upon the stake to atone for our sins and for
the sins of all mankind, that all men might be redeemed
from the power of death and be brought to stand before
the judgement bar of the great HWHY to be judged
according to their works, that every man might receive
326

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

a righteous and just judgment and that mercy might
have claim upon the penitent, the price of their sins
having been paid by the Bĕn of Elohim.
7 Yea, surely, my son, we have been chosen to
represent the Father and the Bĕn in this thing, and
though I grieve to think of losing thee, my beloved, yet
I rejoice that we are honored thus to represent Elohim.

143 And Yitsḥaq said unto me, I will do all that HWHY
hath commanded thee, my father, with joy in my heart
that I am chosen to represent the Bĕn of Elohim in this
sacrifice, and I have this hope in me, that if we are
faithful to all the Commandments of HWHY our Elohim,
I shall yet stand in the flesh with thee and my mother
before the throne of the Ancient of Days and receive
from Him the promise of exaltation and eternal lives.
2 When I heard this answer, I rejoiced in my son
Yitsḥaq whose heart was pure and upright before
HWHY.
3 But the Ruaḥ of HWHY constrained me to test him
further, and I said unto him, Hast thou any thoughts or
feelings which would prevent thy being offered as a
perfect sacrifice before HWHY?
4 For if thou dost in any way doubt the efficacy of this
sacrifice, which is in the similitude of the sacrifice of
the Only Begotten of the Father which is full of grace
and truth, it is not meet that thou shouldst be offered
as a sacrifice before our Elohim.
5 But Yitsḥaq answered me saying, O my father, as
HWHY liveth and as thou liveth as a qodesh man of
Elohim, I know that thou art a servant of the Most High
Elohim and that thou dost hold the keys of the fathers.
6 Thou hast never asked me to do anything which
was not of Elohim but thou hast taught me by precept
and example to serve HWHY thy Elohim in every act of
my life.
327

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Shall I then shrink from being offered by thee as a
sacrifice unto HWHY thy Elohim?
8 Nay, but I shall rejoice forever to have been so
honored.
9 Baruḵ is HWHY thy Elohim who hath this day chosen
me to be sacrificed as a burnt offering before Him.
7

144 Thus we came unto the place which HWHY had
appointed for the offering of my son, rejoicing in the
glory of our Elohim.
2 Yet I did weep at the thought of losing my beloved
son Yitsḥaq and at the knowledge of the pain this
would bring to his mother Sarah, for their souls were
united as one.
3 Nevertheless, my heart rejoiced that I was chosen
with my son for this qodesh ordinance that we might
thereby magnify the Name of HWHY.

145 After kneeling in prayer unto HWHY our Elohim,
Yitsḥaq and I constructed an altar before HWHY and I
laid the wood in order upon the altar which we had
built.
2 And Yitsḥaq lay upon the altar and I bound him
there and he said unto me, Bind me securely lest I
move beneath the force of the knife and profane the
offering before HWHY.
3 So I bound him securely that he could not move
upon the altar.
4 And I wept as I prepared my son for the sacrifice
and Yitsḥaq wept with me, yet our hearts rejoiced to
have been found worthy of this great beraḵah.

146 When all was prepared, I picked up the knife,
kissed my son Yitsḥaq, and prepared to offer him as a
sacrifice unto HWHY my Elohim.
2 But the voice of HWHY came unto me saying,
Aḇraham, slay not thy son, for I have tested you in this
328

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

manner that I might know that your hearts are perfect
before Me.
3 Now I know that ye fear HWHY your Elohim in that
thou hast not withheld thine heir from My altar and he
hath willingly lain thereon to be a sacrifice of a burnt
offering unto HWHY.
4 Therefore, lift up thine eyes and behold the ram that
was chosen from the beginning to stand in the place of
thy son Yitsḥaq as a burnt offering before Me.
5 And I looked up and saw a ram caught by his horns
in a thicket.
6 For as the ram had advanced to the sacrifice, Satan
had caught him in the thicket that he might not be
offered in Yitsḥaq’s stead.
7 But I went and freed him from the thicket and
releasing my son Yitsḥaq, I placed the ram upon the
altar and offered him in Yitsḥaq’s place, that his blood
might be considered as the blood of Yitsḥaq before
HWHY.
8 And HWHY accepted the sacrifice of the ram as if it
had been Yitsḥaq and HWHY appeared unto us and
baraḵ me and my seed on that day.
9 And we rejoiced in HWHY.

147 When all things were finished, Yitsḥaq and I
returned to our camp rejoicing in HWHY our Elohim.
2 But when we reached the place we found that
Sarah was not there, for the agents of Satan had come
to her saying, Behold, dost thou not understand that
Aḇraham goeth to offer thy son Yitsḥaq as a burnt
offering unto HWHY his Elohim?
3 Surely he doeth this because he is jealous of thy
love for thy son Yitsḥaq.
4 Go, therefore, and stop this thing lest he to whom
thine heart is knitted be destroyed from off the face of
the earth.
329

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

148 But Sarah said, Surely the heart of my aḏon
Aḇraham is right with HWHY his Elohim for he walketh
before Him in all His Ways.
2 Nevertheless, shall my son Yitsḥaq be offered as a
burnt offering and I not be there to weep over him and
strengthen him and pray for him that he be an
acceptable offering unto HWHY Elohim of Aḇraham?
3 Nay, but I shall go to him.
4 And Sarah departed with her menservants and her
maidservants and went as far as Ḥeḇron but found us
not.
5 Therefore, Sarah rested in Ḥeḇron and sent her
young men to find us, who searched all the land round
about and even in the city of Shalom but found us not.
6 Then Sarah prayed unto HWHY saying, O HWHY
Elohim of Aḇraham, surely I know that all things are in
thine hand, and I do not fear for my son Yitsḥaq for I
know that my husband Aḇraham is a kohĕn ha’gadol
after Thine qodesh order.
7 Nevertheless, it is my desire to be with my son at
this qodesh hour that I might share his joy and his
sorrow before HWHY our Elohim.

149 Then the Word of HWHY came unto Sarah
saying, Surely I have accepted the offering of Yitsḥaq
and have provided a ram prepared before the
foundation of the earth that was laid to be offered in his
place; wherefore, thy son liveth and is with his father
Aḇraham and even now searcheth for thee.
2 When Sarah heard these words, her heart was
filled with joy so that she could not contain it and her
spirit was lifted up to see the Paradise of Elohim and
she exclaimed, Behold, I have seen my Redeemer and
it sufficeth me, and she gave up the ghost.
3 Thus did Sarah die in Ḥeḇron being one hundred
and twenty-seven years old and she died having seen
330

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

her Redeemer and having received from Him the
promise of eternal life.

150 Then was word brought unto us, that Sarah was
gone unto Ḥeḇron, wherefore we journeyed there and
found that Sarah had died.
2 But having inquired after the manner of her death,
we rejoiced that she went with the promise of
exaltation and that she died knowing of Yitsḥaq’s
deliverance and his acceptance with Elohim.
3 Then we took Sarah unto a cave which I purchased
of Ephron the Ḥittite for that purpose and we buried her
there and we wept over her, yet we rejoiced in her
righteousness before Elohim.
4 And all the people of the land came to honor Sarah
with Pharaoh who came from Mitsrayim and Aḇimeleḵ
from Gerar and many others who honored and loved
Sarah.
5 For she was truly a handmaiden of HWHY and
ministered unto many in the Name of HWHY in love and
charity and was greatly loved by all for her kindness
meekness and her great wisdom in reverence.

151 Thus, I, Aḇraham, began to be old having seen
one hundred and thirty-seven years.
2 Wherefore, I write this record of my life that others
might benefit from the workings of HWHY my Elohim
with me.
3 And I bear this witness that HWHY liveth and
reigneth in the shamayim, and He is the Most High
Elohim over all the earth.
4 He hath led me since first He appeared to me in a
dream when I was three years of age, even unto this
time when I am old and bowed down with years.
5 He hath done only good to me and not evil all the
days of my life.
331

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Surely I will love Him and serve Him forever and
ever and will magnify His Name on high before all
people. Amĕn.
6

152 After Sarah’s death, I sent my son Yitsḥaq unto
Shĕm and Ĕḇer to learn more perfectly the ways of the
ancients and he remained there three years before
returning to my camp.

153 In the one hundred thirty-eighth year of my life,
my brother Aḇimeleḵ, sovereign of Gerar, died being
one hundred and ninety-three years of age.
2 Wherefore, I took my people and journeyed to
Gerar where we mourned over Aḇimeleḵ for he was a
good and qodesh man who walked in perfectness
before his Elohim and had made his calling and his
election sure.
3 Therefore, we rejoiced in knowing of his end.
4 Nevertheless, we sorrowed to be parted from him,
but I knew that I should soon go to him, which
knowledge comforted my heart.
5 And his son Aḇimeleḵ was chosen to reign in his
stead.

154 The following year Lot, my brother’s son, died
being one hundred and forty years old.
2 He, too, was a just man and accepted of HWHY,
although he did not walk in all the ways of the ancients,
for he had coveted his own property and separated
from the community of Elohim, therefore he must
receive a just reward.
3 Nevertheless, HWHY loved him because he
maintained his integrity, even in the midst of wicked
Seḏom, wherefore HWHY saved him and those of his
household who would be saved from destruction, and
HWHY made of him also a mighty people.

332

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

155 Now, when my son Yitsḥaq was about to return
unto me from the city of Shalom, the Word of HWHY
came unto me saying, Behold, in the city of Ḥaran
dwelleth Bethu’ĕl the son of thy brother Naḥor who is
dead.
2 Unto Bethu’ĕl hast been born Riḇqah, who at this
time is ten years of age.
3 Send now and fetch her as a wife to thy son
Yitsḥaq, for thus have I appointed that she shall bear
unto him the chosen seed.

156 So I called unto me Eli’ezer, my trusted
companion who had been with me since we had come
out of the city of Shalom, and I said unto him, Put now
thine hand under my thigh and swear unto me before
the Most High Elohim that thou shalt go unto the city
of Ḥaran and bring thence Riḇqah, daughter of
Bethu’ĕl son of Naḥor my brother to be a wife unto my
son Yitsḥaq according to the Word of HWHY, but if the
maiden refuse to come with thee, thou shalt be free of
this thine oath.
2 So Eli’ezer swore before the Most High Elohim and
departed from me in peace.
3 He also pursued his journey to Ḥaran and found
Riḇqah, even as I had said, and returned with her after
the return of my son Yitsḥaq from the city of Shalom.
4 Thus Yitsḥaq took Riḇqah to wife when he was forty
years old, he having four other wives; but Riḇqah he
took to wife in the tent of Sarah.
5 And Riḇqah bare no children; wherefore I knew that
HWHY should work a marvelous work in her even as in
Sarah before her.
6 Therefore, my heart rejoiced in Riḇqah, the wife of
my son Yitsḥaq, for she was pure and virtuous like unto
Sarah my beloved who had preceded me into the rest
of HWHY.
333

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

157 This same year I took to wife Qeturah, the
daughter of my old friend Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of Gerar
who was dead.
2 Qeturah bare me six sons so that in all I received of
HWHY eight sons and three hundred and twenty-eight
daughters, being in all three hundred and thirty-six
souls.
3 Thus did HWHY increase me greatly besides the
many sons who were adopted to me.
4 And thus I increased continually before HWHY.

158 After nine years my son Yitsḥaq brought unto
me his wife Riḇqah for she was yet barren.
2 And she said unto me, My father, surely I know that
my mother Sarah was barren for many years before
she bare Yitsḥaq unto thee.
3 Wherefore, pray for me, that I, like Sarah, may
conceive.
4 Therefore, I prayed over my daughter Riḇqah, and
I said unto Yitsḥaq, Thy mother Sarah bare thee after
she received a beraḵah from my brother Aḇimeleḵ
sovereign of Gerar.
5 Aḇimeleḵ, son of Aḇimeleḵ, reigneth now in the
place of his father in Gerar, and he, too, is a mighty
man of Elohim.
6 Go ye in unto him that he may baraḵ Riḇqah and
she shall conceive and bear unto thee two sons and
the younger shall rule over the elder, but in the elder
shall the Word of HWHY also be fulfilled for through him
shall I slay wicked Nimroḏ even as HWHY foretold at my
birth.
7 So Yitsḥaq took Riḇqah and went unto Gerar, unto
Aḇimeleḵ, son of Aḇimeleḵ, who baraḵ her after the
Order of the Ancients, and she conceived and bare
unto Yitsḥaq two sons, even as I had said.
334

WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM

And on the eighth day, Yitsḥaq brought the last unto
me to be named and the elder I called Ĕsaw, for he
was covered with hair and I said, Surely he shall be a
mighty hunter before HWHY.
9 But the second I called Ya’aqoḇ, for I said, Surely
the elder shall serve the younger
8

159 When my youngest son Shuwaḥ, whom
Qeturah had borne me - - for she bare Zimran,
Yoqshan, Miḏyan, Meḏan, Yishbaq and Shuwaḥ - was
fifteen years of age, I called all of my sons unto me and
instructed them in the Ways of HWHY and baraḵ them
and gave unto each wives and a goodly inheritance of
property according to the instructions of HWHY and sent
them away to inherit lands which HWHY had prepared
for them.
2 Then I rested in peace knowing that I had done all
the will of HWHY and that soon I should be gathered
unto my fathers to be with Sarah and the righteous in
the Paradise of Elohim.

160 Behold, I am Yitsḥaq, the son of Aḇraham, and
I finish my father’s record.
2 For when the end of my father’s sojourn among
men had come, he called me unto him and said, My
son, according to the Commandment of Elohim unto
thee, I have appointed thee to be my heir that all the
authority I possess should rest with thee.
3 Thou knowest that HWHY is Elohim in the shamayim
and earth and we serve only Him.
4 He hath many times preserved me from destruction
when the evil ones would have destroyed me, for I
always place my trust in Him.
5 He brought me unto this land and said unto me, To
thy seed will I give all this land and they shall inherit it
when they shall keep My Commandments, My
335

WRITINGS OF AḆRAHAM

Statutes and My Judgments that I have Commanded
thee and which I shall Command them.
6 Now therefore my son, hearken unto My voice and
keep the Commandments of HWHY thy Elohim, even as
thou hast been instructed by me and by thy mother
Sarah and by Shĕm and Ĕḇer.
7 Depart not from the qodesh order of Elohim in any
particular and remember always the mercies of our
Elohim and His beraḵah will never depart from thee.
8 Teach these things also unto thy children and thy
children’s children that they may receive the like
bireḵoth with us for all those who obey the Torah of the
fathers will be baruḵ with the fathers.

161 Then I covenanted with my father to do all
things as he had said and to walk always in his ways.
2 And my father baraḵ me and my house and he took
my son Ya’aqoḇ into his tent, he being fifteen years old
at this time, and instructed him for seven days and
nights in the ways of HWHY.
3 Thus did my father end his days and he died, being
one hundred and seventy-five years of age.
4 And Yishma’ĕl and his other sons returned unto me
and we did bury our father with Sarah my mother and
all the inhabitants of the land did mourn over him for
he was a righteous man who did good unto all.
5 And truly this was his testimony, that HWHY is
Elohim over all and those who serve Him shall inherit
peace in this life and eternal joy in the life to come.
Amĕn.
- Sarah and Aḇraham

336

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU
‫ ספר אליהו‬WhYLA Rps

1 The record of Ĕliyahu the Tishbite which he wrote
for his talmid Elisha whom he called from his field in
Aḇĕl Meḥolah unto the qodesh order of Elohim.
2 Behold, I, Ĕliyahu, write this record with mine own
hand and no man shall see it until I have ascended into
the shamayim.
3 Then shall my authority and the keys of my
Kehunnah which is the Kehunnah of the Fathers pass
to my son Elisha by right of lineage and obedience.
4 This Kehunnah came down to me from the Fathers
by lineage, for I am a descendant of Yahoshua the son
of Nun who was descended from Ephrayim the son of
Yosĕph through whom the rights of the First-born
descended in Yisra’ĕl.
5 These rights I received when I was but a lad from
my Father before he was martyred for the testimony of
HWHY, and according to the word of HWHY, I have
appointed Elisha, who is my adopted son, to be my
successor in bearing of this work.
6 Nevertheless, not all of my rights shall rest upon
him, for HWHY hath said, behold, my servant Ĕliyahu
shall not die but shall bear with him the keys of his
ministry unto the city of the shamayim until the last
days when I shall send him unto one of his seed whom
I shall raise up to bear the fullness of this ministry again
among the sons of men.
7 But he shall leave with Elisha those keys necessary
to continue his work in organizing the Schools of the
Neḇi’im and the Order of Ḥanoḵ that the sons of the
neḇi’im may continue to live after the qodesh order of
Elohim.

2 Therefore, my son Elisha, I leave for thee this Book
of the Order by which thou mayest govern the Order of
Ḥanoḵ, for I have organized and governed this Order
according to the revelations of HWHY to me and under
337

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

the direction of his Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh I give thee these
instructions.
2
Everyone who desireth to enter the Order of Ḥanoḵ
must be one who loveth HWHY his Elohim with all his
heart, might, mind and strength and one who loveth his
fellowman as himself, according to the word of HWHY
through Mosheh.
3 He must covenant to live the Torah of consecration
and to hold all things common with his brethren
according to the pattern set by our First Parents, for
when they came forth from the garden they divided not
up the land but held it in common until their posterity
through wickedness began to lay claim to it for
themselves.
4 Behold, this private ownership of the property came
to pass through the teachings of that evil combination
which was organized by Qayin that men might get gain
for themselves because the love of Elohim and man is
not in them.
5 He who entereth the Order must be one who is
dedicated to seeing the face of Elohim and receiving
from Him the promise of eternal lives.
6 He must keep the Commandments and statutes of
HWHY his Elohim, to do what is good and upright in the
sight of Elohim according to that which He
commanded through Mosheh the Torah-giver and
through His servants the neḇi’im.
7 He who seeketh to enter the qodesh order of
Elohim must be one who loveth that which HWHY loveth
and hateth that which HWHY hateth.
8 He must keep all the evil far from him and love to
do good, that his works may bear testimony of his
righteousness before Elohim and man; he must be
governed by the principles of truth, righteousness, and
justice in all he doeth while in this mishkan of clay,
having repented of his inclination to follow after the
dictates of the flesh, no longer doing evil according to
the selfishness and jealousy and contentious spirit
which dwelleth in the natural man.
338

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

Every member of the Order must be dedicated to
bringing into a bond of mutual love all those who are
striving to live after the qodesh order of Elohim.
10 To live after the Order of the Ancients means that
they must live in the community of Elohim’s elect,
holding all things common and loving one another as
themselves.
11 Yea, they must unite in one heart and one mind, for
only thus can Tsiyon be built up in its perfect order and
the Name of our Elohim be glorified.
12 Those entering the qodesh order must have shown
by their works their desires to live according to all that
Elohim has revealed, to keep all His Commandments,
to perfect their lives according to Elohim’s qodesh
order that they may be sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant unto the renewal of their spirits and their
bodies.
13 They must love all the children of Light, each
according to his position in the House of Elohim, for
those who live the highest Torah are most able to be
loved, and so forth, even unto the lowest Torah of
Elohim.
14 They must hate the works of darkness and avoid
intercourse with the sons of Beliya’al, each according
to the measure of his guilt, for Elohim will bring every
work into judgment and those who associate with the
wicked will be condemned with them.
9

3 He who loveth the truth and truly desireth to live
after the order of the shamayim must declare his
willingness to be united to the congregation of HWHY’s
elect and must consecrate by covenant all of his mind,
all of his strength and all of his wealth to the community
of Elohim so that his mind may be purified by the truth
of HWHY’s precepts, his strength controlled by HWHY’s
perfect Ways, and his wealth disposed of in
accordance with HWHY’s just design.
2 He must order his life according to the pattern
which HWHY hath given, observing the hours of
worship, the Shabbathoth and the Appointed Times to
339

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

do them, neither omitting the feasts nor neglecting the
fasts of HWHY.
3 He must be one whose heart is knit unto the
ordinances of Elohim’s Torah, who will strive diligently
to preserve them in purity, neither breaking the Torot,
changing the ordinances nor neglecting the everlasting
Covenants of our Elohim.

4 When such a man cometh forward to present
himself as a candidate for admission into the Order, he
should be examined carefully by the elders of the
community, and having been proven worthy, he must
enter into a covenant in the presence of Elohim, the
qodesh messengers, and his brethren of the Order by
entering into the waters of immersion that he will do
according to all that Elohim hath commanded and not
turn away from the service of HWHY through fear of
wicked men or evil spirits nor through discouragement
because of the trials which Beliya’al shall send against
him, for HWHY Elohim of our Fathers hath appointed
that all who seek to live after His qodesh order shall be
tried and purified until their gold is pure and their dross
consumed.
2 When a man hath entered into this Covenant in the
waters of immersion, the elders of the community are
to lay their hands upon his head and baraḵ him with
the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh of Elohim.

5 At the end of each year, every member of the
community is to be interviewed, from first to last, that
the spiritual standing of each in the community may be
determined.
2 This is needful so long as Beliya’al continues to
hold sway as the elohim of this world.
3 The object of this interview is that every man in
Yisra’ĕl may be made aware of his status in the
community of Elohim’s elect, that he may measure
himself against the perfect, eternal society of the
shamayim.
340

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

If any man finds that he is being governed by a law
which is beyond his desires, then let him be placed
among those who live after his own heart.
5 If any man will qualify himself to live a Torah higher
than he is living, let the opportunity be given him to live
that Torah.
6 Thus no man in Yisra’ĕl need be abased below his
ability to qualify nor exalted above his desires to live
after the pattern of the shamayim.
7 Thus all members of the community will stand,
each in his proper place, according to a true evaluation
of his standing before Elohim.
8 Let those who judge in these matters, judge
according to correct principle, in profound humility,
being full of charity and equity toward their brethren
and sisters that the society of the shamayim may
flourish among you, being sanctified by love and unity
in HWHY our Elohim.
4

6 Anyone who refuses to live after the pattern of
Elohim’s qodesh order, the perfect society of the
shamayim, but persists in walking after stubbornness
of his own heart and the vain traditions of his fathers,
shall not be admitted into the community of Elohim’s
elect.
2 For inasmuch as he has rebelled against the
discipline required of those who are called to set their
lives in order according to the precepts of the Torah of
the shamayim, he cannot be counted among the
qodeshim of the Most High.
3 The spiritual, mental, physical and material
resources of such a man are of no value to the
community of Elohim’s elect; therefore he shall not be
permitted to enter into the Order of Ḥanoḵ to live after
the pattern of the shamayim.
4 If
he were honest in acknowledging his
weaknesses before Elohim, then would HWHY make his
weaknesses to become strengths unto him, but
inasmuch as his heart remaineth stubborn and he
repenteth not, he shall remain in his sins.
341

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

Such a one looketh upon the light of Elohim’s truth
but seeth only darkness.
6 He can never be sanctified because the light is not
in him that he should be born again, a new creature in
HWHY.
7 Although he should offer numerous sacrifices in the
similitude of the Lamb of Elohim and be immersed in
water any number of times and be washed and
anointed after the order of ha’Mashiaḥ, yet he can
never be cleansed from his sins except through
contrition and repentance, wherein he rejecteth his
former works and walketh in the path which our fathers
walked, which is the qodesh order of Elohim.
8 Unclean, unclean he remaineth so long as he will
not be governed by the Torah of Elohim, neither submit
himself to the ordinances; he shall never enter into
communion with the hosts of the shamayim.
9 It is only when the spirit of man hath been
awakened to the light of Elohim’s truth that he can
begin to direct his life according to those qodesh
principles by which he can ascend into the presence
of Elohim and make his calling and election sure.
10 Only through obedience to the Torah and that
qodesh order which has been handed down from our
fathers who entered into the presence of HWHY and
held communion with the General Assembly and
Ekklesia of the First-born can a man sanctify his life to
commune with the fathers who have gone on before.
11 Thus can the bireḵoth and rights and the Kehunnah
of the fathers descend upon their heads and they shall
dwell in the courts of the sanctified in time and eternity.
12 For only through obedience to the Torah and
ordinances of Elohim, walking faithfully after His
qodesh order and enduring unto the end therein can a
man be redeemed from the fall and gain a remission
of all his sins so that his mind can be opened to gaze
upon the true light of ḥai.
13 It is through obedience to the Torah and ordinances
of HWHY that a man receiveth the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh
5

342

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

which will lead him unto true and complete union with
Elohim and all qodesh men as his iniquities are lifted
from him and his mind is expanded to receive Elohim’s
truth that he may walk therein as one of the children of
light.
14 For the atonement of the Lamb of Elohim cometh
upon all those who are upright and humble and
submissive to all the ordinances of Elohim that their
sins should be washed away in the waters of
immersion and they be sanctified through the blood of
the covenant and immersion in fire and in the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.
15 Thus are they purified from all stain that they should
be pure and qodesh, without spot.
16 Only such a one can perfectly direct his steps to
walk blamelessly through all the vicissitudes of life,
never deviating from the Ways of Elohim, but keeping
all the Commandments without turning either to the
right or to the left and without overstepping any of the
bounds imposed by the Word of Elohim.
17 Then indeed is he perfectly acceptable before
Elohim and a pleasure unto HWHY.
18 Then will his joy increase and he will enter by
covenant into the community of the faithful to dwell with
the fathers who have inherited their thrones forever
and ever.

7 Those who enter into covenant to hold all things
common according to the Order of Ḥanoḵ and faithfully
adhere to the Order of the Ancients should be
instructed that their minds may be opened to the vision
of eternity and how the order of the shamayim can be
established and perpetuated here on the earth.
2 He who is called to instruct the children of Light in
these matters must understand and teach the talmidim
the true nature of man, the different influences which
form his character, the meaning of his history and the
reason that Elohim at one time baraḵ him bounteously
and at another time afflicteth him dreadfully.
343

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

This is the hidden knowledge, the application of
which redeemeth man from his natural state and
ushereth him into the qodesh order of Elohim where
he can be prepared to enter into the presence of
Elohim himself and partake of the fruits of eternal lives.
3

8 HWHY is Elohim of knowledge.
By His Word was everything made which was
made and He governeth all things according to His
infinite foreknowledge.
3 Even before He created the shamayim and the
earth, He counseled with the hosts of the shamayim
and planned a plan wherein the spirit of every man
should have his appointed role, for the spirit of every
man appeared before the Elohim of the Ruaḥoth in the
beginning and received a place appointed in the family
of the shamayim and earth.
4 When a man filleth his appointed role, it is
according to the glorious design of the Elohim of the
Ruaḥoth and thus, as each one functions according to
the divine plan, the work of Elohim is pushed toward
its consummation.
5 The designs of Elohim cannot be frustrated; in His
hand lieth the government of all things and he
sustaineth all the children of men in their needs,
wherefore it becometh all men to worship HWHY Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl and be obedient to the divine plan which He
hath ordained in their behalf.
2

9 Now, the Elohim of the Ruaḥoth of all men created
man to rule the world and set before him the ways of
ḥai and death, truth and falsehood.
2 Thus was man made free, even from the beginning
to choose for himself the good or the evil until the final
judgment when the works of every man shall be made
manifest and each shall receive a just reward
according to his works requisite with the mercy of our
Elohim.

344

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

10 The origin of truth lieth in the Fountain of Light,
the Qodesh One of Yisra’ĕl, while the origin of
falsehood or evil lieth in the Wellspring of Darkness.
2 All who practice righteousness are under the
domination of the Prince of Lights and walk in the path
of Light while those who practice evil are under the
domination of the Messenger of Darkness and walk in
the path of darkness.
3 Yea, the Messenger of Darkness is the Devil, that
evil spirit who lieth in wait to entrap the souls of men
and drag them down to misery and woe.
4 He lieth in wait at any opportunity to lead the
unwary soul into sin and error so that through his evil
influence, even the children of light are led to commit
those things which are grievous in the eyes of Elohim.
5 When men of their own free will choose to follow
the influence of this enemy of all righteousness, they
fall from the grace of the Elohim of the shamayim and
must repent of their iniquities that HWHY can visit them
in His mercy and redeem them from their sins, that
they may know to sing the song of redeeming love.
6 All the afflictions which befall the children of men,
all their trials, all their sorrows result from the acts of
this Prince of Evil.
7 He and all his hosts are dedicated to causing the
children of light to fall from grace and become
enmeshed in their snares.
8 Nevertheless, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl with all His
qodesh messengers is always nearby to assist the
sons of Light and save all those who will call upon His
Name from the power of the evil ones.
9 HWHY Elohim hath given unto man his agency to
choose the good or the evil.
10 HWHY loveth righteousness and will for ever and
ever and is always pleased with those who walk in
paths of righteousness, but He hateth the evil and
those who walk in the paths of evil will be cast out of
the presence of HWHY at the last day, for HWHY cannot
345

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

look upon evil with any degree of acceptance nor can
those who love evil dwell in His presence.

11 These are the fruits of the Elohim of the Ruaḥoth:
enlightenment whereby a man can perceive the Ways
of Elohim to walk therein, discernment to know the
good from the evil, reverence for the Name of HWHY
and consciousness of the approaching judgments of
Elohim, humility, patience, abundant charity, love of
righteousness, vision, wisdom, trust, faith, confidence
in the power of the Almighty Elohim, knowledge, selfmastery, sanctity, pure thoughts, abounding love for all
who follow the truth, purity, modesty and the ability to
hide within oneself the secrets of Elohim which one
has received.
2 All these things come unto men in this world
through communion with the Ruaḥ of truth.
3 All those who walk in that path which is set before
them by the Ruaḥ of truth shall receive health in their
navel and marrow to their bones and shall find wisdom
and hidden treasures of knowledge.
4 These shall inherit eternal lives, even the
continuation of the seeds forever and ever, worlds
without end.
5 Eternal shall be their bireḵoth and everlasting their
joy in the realms of glory, for they shall be crowned
with light and robed in glory and shall dwell in
everlasting burnings in the presence of our Elohim.

12 With the wicked it is not so, for the fruits of
wickedness are greed, malice, falsehood, pride,
presumption, deception, guile, insolence, unrighteous
anger, folly, arrogance, lewdness, unchastity,
blasphemies, selfishness, blindness of the eyes,
deafness of the ears, stiffness of neck and hardness
of heart.
2 Such men walk entirely in the ways of darkness and
all their works are evil and abominable in the eyes of
Elohim.
346

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

Those who walk in the paths of evil shall receive a
multitude of afflictions at the hands of the qodesh
messengers.
4 These are the sons of Perdition who are subject to
the wrath of Elohim through all eternity.
5 Eternal horror is their end and perpetual reproach,
even the disgrace of final annihilation in the fire, for
they shall dwell in outer darkness until their end which
is extinction without remnant or survival and after this,
their lot no man knoweth nor is it revealed to any man
save those who are made partakers thereof.
3

13 Thus, O Elisha, are the ways placed before every
man that he may choose the good or the evil.
2 Thus is man free to choose for himself, for HWHY
will force no man to choose the right and the devil
cannot force him to choose evil.
3 Between good and evil there is an eternal enmity;
they cannot exist together in peace.
4 But HWHY Elohim hath appointed a time of judgment
when He shall destroy evil forever.
5 Then will truth emerge triumphant and shall cover
the earth as the waters cover the seas.
6 Then shall the sanctified, those who have been
refined and purified from all evil and all the effects of
wickedness through the immersion of fire and of the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, reign with HWHY upon the sanctified
earth.
7 These have been washed clean in the waters of
immersion and received of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh unto
the cleansing of their souls from all the abominations
and filth of wickedness, that having been made pure
and qodesh they might understand the hidden
mysteries of the reign of Elohim, those secrets which
remain among the sons of Light, being endowed with
the vision of the shamayim order.
8 These hath Elohim chosen to be joint heirs in his
eternal covenant that they should inherit His glory.
9 Then will the earth be redeemed; death and She’ol
shall be no more and men shall dwell in the presence
347

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

of Elohim, those who have been sanctified, forever and
ever, worlds without end.

14 Now, my son Elisha, having explained the
influences which lead men to do good or evil, I shall
give unto thee the rules of the Order which all the
members of the community of Elohim’s elect are
bound to obey.
2 All such as shall have declared their desire to turn
away from all evil and walk in obedience to every Word
of Elohim according to the Commandments which He
hath given shall observe these rules.
3 They are to keep apart from the company of the
froward, having not intercourse with the inhabitants of
the world except such as is required in the exercise of
their stewardships and the preaching to them of the
Besorah of repentance.
4 They are to be one with their brethren in the
community of Elohim’s elect holding all their goods
common according to the qodesh order of Elohim and
holding one faith and one doctrine.
5 They are to abide by the decisions of the
Presidency of the Order and the Family Council in all
matters and be subject to the Word of Elohim as it is
delivered through His neḇi’im, the Patriarchs in all
matters doctrinal, economic and judicial.
6 They are to be united in all their efforts and always
practice veracity, humility, righteousness, justice,
charity and decency with no one walking in the
stubbornness of his own heart or going astray
according to the ideas of his fallible human mind.
7 They are to unite their efforts in overcoming their
carnal natures, that the flesh may be subjected to the
spirit, putting off the carnal man, becoming spiritual in
their natures.
8 They are to establish truth in Yisra’ĕl that falsehood
should be banished from among them forever.
9
They are to unite with an everlasting covenant
forming a bond of union which can never be broken.
348

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

They are to freely extend forgiveness to all who
have enlisted in the cause of reverence and truth.
11 Thus shall they become united as one man before
HWHY our Elohim that they may be found acceptable in
His sight.
10

15 Obedience to these rules can only be maintained
through cultivation of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh which is
received in the ordinances of Elohim’s House.
2 Every one who seeketh admittance to the
community of the Order must first be approved by the
Presidency of the Order.
3 He must then enter into a covenant of Elohim in the
presence of his brethren of the Order, binding himself
by a solemn oath to consecrate all of his mind, all of
his strength and all of his wealth to the community of
Elohim’s elect.
4 He who maketh this covenant is to keep himself
apart from those who have not received the
ordinances of Elohim’s House, except when acting in
the strength of his Kehunnah in the service of our
Elohim.
5 Those who reject the ordinances of Elohim’s House
cannot perfect their lives that they may be sanctified
by the power of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh; therefore, they
remain in their sins and their pride, being subject to the
judgment of Elohim, for surely he shall come forth in
vengeance upon all those who have the Covenant
revealed unto them but receive it not, until they shall
be finally destroyed without remnant if they repent not.
6 No man can be purified except by the power of the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh which is received in the ordinances
of Elohim.
7 Only thereby can men become qodesh if they
repent of their evils, for without repentance, the
reception of the ordinances is a mockery before
Elohim and shall result in a cursing and not a beraḵah.

16 When a man desireth to enter the Covenant and
take upon himself the ordinances of Elohim’s House,
349

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

thereby allying himself with the congregation of the
qodeshim, he is to be interviewed to determine his
conduct in life, his relations with his fellowmen, and his
adherence to correct principle and the true doctrines of
the shamayim.
2 He who is found acceptable shall then enter the
order of Ḥanoḵ after the Aharonic order where, through
obedience to the Word of Elohim and the instructions
of those who preside over him in the Kehunnah, he
may progress from one degree to another until he
entereth into the Order of the Father, the most qodesh
of all.
3 Moreover, every member of the Order is to be
interviewed at the end of each year to evaluate his
spiritual attitude and the performance of his duties.
4 Thus by annual and other interviews, the standing
of each man in the community may be made evident,
that the righteous may be promoted by virtue of their
increased understanding and the integrity of their
conduct, while the froward shall be demoted for their
waywardness.

17 When any member of the community hath been
offended by another or observeth another in
wrongdoing, he is not to come against that erring one
with a railing accusation, but is to approach him
truthfully, humbly and humanely.
2 A qodesh person of Elohim must not bear hatred in
his heart toward his brother.
3 If the offender will not hear his complaint, then he
is to take with him two of the teachers to reason with
him.
4 If the offender will not hear them, then he is to be
called before the Kohĕn ha’Gadol and his brethren
who are set as judges in Yisra’ĕl.
5 Thus will all disputations be settled in order, without
anger or emotion, that peace and harmony and unity
may be preserved in Yisra’ĕl.
6 Furthermore, no man is to bring a charge publicly
against his brother except he prove it by witnesses, for
350

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every
charge be established.

18 These rules should govern the affairs of the
community.
2 All those who have entered the qodesh order of
Elohim should be obedient to those who have been
placed over them in the Kehunnah in all matters,
especially those relating to the Order of Ḥanoḵ.
3 All the elect are to eat at a common table, assemble
at every appointed time to worship HWHY their Elohim
and attend all councils to which they are invited.
4 They are to attend the schools of the Kehunnah
where they can be instructed in the order of the
shamayim.
5 They are to neither eat nor drink that which hath not
been baraḵ and sanctified.
6 They shall assemble at sunrise, high noon and
sundown to praise HWHY their Elohim and worship
before His throne.
7 They shall meet together often to study the Word of
Elohim and share the Word of Ḥai.

19 The council of the Order is to be conducted
according to the Torah of Elohim.
2 Every member is to have an equal opportunity to
give his opinion in the council.
3 No one, however, is to interrupt while his brother is
speaking not to speak until he is finished.
4 Everyone is to speak in turn, as he is called upon.
5 No one is to speak on any subject which is not the
concern of that council.
6 Thus by reasoning together will the council
determine the Will of Elohim that all things in the Order
may be done to the glory of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.

20 Regarding the teaching of this order, O Elisha, no
one is to engage in discussion or disputation with
another concerning the Torah of Elohim nor is it to be
351

WRITINGS OF ĔLIYAHU

discussed with those who are not sincerely seeking the
truth.
2 With those, however, that have chosen the right
path, everyone is to discuss matters pertaining to the
knowledge of Elohim’s Truth and of His righteous
judgments.
3 The purpose of such discussions is to guide the
minds of the members of the community, to give them
insight into Elohim’s hidden wonders and truths, and to
bring them to walk blamelessly each with his neighbor
in harmony with all that has been revealed to them.
4 For this life is a time of preparation for meeting
HWHY and a time when the elect must be careful not to
mingle with the wicked lest they be led to turn aside
from the Way through the cunning craftiness of the evil
ones.

21 Thus must the elect be careful to live by every
Word of Elohim.
2 Say unto those who are seeking the inner vision in
these dark days, Thus saith HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
Let My elect keep no fellowship with the world for all
their ways are evil before Me.
3 Leave them to pursue their wealth and profit, for
they are slaves to their desires.
4 Be ye zealous to carry out every Covenant and
Commandment which ye have received in the
ordinances of My House or ye shall be in the power of
the devil, and surely it shall be hard for you at the
judgment bar.
5 Faithfully exercise your stewardships according to
the qodesh order of Elohim which I have revealed unto
you.
6 Accept willingly whatever may befall you, for I,
HWHY, have all things in My Hands and take your
pleasure in nothing but according to the Will of Elohim.
7 Speak only that which is acceptable before your
Elohim and lust not after anything which I have not
Commanded.
352

WRITINGS OF ELIJAH

Then shall your reward be sure and ye shall stand
at the judgment bar without fear. Amĕn.
8

22 Now, Elisha, my son, I shall soon leave to join

my Father Ḥanoḵ whose city I have sought all my days,
but I shall leave with thee the keys which are
necessary for thee to do the work which HWHY hath
appointed thee.
2 My mantle also shall fall upon thee and the pure in
heart will know thy voice and will follow thee.
3 Farewell, my son.
4 May the grace of Elohim attend thee all thy days
and may the peace of Elohim be in thine heart. Amĕn.

353

REUBEN

TESTAMENT OF RE’UḆĔN
‫! ראובן‬BWAR

1 The copy of the Testament of Re’uḇĕn, even the
commands which he gave his sons before he died in
the hundred and twenty-fifth year of his life.
2 Two years after the death of Yosĕph his brother,
when Re’uḇĕn fell ill, his sons and his sons’ sons were
gathered together to visit him.
3 And he said to them: My children, behold I am
dying, and go the way of my fathers.
4 And seeing there Yahuḏah, and Gaḏ, and Ashĕr,
his brethren, he said to them: Raise me up that I may
tell to my brethren and to my children what things I
have hidden in my heart, for behold now at length I am
passing away.
5 And he arose and kissed them, and said unto them:
Hear, my brethren, and do ye my children, give ear to
Re’uḇĕn your father, in the commands which I give
unto you.
6 And behold I call to witness against you this day the
Elohim of the shamayim, that ye walk not in the sins of
youth and fornication, wherein I was poured out, and
defiled the bed of my father Ya’aqoḇ.
7 And I tell you that he smote me with a sore plague
in my loins for seven months; and had not my father
Ya’aqoḇ prayed for me to hWhY, hWhY would have
destroyed me.
8 For I was thirty years old when I wrought the evil
thing before hWhY, and for seven months I was sick
unto death.
9 And after this I repented with set purpose of my soul
for seven years before hWhY.
10 And wine and strong drink I drank not, and flesh
entered not into my mouth, and I ate no pleasant food;
but I mourned over my sin, for it was great, such as
had not been in Yisra’ĕl.
354

RE’UḆĔN

And now hear me, my children, what things I saw
concerning the seven spirits of deceit, when I
repented.
12 Seven spirits therefore are appointed against man,
and they are the leaders in the works of youth.
13 And seven other Ruaḥoth are given to him at his
creation, that through them should be done every work
of man.
14 The first is the ruaḥ of ḥai, with which the
constitution of man is created.
15 The second is the sense of sight, with which ariseth
desire.
16 The third is the sense of hearing, with which cometh
teaching.
17 The fourth is the sense of smell, with which tastes
are given to draw air and breath.
18 The fifth is the power of speech, with which cometh
knowledge.
19 The sixth is the sense of taste, with which cometh
the eating of meats and drinks; and by it strength is
produced, for in food is the foundation of strength.
20 The seventh is the power of procreation and sexual
intercourse, with which through love of pleasure sins
enter in.
21 Wherefore it is the last in order of creation, and the
first in that of youth, because it is filled with ignorance,
and leadeth the youth as a blind man to a pit, and as a
beast to a precipice.
22 Besides all these there is an eighth ruaḥ of sleep,
with which is brought about the trance of nature and of
death.
23 With these Ruaḥoth are mingled the spirits of error.
24 First, the spirit of fornication is seated in the nature
and in the senses;
25 The second, the spirit of insatiableness in the belly;
26 The third, the spirit of fighting, in the liver and gall.
27 The fourth is the spirit of obsequiousness and
chicanery, that through officious attention one may be
fair in seeming.
11

355

REUBEN

The fifth is the spirit of pride, that one may be
boastful and arrogant.
29 The sixth is the spirit of lying, in perdition and
jealousy to practise deceits, and concealments from
kindred and friends.
30 The seventh is the spirit of injustice, with which are
thefts and acts of rapacity, that a man may fulfill the
desire of his heart; for injustice worketh together with
the other spirits by the taking of gifts.
31 And with all these the spirit of sleep is joined which
is that of error and fantasy.
32 And so perisheth every young man, darkening his
mind from the truth, and not understanding the Torah
of Elohim, nor obeying the admonitions of his fathers,
as befell me also in my youth.
33 And now, my children, love the truth, and it will
preserve you: hear ye the words of Re’uḇĕn your
father.
34 Pay no heed to the face of a woman,
35 nor associate with another man’s wife,
36 nor meddle with affairs of womankind.
37 For had I not seen Bilhah bathing in a covered
place, I had not fallen into this great iniquity.
38 For my mind taking in the thought of the woman’s
nakedness, suffered me not to sleep until I had
wrought the abominable thing.
39 For while Ya’aqoḇ our father had gone to Yitsḥaq
his father, when we were in Ĕḏer, near to Ephrath in
Bĕyth Leḥem, Bilhah became drunk and was asleep
uncovered in her chamber.
40 Having therefore gone in and beheld her
nakedness, I wrought the impiety without her
perceiving it, and leaving her sleeping departed.
41 And forthwith a messenger of Elohim revealed to
my father concerning my impiety, and he came and
mourned over me, and touched her no more.
28

2 Pay no heed, therefore, my children, to the beauty
of women, nor set your mind on their affairs; but walk
in singleness of heart in the fear of hWhY, and expend
356

RE’UḆĔN

labour on good works, and on study and on your flocks,
until hWhY gives you a wife, whom He will, that ye
suffer not as I did.
2 For until my father’s death I had not boldness to
look in his face, or to speak to any of my brethren,
because of the reproach.
3 Even until now my conscience causeth me anguish
on account of my impiety.
4 And yet my father comforted me much, and prayed
for me unto hWhY, that the anger of hWhY might pass
from me, even as hWhY showed.
5 And thenceforth until now I have been on my guard
and sinned not.
6 Therefore, my children, I say unto you, observe all
things whatsoever I command you, and ye shall not
sin.
7 For a pit unto the soul is the sin of fornication,
separating it from Elohim, and bringing it near to idols,
because it deceiveth the mind and understanding, and
leadeth down young men into She’ol before their time.
8 For many hath fornication destroyed; because,
though a man be old or noble, or rich or poor, he
bringeth reproach upon himself with the sons of men
and derision with Beliar.
9 For ye heard regarding Yosĕph how he guarded
himself from a woman, and purged his thoughts from
all fornication, and found favour in the sight of Elohim
and men.
10 For the Mitsrite woman did many things unto him,
and summoned magicians, and offered him love
potions, but the purpose of his soul admitted no evil
desire.
11 Therefore the Elohim of your fathers delivered him
from every evil and hidden death.
12 For if fornication overcomes not your mind, neither
can Beliar overcome you.
13 For evil are women, my children; and since they
have no power or strength over man, they use wiles by
357

REUBEN

outward attractions, that they may draw him to
themselves.
14 And whom they cannot bewitch by outward
attractions, him they overcome by craft.
15 For moreover, concerning them, the Messenger of
hWhY told me, and taught me, that women are
overcome by the spirit of fornication more than men,
and in their heart they plot against men; and by means
of their adornment they deceive first their minds, and
by the glance of the eye instill the poison, and then
through the accomplished act they take them captive.
16 For a woman cannot force a man openly, but by a
harlot’s bearing she beguiles him.
17 Flee, therefore, fornication, my children, and
command your wives and your daughters, that they
adorn not their heads and faces to deceive the mind:
because every woman who useth these wiles hath
been reserved for eternal punishment.
18 For thus they allured the Watchers who were
before the flood; for as these continually beheld them,
they lusted after them, and they conceived the act in
their mind; for they changed themselves into the shape
of men, and appeared to them when they were with
their husbands.
19 And the women lusting in their minds after their
forms, gave birth to giants, for the Watchers appeared
to them as reaching even unto the shamayim.
20 Beware, therefore, of fornication; and if you wish to
be pure in mind, guard your senses from every woman.
21 And command the women likewise not to associate
with men, that they also may be pure in mind.
22 For constant meetings, even though the beliya’al
deed be not wrought, are to them an irremediable
disease, and to us a destruction of Beliar and an
eternal reproach.
23 For in fornication there is neither understanding nor
reverence, and all jealousy dwelleth in the lust thereof.

358

RE’UḆĔN

Therefore, then I say unto you, ye will be jealous
against the sons of Lĕwi, and will seek to be exalted
over them; but ye shall not be able.
25 For Elohim will avenge them, and ye shall die by an
evil death. For to Lĕwi, Elohim gave the sovereignty
and to Yahuḏah with him and to me also, and to Dan
and Yosĕph, that we should be for rulers.
26 Therefore I command you to hearken to Lĕwi,
because he shall know the Torah of hWhY, and shall
give ordinances for judgement and shall sacrifice for
all Yisra’ĕl until the consummation of the times, as the
anointed Kohĕn ha’Gadol, of whom hWhY spake.
27 I adjure you by the Elohim of the shamayim to do
truth each one unto his neighbour and to entertain love
each one for his brother.
28 And draw ye near to Lĕwi in humbleness, of heart,
that ye may receive a beraḵah from his mouth.
29 For he shall baraḵ Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah, because
him hath hWhY chosen to be sovereign over all the
nation.
30 And bow down before his seed, for on our behalf it
will die in wars visible and invisible, and will be among
you an eternal sovereign.
31 And Re’uḇĕn died, having given these commands
to his sons. And they placed him in a coffin until they
carried him up from Mitsrayim, and buried him in
Ḥeḇron in the cave where his father was.
24

359

SIMEON

TESTAMENT OF SHIM’ON
‫! שמעון‬W[mv

1 A copy of the words of Shim’on, which he spoke to
his sons before he died in the hundred and twentieth
year of his life, at the time when his brother Yosĕph
died.
2 While Shim’on was sick his sons came to see him,
and becoming stronger, he sat up, kissed them, and
said,

2 Listen, my children, to Shim’on, your father, and I
shall tell you the things which I have in my heart.
2 I was born of Ya’aqoḇ, a second son for my father;
and Lĕ’ah, my mother, called me Shim’on because
hWhY had heard her prayer.
3 And I became extraordinarily strong; I did not hold
back from any exploit, nor did I fear anything.
4 My heart was firm, my courage was high, and my
feelings were dispassionate.
5 For by the Most High, manly courage is given to
men in soul and body.
6 In the time of my youth I was jealous of Yosĕph,
because my father loved him more than the rest of us.
7 I determined inwardly to destroy him, because the
Prince of Error blinded my mind so that I did not
consider him as a brother nor did I spare Ya’aqoḇ, my
father.
8 But his Elohim and the Elohim of our fathers sent
His messenger and delivered him from my hands.
9 For when I went to Sheḵem to procure ointment for
the flocks, and Re’uḇĕn went to Dothan where our
supplies and stores were, my brother Yahuḏah sold
him to the Yishma’ĕlites.
10 When Re’uḇĕn heard this he was sorrowful, for he
wanted to restore him to his father.
11 But when I heard it, I was furious with Yahuḏah
because he had let him go away alive. For five months
I was angry with him.
360

SHIM’ON

hWhY bound my hands and feet, however, and thus
prevented my hands from performing their deeds,
because for seven days my right hand became partly
withered.
13 I knew, children, that this had happened to me
because of Yosĕph, so I repented and wept. Then I
prayed to hWhY Elohim that my hand might be restored
and that I might refrain from every defilement and
grudge and from all folly, for I knew that I had
contemplated an evil deed in the sight of hWhY and of
Ya’aqoḇ, my father, on account of Yosĕph, my brother,
because of my envying him.
12

3 And now, my children, pay heed to me. Beware of
the spirit of deceit and envy.
2 For envy dominates the whole of man’s mind and
does not permit him to eat or drink or to do anything
good.
3 Rather it keeps prodding him to destroy the one
whom he envies. Whenever the one who is envied
flourishes, the envious one fades away.
4 Out of the reverence of hWhY, I chastened my soul
by fasting for two years. And I came to know that
liberation from envy occurs through reverence of
hWhY.
5 If anyone flees to hWhY for refuge, the evil spirit will
quickly depart from him, and his mind will be eased.
6 From then on he has compassion on the one whom
he envied and has sympathetic feelings with those
who love him, thus his envy ceases - and forgives
those who are hostile to him, and so ceases from his
envy. -

4 Now my father was inquiring about me because he
saw that I was sullen.
2 And I said to him, I am inwardly in pain in my liver.
For I was more sorrowful than all of them because it
was I who was responsible for what had been done to
Yosĕph.
361

SIMEON

And when we went down into Mitsrayim and he
placed me in fetters as a spy, I knew that I was
suffering justly, and I did not lament.
4 But Yosĕph was a good man, one who had within
him the Ruaḥ of Elohim, and being full of compassion
and mercy he did not bear ill will toward me, but loved
me as well as my brothers.
5 Guard yourselves therefore, my children, from all
jealousy and envy. Live in the integrity of your heart,
so that Elohim might give you grace and glory and
beraḵah upon your heads, just as you have observed
in Yosĕph.
6 In all his days he did not reproach us for this deed,
but he loved us as his own life; he extolled us more
than he did his own sons, and he showered us with
wealth, flocks, and produce.
7 And you, my children, each of you love his brothers
with a good heart, and the spirit of envy will depart from
you.
8 For that attitude makes the soul savage and
corrupts the body; it foments wrath and conflict in the
reason, excites to the shedding of blood, drives the
mind to distraction, arouses tumult in the soul and
trembling in the body.
9 Even in sleep some malicious jealousy fills his
fantasy and consumes him; by evil spirits it stirs up his
soul and fills his body with terror. In distress it rouses
his mind from sleep, and like an evil penetrating spirit,
so it manifests itself to human beings - and as a wicked
and poisonous spirit, so appears it to men. 3

5 Because nothing evil resided in Yosĕph, he was
attractive in appearance and handsome to behold, for
the face evidences any troubling of the ruaḥ.
2 And now my children, make your hearts virtuous in
the sight of hWhY, make your paths straight before
men, and you shall continually find grace with hWhY
and with men.

362

SHIM’ON

Guard yourselves from sexual promiscuity because
fornication is the mother of all wicked deeds; it
separates from Elohim and leads men to Beliar.
4 For I have seen in a copy of the Book of Ḥanoḵ that
your sons will be ruined by promiscuity, and they shall
injure with a sword the sons of Lĕwi.
5 But they shall not be able to withstand Lĕwi,
because he shall wage hWhY’s war and will triumph
over all your battalions.
6 These forces distributed among Lĕwi and Yahuḏah
will be few in number, and from you there will be no
one for leadership, just as our father predicted in his
beraḵah.
3

6 See, I have told you everything, so that I might be
exonerated with regard to your sin.
2 If you divest yourselves of envy and every
hardness of heart, my bones will flourish as a rose in
Yisra’ĕl and my flesh as a lily in Ya’aqoḇ. My odor shall
be like the odor of Leḇanon. Qodesh ones shall be
multiplied from me forever and ever, and their
branches shall extend to a great distance.
3 Then the seed of Kena’an will be destroyed, and
there will be no posterity of Amalĕq. All the
Cappadocians shall be destroyed and all the Ḥittites
shall be wholly obliterated.
4 The land of Ḥam shall be wanting, and all that
people shall perish. Then the whole earth shall be at
rest from trouble, and everything under the shamayim
shall be free from war.
5 Then Shĕm shall be glorified; because Elohim the
Master, the Great One in Yisra’ĕl, will be manifest upon
the earth as a man. By Himself will He save man.
6 Then all the spirits of error shall be given over to
being trampled underfoot. And men will have mastery
over the evil spirits.
7 Then I shall arise in gladness and I shall baraḵ the
Most High for his marvels.

363

SIMEON

7 And now, my children, be obedient to Lĕwi and to
Yahuḏah. Do not exalt yourselves above these two
tribes, because from them will arise the Savior from
Elohim.
2 For hWhY shall raise up from Lĕwi as it were a
Kohĕn ha’Gadol, and from Yahuḏah as it were a
Sovereign - Elohim and man. He will save all the
nations and the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
3 For this reason I command these things to you and
you command them to your children, so that they may
observe them in their successive generations.

8 And when Shim’on had finished his instructions to
his sons, he fell asleep with his fathers at the age of
one hundred and twenty years.
2 They placed him in a wooden coffin in order to carry
his bones up to Ḥeḇron; they took them up in secret
during a war with Mitsrayim.
3 The bones of Yosĕph the Mitsrites kept in the
tombs of the sovereigns, since their magi told them
that at the departure of Yosĕph’s bones there would
be darkness and gloom in the whole land and a great
plague on the Mitsrites, so that even with a lamp no
one could recognize his brother.

9 And the sons of Shim’on uttered lamentations for
their father.
2 And they were in Mitsrayim until the day of their
departure by the hand of Mosheh.

364

LEVI

TESTAMENT OF LĔWI
‫ לוי‬YWL

1 A copy of the words of Lĕwi: the things that he
decreed to his sons concerning all they were to do, and
the things that would happen to them until the Day of
Judgment.
2 He was in good health when he summoned them to
him, but it had been revealed to him that he was about
to die. When they all were gathered together, he said
to them:

2 I, Lĕwi, was born in Ḥaran and came with my father
to Sheḵem.
2 I was a youth, about twenty years old. It was then
that, together with Shim’on, I performed vengeance
against Ḥamor because of our sister, Dinah.
3 As I was tending the flocks in Aḇĕl-Maoul a ruaḥ of
understanding from HWHY came upon me, and I
observed all human beings making their way in life
deceitfully. Sin was erecting walls and injustice was
ensconced in towers.
4 I kept grieving over the race of the sons of men, and
I prayed to HWHY that I might be delivered.
5 Then sleep fell upon me, and I beheld a high
mountain, and I was on it.
6 And behold, the shamayim was opened, and a
messenger of HWHY spoke to me: ‘Lĕwi, Lĕwi, enter!
7 And I entered the first shamayim, and saw there
much water suspended.
8 And again I saw a second shamayim much brighter
and more lustrous, for there was a measureless height
in it.
9 And I said to the messenger, ‘Why are these things
thus?’ And the messenger said to me, ‘Do not be
amazed concerning this, for you shall see another
shamayim more lustrous and beyond compare.
10 And when you have mounted there, you shall stand
near HWHY. You shall be his kohĕn and you shall tell
365

LĔWI

forth His mysteries to men. You shall announce the
One who is about to redeem Yisra’ĕl.
11 Through you and Yahuḏah, HWHY will be seen by
men.
12 Your ḥai shall be from HWHY’s provision; He shall
be to you as field and vineyard and produce, as silver
and gold.

3 Listen, therefore, concerning the shamayim which
has been shown to you.
2 The lowest is dark for this reason: It sees all the
injustices of humankind,
3 and contains fire, snow, and ice, ready for the day
determined by Elohim’s righteous judgment. In it are
all the ruaḥoth of those dispatched to achieve the
punishment of mankind.
4 In the uppermost shamayim of all dwells the Great
Glory in the Most Qodesh, superior to all qodeshah.
5 There with him are the chief messengers, who
minister and make propitiation to HWHY for all the sins
of ignorance of the righteous.
6 They present to HWHY a pleasing odor, a rational
and bloodless oblation.
7 In the shamayim below them are the messengers
who carry the responses to the Messengers of HWHY’s
presence.
8 There with him are thrones and authorities; there
praises to Elohim are offered eternally.
9 So when HWHY looks upon us we all tremble. Even
the shamayim and earth and the abysses tremble
before the presence of his majesty.
10 But the sons of men, being insensitive to these
matters, keep sinning and provoking the anger of the
Most High.

4 Know, then, that HWHY will effect judgment on the
sons of men. For even when stones are split, when the
sun is extinguished, the waters are dried up, fire is
cowed down, all creation is distraught, invisible spirits
are vanishing, and Gĕy-Hinnom is snatching spoils by
366

LEVI

sufferance of the Most High, men – unbelieving still –
will persist in their wrongdoing. Therefore they shall be
condemned with punishment.
2 The Most High has given heed to your prayer that
you be delivered from wrongdoing, that you should
become a son to Him, as minister and kohĕn in His
presence.
3 The light of knowledge you shall light up in Ya’aqoḇ,
and you, shall be as the sun for all the posterity of
Yisra’ĕl.
4 Beraḵah shall be given to you and to all your
posterity until through His Bĕn’s compassion HWHY
shall visit all the nations forever, - although your sons
will lay hands on Him in order to impale Him. 5 Therefore counsel and understanding have been
given to you so that you might give understanding to
your sons concerning this.
6 Because those who baraḵ Him shall be baruḵ,
those who curse Him shall be destroyed.

5 At this moment the messenger opened for me the
gates of the shamayim and I saw the Qodesh Most
High sitting on the throne.
2 And He said to me, ‘Lĕwi, to you I have given the
beraḵah of the kehunnah until I shall come and dwell
in the midst of Yisra’ĕl.
3 Then the messenger led me back to the earth, and
gave me a shield and a sword, and said to me,
‘Perform vengeance on Sheḵem for the sake of Dinah,
your sister, and I shall be with you, for HWHY sent me.
4 At that time I put an end to the sons of Ḥamor, as
is written in the tablets of the fathers.
5 And I said to him, ‘I beg you, Aḏonai, teach me Your
Name, so that I may call on You in the day of
tribulation.
6 And he said, ‘I am the messenger who makes
intercession for the nation Yisra’ĕl, that they might not
be beaten.
7 And after this I awoke and baruḵ the Most High.
367

LĔWI

6 And as I was going to my father, I found a brass
shield. Thus the name of the mountain is Aspis, which
is near Geḇal to the right of Aḇima.
2 And I guarded these words in my heart.
3 Then I advised my father and Re’uḇĕn that they tell
the sons of Ḥamor that they should be circumcised,
because I was filled with zeal on account of the
abominable thing they had done to my sister.
4 And I destroyed Sheḵem first, and Shim’on
destroyed Ḥamor.
5 Then my brother came and destroyed that city by
the sword.
6 When my father heard of this he was angry and
sorrowful, because they had received circumcision
and died, and so he passed us by in his bireḵoth.
7 Thus we sinned in doing this contrary to his opinion,
and he became sick that very day.
8 But I saw that Elohim’s sentence was ‘Guilty,’
because they had wanted to do the same thing to
Sarah and Riḇqah that they did to Dinah, our sister.
But HWHY prevented them.
9 They persecuted Aḇraham when he was a nomad,
and they harassed his flocks when they were
pregnant, and they grossly mistreated El’azar, who
had been born in this house.
10 This is how they treated the nomadic people,
seizing their wives and murdering them.
11 But the wrath of Elohim ultimately came upon them.

7 And I said to my father, Ya’aqoḇ, ‘Through you HWHY
will bring the Kena’anites to nothing and will give their
land to you and your descendants after you.
2 For from this day forward, Sheḵem shall be called
City of the Senseless, because as one might scoff at a
fool, so we scoffed at them,
3 because by defiling my sister they committed folly
in Yisra’ĕl.
4 And we left there and came to Bĕyth Ĕl.
368

LEVI

8 There I again saw the vision as formerly, after we
had been there seventy days.
2 And I saw seven men in white clothing, who were
saying to me, ‘Arise, put on the vestments of the
kehunnah, the crown of righteousness, the oracle of
understanding, the robe of truth, the breastplate of
faith, the turban for the head, and the apron for neḇuah
power,
3 each carried one of these and put them on me and
said, ‘From now on be a kohĕn, you and all your
posterity.
4 The first anointed me with qodesh oil and gave me
a staff.
5 The second washed me with pure water, fed me by
hand with bread and qodesh wine, and put on me a
qodesh and glorious vestment.
6 The third put on me something made of linen, like
an ĕphoḏ.
7 The forth placed around me a girdle which was like
purple.
8 The fifth gave me a branch of rich olive wood.
9 The sixth placed a wreath on my head.
10 The seventh placed the diadem of the kohĕn on me
and filled my hands with incense, in order that I might
serve as kohĕn for HWHY Elohim.
11 And they said to me, ‘Lĕwi, your posterity shall be
divided into three offices as a sign of the glory of HWHY
who is coming.
12 The first lot shall be great; no other shall be greater
than it.
13 The second shall be in the role of kohĕn.
14 But the third shall be granted a new name, because
from Yahuḏah a sovereign will arise and shall found a
new kehunnah in accord with the gentile model of the
people and for all nations.
15 His presence is beloved, as a naḇi of the Most High,
a descendant of Aḇraham, our father.
16 To you and your posterity will be everything desired
in Yisra’ĕl, and you shall eat everything attractive to
369

LĔWI

behold, and your posterity will share among
themselves HWHY’s table.
17 From among them will be kohenim, judges, and
scribes, and by their word the sanctuary will be
controlled.
18 When I awoke, I understood that this was like the
first dream.
19 And I hid this in my heart as well, and I did not report
it to any human being on the earth.

9 And after two days Yahuḏah and I went with our
father, Ya’aqoḇ, to Yitsḥaq, our grandfather.
2 And my father’s father baraḵ me in accord with the
vision that I had seen. And he did not want to go with
us to Bĕyth Ĕl.
3 When we came to Bĕyth Ĕl my father, Ya’aqoḇ, saw
a vision concerning me that I should be in the
kehunnah.
4 And thus we came to Ḥeḇron to settle there.
5 He arose early and paid tithes for all to HWHY,
through me.
6 And Yitsḥaq kept calling me continually to bring to
my remembrance the Torah of HWHY, just as the
messenger had shown me.
7 And he taught me the Torah of the kehunnah:
sacrifices, whole burnt offerings, voluntary offerings of
the first-fruits, and peace offerings.
8 Day by day he was informing me, occupying
himself with me. And he said to me,
9 ‘Be on your guard against the spirit of promiscuity,
for it is constantly active and through your
descendants it is about to defile the sanctuary.
10 ‘Therefore take for yourself a wife while you are still
young, a wife who is free of blame or profanation, who
is not from the race of alien nations.
11 ‘Before you enter the sanctuary, bathe; while you
are sacrificing, wash, and again when the sacrifice is
concluded, wash.
12 ‘Present to HWHY the twelve trees that have leaves,
as Aḇraham taught me.
370

LEVI

‘And from every clean living animal and bird, bring
a sacrifice to HWHY,
14 ‘And of all your first-fruits and wine bring the very
first as a sacrifice to HWHY Elohim. And salt with salt
every sacrificial offering.’
13

10 And now, my children, observe the things which I
commanded you, since what I heard from my
ancestors I have told to you.
2 See, I am free of responsibility for your impiety or
for any transgression which you may commit until the
consummation of the ages in leading Yisra’ĕl astray
and in fomenting in it great evils against HWHY.
3 And you shall act torahlessly in Yisra’ĕl, with the
result that Yerushalayim cannot bear the presence of
your wickedness, but the curtain of the Hĕyḵal will be
torn, so that it will no longer conceal your shameful
behavior.
4 You shall be scattered as captives among the
nations, where you will be a disgrace and a curse.
5 For the house which HWHY shall choose shall be
called Yerushalayim, as the Book of Ḥanoḵ the
Righteous maintains.

11 I was twenty-eight when I took a wife; her name
was Melcha.
2 She conceived and gave birth to a son, and I gave
him the name Gĕreshon, because we were sojourners
in the land.
3 And I saw that, as concerns him, he would not be
in the first rank.
4 And Qehath was born in the thirty-fifth year of my
life, before sunrise.
5 And in a vision I saw him standing in the heights, in
the midst of the congregation.
6 This is why I called him Qehath, that is the Ruler of
Greatness and Reconciliation.
7 And she bore me a third son, Merari, in the fortieth
year of my life, and since his mother bore him with
great pain, I called him Merari; that is bitterness.
371

LĔWI

Yoḵeḇeḏ was born in Mitsrayim in the sixty-fourth
year of my life, for by that time I had a great reputation
in the midst of my brothers.
8

12 And Gĕreshon took a wife who bore him Lomne
and Semei.
2 The sons of Qehath were Amram, Yissasḵar,
Ḥeḇron, and Uzzi’ĕl.
3 And the sons of Merari were Maḥli and Mushi.
4 And in the ninety-fourth year Amram took Yoḵeḇeḏ,
my daughter, as his wife, because he and my daughter
had been born on the same day.
5 I was eight years old when I entered the land of
Kena’an, and eighteen years old when I killed Sheḵem.
At nineteen years I served as a kohĕn; at twenty-eight
years I took a wife; and at forty-eight I entered
Mitsrayim. See, my children, you are a third
generation. During my one hundred eighteenth year
Yosĕph died.

13 And now, my children, I command you:
Reverence HWHY your Elohim with your whole heart,
and walk according to His Torah in integrity.
2 Teach your children letters also, so that they might
have understanding throughout all their lives as they
ceaselessly read the Torah of Elohim.
3 For everyone who knows the Torah of Elohim shall
be honored wherever he goes, he shall not be a
stranger.
4 He shall acquire many more friends than his
parents, and many men will want to serve him and to
hear the Torah from his mouth.
5 Therefore, my sons, do righteousness on earth in
order that you might find it in shamayim.
6 Sow good things in your souls and you will find
them in your lives. If you sow evil, you will reap every
trouble and tribulation.
7 Acquire wisdom in the reverence of HWHY because
if a captivity occurs, if cities and territories are laid
waste, if silver and gold and every possession are lost,
372

LEVI

nothing can take away the wisdom of the wise man
except the blindness of impiety and the obtuseness of
sin.
8 For if anyone preserves himself from these evil
deeds, his wisdom shall be glorious, even among his
opponents; it will be found to be a homeland in a
foreign territory, and a friend in the midst of his
enemies.
9 Whoever teaches good things and practices them
shall be enthroned with sovereigns, as was Yosĕph,
my brother.

14 And now, my children, I know from the writings of
Ḥanoḵ that in the end-time you will act impiously
against HWHY, setting your hands to every evil deed;
because of you, your brothers will be humiliated and
among all the nations you shall become the occasion
for scorn.
2 For your father, Yisra’ĕl, is pure with respect to all
the impieties of the kohenim, - who shall lay their
hands on the Savior. 3 As the shamayim is pure above the earth, and you
should be the lights of Yisra’ĕl as the sun and the
moon.
4 For what will all the nations do if you become
darkened with impiety? You will bring down a curse on
our nation, because you want to destroy the light of the
Torah which was granted to you for the enlightenment
of every man, teaching commandments which are
opposed to Elohim’s just ordinances.
5 You will plunder HWHY’s offerings; from His share
you steal choice parts, contemptuously eating them
with whores.
6 And out of covetousness you will teach the
commandments of HWHY, wedded women shall you
pollute, and the virgins of Yerushalayim shall you
defile; and with harlots and adulteresses shall you be
joined, and the daughters of the Gentiles shall you take
to wife, purifying them with an unlawful purification;
and your union shall be like unto Seḏom and Amorah.
373

LĔWI

You will be inflated with pride over your kehunnah,
exalting yourselves not merely by human standards
but contrary to the commands of Elohim.
8 With contempt and laughter you will deride the
sacred things.
7

15 Therefore the Miqdash which HWHY chose shall
become desolate through your uncleanness, and you
will be captives in all the nations.
2 And you shall be to them a revolting thing, and you
shall receive scorn and eternal humiliation through the
just judgment of Elohim.
3 All who hate you will rejoice at your destruction.
4 And unless you had received mercy through
Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ, our fathers, not a
single one of your descendants would be left on the
earth.

16 Now I have come to know that for seventy weeks
you shall wander astray and profane the kehunnah
and defile the sacrificial altars.
2 You shall set aside the Torah and nullify the words
of the neḇi’im by your wicked perversity. You
persecute just men: and you hate the pious; the word
of the faithful you regard with revulsion.
3 A man who by the power of the Most High renews
the Torah, you name ‘Deceiver’, and finally you shall
plot to kill Him, not discerning His eminence; by your
wickedness you take innocent blood on your heads.
4 I tell you, on account of Him your qodesh places
shall be razed to the ground.
5 You shall have no place that is clean, but you will
be as a curse and a dispersion among the nations until
He will again have regard for you, and will take you
back in compassion.

17 Because you have heard about the seventy
weeks, listen also concerning the kehunnah.
2 In each Yoḇĕl there shall be a kehunnah: In the first
Yoḇĕl the first person to be anointed to the kehunnah
374

LEVI

will be great, and he shall speak to Elohim as father;
and his kehunnah shall be fully satisfactory to HWHY,
and in the days of his joy, he shall rise up for the
deliverance of the world.
3 In the second Yoḇĕl the anointed one shall be
conceived in sorrow of the beloved one, and his
kehunnah shall be praised and shall be glorified by all.
4 The third kohĕn shall be overtaken by grief, and,
5 the fourth kehunnah shall be with sufferings,
because injustice shall be imposed upon him in a high
degree, and all Yisra’ĕl shall hate each one his
neighbor.
6 The fifth shall be overcome by darkness;
7 Likewise the sixth and the seventh.
8 In the seventh there shall be pollution such as I am
unable to declare in the presence of human beings,
because only the ones who do these things
understand such matters.
9 Therefore they shall be in captivity and will be
preyed upon; both their land and their possessions
shall be stolen.
10 And in the fifth week they shall return to the land of
their desolation, and shall restore anew the House of
HWHY.
11 In the seventh week there will come kohenim;
idolaters, adulterers, money lovers, arrogant,
Torahless, voluptuaries, pederasts, those who practice
bestiality.

18 When vengeance will have come upon them from
HWHY, the kehunnah will lapse.
2 And then HWHY will raise up a new kohĕn to whom
all the words of HWHY will be revealed. He shall effect
the judgment of truth over the earth for many days.
3 And His star shall rise in the shamayim like a
Sovereign; kindling the light of knowledge as day is
illumined by the sun. And He shall be extolled by the
whole inhabited world.

375

LĔWI

This One will shine forth like the sun in the earth;
He shall take away all darkness from under the
shamayim, and there shall be peace in all the earth.
5 The shamayim shall greatly rejoice in His days and
the earth shall be glad; the clouds will be filled with joy
and the knowledge of HWHY will be poured out on the
earth like the water of the seas. And the messengers
of glory of HWHY’s presence will be made glad by Him.
6 The shamayim will be opened, and from the Hĕyḵal
of glory sanctification will come upon Him, with a
fatherly voice, as from Aḇraham to Yitsḥaq.
7 And the glory of the Most High shall burst forth upon
Him. And the Ruaḥ of understanding and sanctification
shall rest upon Him in the water.
8 For He shall give the Greatness of HWHY to those
who are His children in truth forever. And there shall
be no successor for Him from generation to generation
forever.
9 And in His kehunnah the nations shall be multiplied
in knowledge on the earth, and they shall be illumined
by the grace of HWHY, but Yisra’ĕl shall be diminished
by her ignorance and darkened by her grief. In His
kehunnah sin shall cease and Torahless men shall rest
from their evil deeds, and righteous men shall find rest
in Him.
10 And He shall open the gates of Paradise, He shall
remove the sword that has threatened since Aḏam,
11 and He will grant to the elect to eat of the tree of
life.
12 And Beliar shall be bound by Him. And He shall
grant to His children the authority to trample on wicked
spirits.
13 And HWHY will rejoice in His children; He will be well
pleased by His beloved ones forever.
14 Then Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ will rejoice,
and I shall be glad, and all the elect shall be clothed in
righteousness.
4

376

LEVI

19 And now, my children, you have heard everything.
Choose for yourselves light or darkness, the Torah of
HWHY or the works of Beliar.
2 And his sons replied, “Before HWHY we will live
according to His Torah.”
3 And their father said to them, “HWHY is my witness
and his messengers are witnesses, and you are
witnesses, and I am a witness concerning the word
from your mouth.”
4 And his sons said, “We are witnesses.” Then Lĕwi
finished giving instructions to his sons. He stretched
out his feet on his bed and was gathered to his fathers,
having lived a hundred and thirty-seven years.
5 And they put him in a coffin and later buried him in
Ḥeḇron with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ.

377

JUDAH

TESTAMENT OF YAHUḎAH
‫ יהודה‬hdWhY

1 The copy of the words of Yahuḏah, what things he
spake to his sons before he died.
2 They gathered themselves together, therefore, and
came to him, and he said to them: Hearken, my
children, to Yahuḏah your father.
3 I was the fourth son born to my father Ya’aqoḇ; and
Lĕ’ah my mother named me Yahuḏah, saying, I give
thanks to HWHY, because He hath given me a fourth
son also.
4 I was swift in my youth, and obedient to my father
in everything.
5 And I honoured my mother and my mother’s sister.
6 And it came to pass, when I became a man, that
my father baraḵ me, saying, Thou shalt be a sovereign,
prospering in all things.
7 And HWHY showed me favour in all my works both
in the field and in the house.
8 I know that I raced a hind, and caught it, and
prepared the meat for my father, and he did eat.
9 And the roes I used to master in the chase, and
overtake all that was in the plains.
10 A wild mare I overtook, and caught it and tamed it.
11 I slew a lion and plucked a kid out of its mouth.
12 I took a bear by its paw and hurled it down the cliff,
and it was crushed.
13 I outran the wild boar, and seizing it as I ran, I tore
it in sunder.
14 A leopard in Ḥeḇron leaped upon my dog, and I
caught it by the tail, and hurled it on the rocks, and it
was broken in twain.
15 I found a wild ox feeding in the fields, and seizing it
by the horns, and whirling it round and stunning it, I
cast it from me and slew it.
16 And when the two sovereign’s of the Kena’anites
came sheathed, in armour against our flocks, and
much people with them, single handed I rushed upon
378

YAHUḎAH

the sovereign of Hazor, and smote him on the grieves
and dragged him down, and so I slew him.
17 And the other, the sovereign of Tappuaḥ, as he sat
upon his horse, I slew, and so I scattered all his people.
18 Aḵor, the sovereign, a man of giant stature, I found,
hurling javelins before and behind as he sat on
horseback, and I took up a stone of sixty pounds
weight, and hurled it and smote his horse, and killed it.
19 And I fought with this other for two hours; and I
clave his shield in twain, and I chopped off his feet, and
killed him.
20 And as I was stripping off his breastplate, behold
nine men his companions began to fight with me,
21 and I wound my garment on my hand; and I slung
stones at them, and killed four of them, and the rest
fled.
22 And Ya’aqoḇ my father slew Beelesath, sovereign
of all the sovereigns, a giant in strength, twelve cubits
high.
23 And fear fell upon them, and they ceased warring
against us.
24 Therefore my father was free from anxiety in the
wars when I was with my brethren.
25 For he saw in a vision concerning me that a
messenger of might followed me everywhere, that I
should not be overcome.
26 And in the south there came upon us a greater war
than that in Sheḵem; and I joined in battle array with
my brethren, and pursued a thousand men, and slew
of them two hundred men and four sovereigns.
27 And I went up upon the wall, and I slew four mighty
men.
28 And so we captured Hazor, and took all the spoil.
29 And the next day we departed to Aretan, a city
strong and walled and inaccessible, threatening us
with death.
30 But I and Gaḏ approached on the east side of the
city, and Re’uḇĕn and Lĕwi on the west.
379

JUDAH

And they that were upon the wall, thinking that we
were alone, were drawn down against us.
32 And so my brothers secretly climbed up the wall on
both sides by stakes, and entered the city, while the
men knew it not.
33 And we took it with the edge of the sword.
34 And as for those who had taken refuge in the tower,
we set fire to the tower and took both it and them.
35 And as we were departing the men of Tappuaḥ
seized our spoil, and seeing this we fought with them.
36 And we slew them all and recovered our spoil.
37 And when I was at the waters of Kozĕḇa, the men
of Yoḇĕl came against us to battle.
38 And we fought with them and routed them; and their
allies from Shiloh we slew, and we did not leave them
power to come in against us.
39 And the men of Maḵir came upon us the fifth day,
to seize our spoil; and we attacked them and overcame
them in fierce battle: for there was a host of mighty
men amongst them, and we slew them before they had
gone up the ascent.
40 And when we came to their city their women rolled
upon us stones from the brow of the hill on which the
city stood.
41 And I and Shim’on had ourselves behind the town,
and seized upon the heights, and destroyed this city
also.
42 And the next day it was told us that the sovereign
of the city of Ga’ash with a mighty host was coming
against us.
43 I, therefore, and Dan feigned ourselves to be
Amorites, and as allies went into their city.
44 And in the depth of night our brethren came and we
opened to them the gates; and we destroyed all the
men and their substance, and we took for a prey all
that was theirs, and their three walls we cast down.
45 And we drew near to Thamna, where was all the
substance of the hostile sovereign’s.
31

380

YAHUḎAH

Then being insulted by them, I was therefore wroth,
and rushed against them to the summit; and they kept
slinging against me stones and darts.
47 And had not Dan my brother aided me, they would
have slain me.
48 We came upon them, therefore, with wrath, and
they all fled; and passing by another way, they fought
my father, and he made peace with them.
49 And we did to them no hurt, and they became
tributary to us, and we restored to them their spoil.
50 And I built Thamna, and my father built Pabael.
51 I was twenty years old when this war befell. And the
Kena’anites feared me and my brethren.
52 And I had much cattle, and I had for chief herdsman
Ḥirah the Aḏullamite.
53 And when I went to him I saw Parsaba, sovereign
of Aḏullam; and he spake unto us, and he made us a
feast; and when I was heated he gave me his daughter
Shuwa to wife.
54 She bare me Ĕr, and Onan and Shĕlah; and two of
them HWHY smote: for Shĕlah lived, and his children
are ye.
46

2 And eighteen years my father abode in peace with
his brother Ĕsaw, and his sons with us, after that we
came from Mesopotamia, from Laḇan.
2 And when eighteen years were fulfilled, in the
fortieth year of my life, Ĕsaw, the brother of my father,
came upon us with a mighty and strong people.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ smote Ĕsaw with an arrow, and he
was taken up wounded on Mount Sĕ’ir, and as he went
he died at Anoniram.
4 And we pursued after the sons of Ĕsaw.
5 Now they had a city with walls of iron and gates of
brass; and we could not enter into it, and we encamped
around, and besieged it.
6 And when they opened not to us in twenty days, I
set up a ladder in the sight of all and with my shield
upon my head I went up, sustaining the assault of
381

JUDAH

stones, upwards of three talents weight; and I slew four
of their mighty men.
7 And Re’uḇĕn and Gaḏ slew six others.
8 Then they asked from us terms of peace; and
having taken counsel with our father, we received
them as tributaries.
9 And they gave us five hundred cors of wheat, five
hundred baths of oil, five hundred measures of wine,
until the famine, when we went down into Mitsrayim.
10 And after these things my son Ĕr took to wife
Tamar, from Mesopotamia, a daughter of Aram.
11 Now Ĕr was wicked, and he was in need
concerning Tamar, because she was not of the land of
Kena’an.
12 And on the third night a messenger of HWHY smote
him.
13 And he had not known her according to the evil
craftiness of his mother, for he did not wish to have
children by her.
14 In the days of the wedding feast I gave Onan to her
in marriage; and he also in wickedness knew her not,
though he spent with her a year.
15 And when I threatened him he went in unto her, but
he spilled the seed on the ground, according to the
command of his mother, and he also died through
wickedness.
16 And I wished to give Shĕlah also to her, but his
mother did not permit it; for she wrought evil against
Tamar, because she was not the daughters of
Kena’an, as she also herself was.
17 And I knew that the race of the Kena’anites was
wicked, but the impulse of youth blinded my mind.
18 And when I saw her pouring out wine, owing to the
intoxication of wine I was deceived, and took her
although my father had not counselled it.
19 And while I was away she went and took for Shĕlah
a wife from Kena’an.
20 And when I knew what she had done, I cursed her
in the anguish of my soul.
382

YAHUḎAH

And she also died through her wickedness together
with her sons.
22 And after these things, while Tamar was a widow,
she heard after two years that I was going up, to shear
my sheep, and adorned herself in bridal array, and sat
in the city Ĕnayim by the gate.
23 For it was a law of the Amorites, that she who was
about to marry should sit in fornication seven days by
the gate.
24 Therefore being drunk with wine, I did not
recognize her; and her beauty deceived me, through
the fashion of her adorning.
25 And I turned aside to her, and said: Let me go in
unto thee.
26 And she said: What wilt thou give me? And I gave
her my staff, and my girdle, and the diadem of my
sovereignty in pledge.
27 And I went in unto her, and she conceived.
28 And not knowing what I had done, I wished to slay
her; but she privily sent my pledges, and put me to
shame.
29 And when I called her, I heard also the secret words
which I spoke when lying with her in my drunkenness;
and I could not slay her, because it was from HWHY.
30 For I said, Lest haply she did it in subtlety, having
received the pledge from another woman.
31 But I came not again near her while I lived, because
I had done this abomination in all Yisra’ĕl.
32 Moreover, they who were in the city said there was
no harlot in the gate, because she came from another
place, and sat for a while in the gate.
33 And I thought that no one knew that I had gone in
to her.
34 And after this we came into Mitsrayim to Yosĕph,
because of the famine.
35 And I was forty and six years old, and seventy and
three years lived I in Mitsrayim.
21

3 And now I command you, my children, hearken to
Yahuḏah your father, and keep my sayings to perform
383

JUDAH

all the ordinances of HWHY, and to obey the commands
of Elohim.
2 And walk not after your lusts, nor in the
imaginations of your thoughts in haughtiness of heart;
and glory not in the deeds and strength of your youth,
for this also is evil in the eyes of HWHY.
3 Since I also gloried that in wars no comely woman’s
face ever enticed me, and reproved Re’uḇĕn my
brother concerning Bilhah, the wife of my father, the
spirits of jealousy and of fornication arrayed
themselves against me, until I lay with Shuwa the
Kena’anite, and Tamar, who was espoused to my
sons.
4 For I said to my father-in-law: I will take counsel
with my father, and so will I take thy daughter.
5 And he was unwilling but he showed me a
boundless store of gold in his daughter’s behalf; for he
was a sovereign.
6 And he adorned her with gold and pearls, and
caused her to pour out wine for us at the feast with the
beauty of women.
7 And the wine turned aside my eyes, and pleasure
blinded my heart.
8 And I became enamoured of and I lay with her, and
transgressed the commandment of HWHY and the
commandment of my fathers, and I took her to wife.
9 And HWHY rewarded me according to the
imagination of my heart, inasmuch as I had no joy in
her children.
10 And now, my children, I say unto you, be not drunk
with wine; for wine turneth the mind away from, the
truth, and inspires the passion of lust, and leadeth the
eyes into error.
11 For the spirit of fornication hath wine as a minister
to give pleasure to the mind; for these two also take
away the mind of man.
12 For if a man drink wine to drunkenness, it disturbeth
the mind with filthy thoughts leading to fornication, and
heateth the body to carnal union; and if the occasion
384

YAHUḎAH

of the lust be present, he worketh the sin, and is not
ashamed.
13 Such is the inebriated man, my children; for he who
is drunken reverenceth no man.
14 For, lo, it made me also to err, so that I was not
ashamed of the multitude in the city, in that before the
eyes of all I turned aside unto Tamar, and I wrought a
great sin, and I uncovered the covering of my sons’
shame.
15 After I had drunk wine I reverenced not the
commandment of Elohim, and I took a woman of
Kena’an to wife.
16 For much discretion needeth the man who drinketh
wine, my children; and herein is discretion in drinking
wine, a man may drink so long as he preserveth
modesty.
17 But if he go beyond this limit the spirit of deceit
attacketh his mind, and it maketh the drunkard to talk
filthily, and to transgress and not to be ashamed, but
even to glory in his shame, and to account himself
honourable.
18 He that committeth fornication is not aware when
he suffers loss, and is not ashamed when put to
dishonour.
19 For even though a man be a sovereign and commit
fornication, he is stripped of his sovereignship by
becoming the slave of fornication, as I myself also
suffered.
20 For I gave my staff, that is, the stay of my tribe; and
my girdle, that is, my power; and my diadem, that is,
the glory of my sovereignty.
21 And indeed I repented of these things; wine and
flesh I eat not until my old age, nor did I behold any joy.
22 And the messenger of Elohim showed me that for
ever do women bear rule over sovereign and beggar
alike.
23 And from the sovereign they take away his glory,
and from the valiant man his might, and from the
beggar even that little which is the stay of his poverty.
385

JUDAH

Observe, therefore, my children, the right limit in
wine; for there are in it four evil spirits: of lust, of hot
desire, of profligacy, of filthy lucre.
25 If ye drink wine in gladness, be ye modest in the
reverence of Elohim.
26 For if in your gladness the reverence of Elohim
departeth,
then
drunkenness
ariseth
and
shamelessness stealeth in.
27 But if ye would live soberly do not touch wine at all,
lest ye sin in words of outrage, and in fightings and
slanders, and transgressions of the commandments of
Elohim, and ye perish before your time.
28 Moreover, wine revealeth the mysteries of Elohim
and men, even as I also revealed the commandments
of Elohim and the mysteries of Ya’aqoḇ my father to
the Kena’anite woman Shuwa, which Elohim bade me
not to reveal.
29 And wine is a cause both of war and confusion.
30 And now, I command you, my children, not to love
money, nor to gaze upon the beauty of women;
because for the sake of money and beauty I was led
astray to Shuwa the Kena’anite.
31 For I know that because of these two things shall
my race fall into wickedness.
32 For even wise men among my sons shall they mar,
and shall cause the sovereignty of Yahuḏah to be
diminished, which HWHY gave me because of my
obedience to my father.
33 For I never caused grief to Ya’aqoḇ, my father; for
all things whatsoever he commanded I did.
34 And Yitsḥaq, the father of my father, baraḵ me to
be sovereign in Yisra’ĕl, and Ya’aqoḇ further baraḵ me
in like manner.
35 And I know that from me shall the sovereignty be
established.
36 And I know what evils ye will do in the last days.
37 Beware, therefore, my children, of fornication, and
the love of money, and hearken to Yahuḏah your
father.
24

386

YAHUḎAH

For these things withdraw us from the Torah of
Elohim, and blind the inclination of the soul, and teach
arrogance, and suffer not a man to have compassion
upon his neighbour.
39 They rob his soul of all goodness, and oppress him
with toils and troubles, and drive away sleep from him,
and devour his flesh.
40 And he hindereth the sacrifices of Elohim; and he
remembereth not the beraḵah of Elohim, he
hearkeneth not to a naḇi when he speaketh, and
resenteth the words of reverence.
41 For he is a slave to two contrary passions, and
cannot obey Elohim, because they have blinded his
soul, and he walketh in the day as in the night.
42 My children, the love of money leadeth to idolatry;
because, when led astray through money, men name
as elohim those who are not elohim, and it causeth him
who hath it to fall into madness.
43 For the sake of money I lost my children, and had
not my repentance, and my humiliation, and the
prayers of my father been accepted, I should have died
childless.
44 But the Elohim of my fathers had mercy on me,
because I did it in ignorance.
45 And the prince of deceit blinded me, and I sinned
as a man and as flesh, being corrupted through sins;
and I learnt my own weakness while thinking myself
invincible.
46 Know, therefore, my children, that two ruaḥoth wait
upon man - the Ruaḥ of truth and the spirit of deceit.
47 And in the midst is the Ruaḥ of understanding of
the mind, to which it belongeth to turn whithersoever it
will.
48 And the works of truth and the works of deceit are
written upon the hearts of men, and each one of them
HWHY knoweth.
49 And there is no time at which the works of men can
be hid; for on the heart itself have they been written
down before HWHY.
38

387

JUDAH

And the Ruaḥ of truth testifieth all things, and
accuseth all; and the sinner is burnt up by his own
heart, and cannot raise his face to the judge.
50

4 And now, my children, I command you, love Lĕwi,
that ye may abide, and exalt not yourselves against
him, lest ye be utterly destroyed.
2 For to me HWHY gave the sovereignty, and to him
the kehunnah, and He set the sovereignty beneath the
kehunnah.
3 To me He gave the things upon the earth; to him
the things in the shamayim.
4 As the shamayim is higher than the earth, so is the
kehunnah of Elohim higher than the earthly
sovereignty, unless it falls away through sin from HWHY
and is dominated by the earthly sovereignty.
5 For the messenger of HWHY said unto me: HWHY
chose him rather than thee, to draw near to Him, and
to eat of His table and to offer Him the first-fruits of the
choice things of the sons of Yisra’ĕl; but thou shalt be
sovereign of Ya’aqoḇ.
6 And thou shalt be amongst them as the sea.
7 For as, on the sea, just and unjust are tossed about,
some taken into captivity while some are enriched, so
also shall every race of men be in thee: some shall be
impoverished, being taken captive, and others grow
rich by plundering the possessions of others.
8 For the sovereigns shall be as sea-monsters.
9 They shall swallow men like fishes: the sons and
daughters of freemen shall they enslave; houses,
lands, flocks, money shall they plunder:
10 And with the flesh of many shall they wrongfully
feed the ravens and the cranes; and they shall
advance in evil in covetousness uplifted, and there
shall be false neḇi’im like tempest, and they shall
persecute all righteous men.
11 And HWHY shall bring upon them divisions one
against another.
12 And there shall be continual wars in Yisra’ĕl; and
among men of another race shall my sovereignty be
388

YAHUḎAH

brought to an end, until the deliverance of Yisra’ĕl shall
come.
13 Until the appearing of the Elohim of Righteousness,
that Ya’aqoḇ, and all the Gentiles may rest in peace.
14 And He shall guard the might of my sovereignty
forever; for HWHY swore to me with an oath that He
would not destroy the sovereignty from my seed
forever.
15 Now I have much grief, my children, because of
your lewdness and witchcrafts, and idolatries which ye
shall practise against the sovereignty, following them
that have familiar spirits, diviners, and demons of error.
16 Ye shall make your daughters singing girls and
harlots, and ye shall mingle in the abominations of the
Gentiles.
17 For which things’ sake HWHY shall bring upon you
famine and pestilence, death and the sword,
beleaguering by enemies, and revilings of friends, the
slaughter of children, the rape of wives, the plundering
of possessions, the burning of the Hĕyḵal of Elohim,
the laying waste of the land, the enslavement of
yourselves among the Gentiles.
18 And they shall make some of you eunuchs for their
wives.
19 Until HWHY visit you, when with perfect heart ye
repent and walk in all His Commandments, and He
bring you up from captivity among the Gentiles.
20 And after these things shall a star arise to you from
Ya’aqoḇ in peace,
21 and a Man shall arise from my seed, like the sun of
righteousness,
22 walking with the sons of men in meekness and
righteousness;
23 And no sin shall be found in Him.
24 And the shamayim shall be opened unto him, to
pour out the Ruaḥ, even the beraḵah of the Qodesh
Father; and He shall pour out the Ruaḥ of Favor upon
you;
389

JUDAH

And ye shall be unto Him sons in truth, and ye shall
walk in His Commandments first and last.
26 Then shall the sceptre of my sovereignty shine
forth; and from your root shall arise a stem; and from it
shall grow a rod of righteousness to the Gentiles, to
judge and to save all that call upon HWHY.
27 And after these things shall Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq
and Ya’aqoḇ arise unto ḥai; and I and my brethren
shall be chiefs of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl:
28 Lĕwi first, I the second, Yosĕph third, Binyamin
fourth, Shim’on fifth, Yissasḵar sixth, and so all in
order.
29 And HWHY blessed Lĕwi, and the Messenger of the
Presence, me; the powers of favor, Shim’on; the
shamayim, Re’uḇĕn; the earth, Yissasḵar; the sea,
Zeḇulun; the mountains, Yosĕph; the Mishkan,
Binyamin; the luminaries, Dan; Ĕḏen, Naphtali; the
sun, Gaḏ; the moon, Ashĕr.
30 And ye shall be the people of HWHY, and have one
tongue; and there shall be there no spirit of deceit of
Beliar, for he shall be cast into the fire forever.
31 And they who have died in grief shall arise in joy,
and they who were poor for HWHY’s sake shall be made
rich, and they who are put to death for HWHY’s sake
shall awake to ḥai.
32 And the hearts of Ya’aqoḇ shall run in joyfulness,
and the eagles of Yisra’ĕl shall fly in gladness; and all
the people shall glorify HWHY forever.
33 Observe, therefore, my children, all the Torah of
HWHY, for there is hope for all them who hold fast unto
His ways.
34 And he said to them: Behold, I die before your eyes
this day, a hundred and nineteen years old.
35 Let no one bury me in costly apparel, nor tear open
my bowels, for this shall they who are sovereigns do;
and carry me up to Ḥeḇron with you.
36 And Yahuḏah, when he had said these things, fell
asleep; and his sons did according to all whatsoever
25

390

YAHUḎAH

he commanded them, and they buried him in Ḥeḇron,
with his fathers.

391

DAN

TESTAMENT OF DAN
‫! דן‬d

1 A copy of the words of Dan, which he spoke to his
sons at the last of his days, in the one hundred twentyfifth year of his life.
2 Assembling his clan, he said, Sons of Dan, hear my
words; give heed to what is uttered by the mouth of
your father.
3 I have made proof in my heart and in my life that
truth with honest dealings is good and well-pleasing to
Elohim, while lying and anger are evil because they
instruct mankind thoroughly in every evil.
4 My children, I confess to you today that in my heart
I rejoiced over the death of Yosĕph, a man who was
true and good.
5 I was glad about the sale of Yosĕph, because
Father loved him more than the rest of us.
6 For the spirit of jealousy and pretentiousness kept
saying to me, You too are his son.
7 And one of the spirits of Beliar was at work within
me, saying, Take this sword, and with it kill Yosĕph;
once he is dead, your father will love you.
8 Now this is the spirit of anger that persuaded me to
crush Yosĕph as a leopard crushes a kid.
9 But the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, our father, did not allow
him to fall into my hands so that I might find him alone,
nor did He permit me to accomplish this torahless act,
lest two tribes be lost from Yisra’ĕl.

2 And now, my children, I am dying, and I say to you
in truth that if you do not guard yourselves against the
spirit of lying and anger, and love truth and long
suffering, you will perish.
2 There is blindness in anger, my children, and there
is no angry person who can perceive the face of truth.
3 For even if one is his father or mother, he treats
them as enemies; if it is a brother, he does not
recognize him; if it is a naḇi of HWHY, he disobeys; if it
392

DAN

is a just man, he regards him not; if a friend, he ignores
him.
4 For the spirit of anger ensnares him in the nets of
deceit, blinds his eyes literally, darkens his
understanding by means of a lie, and provides him with
its own peculiar perspective.
5 And how does it encompass his eyes? By hatred in
the heart, it gives him a peculiar disposition, to envy
his brother.

3 Anger is evil, my children, for it becomes the
motivation force of the soul itself.
2 That force has strange effects on the body of the
angry man; it dominates his soul, and provides the
body with a peculiar power so that it can accomplish
every torahless act.
3 When the soul acts, it justifies whatever is done
since it lacks discernment.
4 So then whoever is angry, if he is a powerful
person, has triple strength by reason of his anger: First
through the power and support of his subordinates;
second through his wealth, by which he can win by
persuasive acts and triumph in injustice; third, he has
the natural force of his own body, and through it he
accomplishes evil.
5 But if the angry one is a weak person, his strength
is twice that of nature, for anger always supports such
a person in their transgression.
6 This spirit always mixes with lying at the right hand
of Beliar, in order that such deeds may be done
through savagery and deception.

4 Understand, then, the power of anger, that it is
senseless.
2 First, it arouses by spoken word; then by actions it
gives strength to the one who is aroused, by sharp
losses it perturbs his mind, and thus arouses his soul
with great anger.
3 When anyone speaks against you, do not be
moved to anger; and if anyone praises you as being
393

DAN

kind, do not be elated, nor be carried away, neither by
pleasure nor by shame.
4 First it is pleasant to hear and thus it sharpens the
mind to be sensitive to some provocation; and then
when anyone is aroused by anger, it makes him
suppose his self-esteem is justified.
5 If you suffer a loss, if you undergo the destruction
of anything, do not become alarmed, my children,
because this spirit makes one desire what is transitory
in order that he might be made angry over what he is
missing.
6 If you lose something, by your own action or
otherwise, do not be sorrowful, for grief arouses anger
as well as deceit.
7 Anger and lying together are a double-edged evil,
and they assist one another in order to disturb the
heart. And when the soul is continually perturbed,
HWHY withdraws from it and Beliar rules it.

5 Observe HWHY’s Commandments then my children,
and keep His Torah. Avoid wrath, and hate lying, in
order that HWHY may dwell among you, and Beliar may
flee from you.
2 Each of you speak truth clearly to his neighbor, and
do not fall into pleasure and trouble making, but be at
peace, holding to the Elohim of peace. Thus no conflict
will overwhelm you.
3 Throughout all your life love HWHY, and one another
with a true heart.
4 For I know that in the last days you will defect from
HWHY, you will be offended at Lĕwi, and revolt against
Yahuḏah; but you will not prevail over them. A
messenger of HWHY guides them both, because by
them Yisra’ĕl shall stand.
5 To the extent that you abandon HWHY, you will live
by every evil deed, committing the revolting acts of the
gentiles, chasing after wives of torahless men, and you
are motivated to all wickedness by the spirits of deceit
among you.
394

DAN

For I read in the Book of Ḥanoḵ the Righteous that
your prince is Beliar and that all the spirits of sexual
promiscuity and of arrogance devote attention to the
sons of Lĕwi in the attempt to observe them closely
and cause them to commit sin before HWHY.
7 My sons will draw close to Lĕwi, will participate with
them in all manner of sins; and with the sons of
Yahuḏah they will share in greed, like lions snatching
what belongs to others.
8 Accordingly you will be led off with them into
captivity; there you will receive all the plagues of
Mitsrayim, and all the evils of the gentiles.
9 Therefore when you turn back to HWHY, you will
receive mercy, and He will lead you into His Qadosh
Place, proclaiming peace to you.
10 And there shall arise for you from the tribe of
Yahuḏah and the tribe of Lĕwi; HWHY’s deliverance. He
will make war against Beliar; he will grant the
vengeance of victory as our goal.
11 And he shall take from Beliar the captives, the souls
of the qadosh ones; and he shall turn the hearts of the
disobedient ones to HWHY, and grant eternal peace to
those who call upon Him.
12 And the qadosh ones shall refresh themselves in
Ĕḏen; the righteous shall rejoice in the New
Yerushalayim, which shall be eternally for the
glorification of Elohim.
13 And Yerushalayim shall no longer undergo
desolation, nor shall Yisra’ĕl be led into captivity,
because HWHY will be in her midst. The Qodesh One
of Yisra’ĕl will rule over them in humility and poverty,
and he who trusts in him shall reign in truth in the
heavens.
6

6 And now reverence HWHY, my children, be on guard
against Beliar and his spirits.
2 Draw near to Elohim and to the messenger who
intercedes for you, because he is the mediator
between Elohim and men for the peace of Yisra’ĕl. He
395

DAN

shall stand in opposition to the sovereignty of the
enemy.
3 Therefore the enemy is eager to trip up all who call
on HWHY,
4 because he knows that on the day in which Yisra’ĕl
shall repent, the enemy’s sovereignty will be brought
to an end.
5 This messenger of peace will strengthen Yisra’ĕl so
that it will not succumb to an evil destiny.
6 But in Yisra’ĕl’s period of torahlessness it will be
HWHY who will not depart from her and therefore He will
seek to do His will, for none of the messengers is like
Him.
7 His name shall be everywhere throughout Yisra’ĕl;
and the Savior will be known among the nations.
8 Keep love, truth, and patience.
9 What you have heard from your father pass on to
your children, so that the Father of nations may accept
you. For he is true and patient, lowly and humble,
exemplifying by his actions the Torah of Elohim.
10 Forsake all unrighteousness and cling to the
righteousness of the Torah of Elohim.
11 And bury me near my fathers.

7 When he had said this, he kissed them and slept an
eternal sleep.
2 And his sons buried him and later they carried his
bones to be near Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ.
3 Dan naḇu to them, however, that they would go
astray from Elohim’s Torah, that they would be
estranged from their inheritance, from the race of
Yisra’ĕl, and from the patrimony; and that is what
occurred.

396

NAPHTALI

TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI
‫ נפתלי‬YLtp!

1 A copy of the testament of Naphtali, which he
decreed at the time of his death in the one hundred
thirty-second year of his life.
2 When his sons were gathered together in the
seventh month, on the first day of the month, and he
was in good health, he gave a feast of food and wine.
3 After he awoke early the next morning, he told
them, I am dying, but they did not believe him.
4 And while he was beraḵah HWHY, he confirmed that
after the previous day’s feast he would die.
5 Then he began to say to his sons, Listen, my
children, sons of Naphtali, hear your father’s words.
6 I was born from Bilhah; Raḥĕl dealt craftily, giving
Bilhah to Ya’aqoḇ in place of herself, and she bore me
on the knees of Raḥĕl, for which reason she called me
Naphtali.
7 Raḥĕl loved me because I was born in her lap;
while I was tender in appearance she would kiss me
and say, May I see a brother of yours, like you, from
my own womb.
8 Thus Yosĕph was like me in every way, in keeping
with Raḥĕl’s prayer.
9 But my mother was Bilhah, daughter of Rotheos,
Deḇorah’s brother, nurse of Riḇqah; she was born the
very day on which Raḥĕl was born.
10 Rotheos was of Aḇraham’s tribe, a Kasdim, one
who honored Elohim, free and well-born;
11 But he was taken captive and bought by Laḇan,
who gave him Euna, his servant girl, as a wife. She
bore a daughter and called her Zilpah from the name
of the village in which he had been taken captive.
12 After that she bore Bilhah, saying, My daughter is
ever eager for new things; No sooner had she been
born than she hurried to start sucking.
397

NAPHTALI

2 Since I was swift on my feet like a deer, my father,
Ya’aqoḇ, appointed me for all missions and messages,
and as a deer he baraḵ me.
2 For just as a potter knows the pot, how much it
holds, and brings clay for it accordingly, so also HWHY
forms the body in correspondence to the spirit, and
instills the spirit corresponding to the power of the
body.
3 And from one to the other there is no discrepancy,
not so much as a third of a hair, for by weight, and
measure, and rule was all the creation made.
4 And just as the potter knows the use of each vessel
and to what it is suited for, so also HWHY knows the
body to what extent it will persist in goodness, and
when it will be dominated by evil.
5 For there is no inclination or thought which HWHY
knows not, since He created every human being
according to His own image.
6 As a person’s strength, so also is his work; as is his
mind, so also is his skill. As is his plan, so also is his
achievement; as is his heart, so is his speech; as is his
eye, so also is his sleep; as is his soul, so also is his
thought, whether on the Torah of HWHY, or on the law
of Beliar.
7 As there is a distinction between light and
darkness, between seeing and hearing, thus there is a
distinction between man and man and between
woman and woman. And it is not to be said that the
one is like the other either in face or in mind.
8 For Elohim made all things good in their order; the
five senses in the head; to the head he attached the
neck, in addition to the hair for the enhancement of
appearance; then the heart for understanding; the
belly for excretion from the stomach; the windpipe for
health; the liver for anger; the gallbladder for
bitterness; the spleen for laughter; the kidneys for
craftiness; the loins for power; the lungs for drawing in
air; the hips for strength and so on.
398

NAPHTALI

So then, my children, let all your works be done in
order with good intent in the fear of Elohim, and do
nothing disorderly, in scorn, or not in an appropriate
time.
9

If you tell the eye to hear, it cannot; so you are
unable to perform the works of light while you are in
darkness.
10

3 Do not strive to corrupt your actions through
covetousness or to beguile your souls by empty
phrases, because if you keep silence in purity of heart,
you shall understand how to hold fast the will of
Elohim, and to cast away the will of Beliar.
Sun, moon, and stars do not alter their order; thus
you should not alter the Torah of Elohim by the
disorder of your actions.
2

The gentiles, because they wandered astray and
forsook HWHY, have changed the order, and have
devoted themselves to stones and sticks, patterning
themselves after wandering spirits.
3

But you, my children, shall not be like that: In the
firmament, in the earth, and in the sea, in all the
products of his workmanship discern HWHY who made
all things, so that you do not become like Seḏom,
which departed from the order of nature.
4

Likewise the Watchers departed from nature’s
order; HWHY pronounced a curse on them at the flood.
On their account, He made the earth without
inhabitants and fruitless.
5

4 I say these things, my children, because I have read
in the writing of qodesh Ḥanoḵ that you also will stray
from HWHY, living in accord with every wickedness of
the gentiles and committing every torahless act of
Seḏom.
HWHY will impose captivity upon you; you shall
serve your enemies there and you will be engulfed in
hardship and difficulty until HWHY will wear you all out.
2

399

NAPHTALI

And after you have been decimated and reduced in
number, you will return and acknowledge HWHY your
Elohim.
3

And it shall happen that when they come into the
land of their fathers, they will again neglect HWHY and
act impiously.
4

And HWHY will disperse them over the face of the
whole earth until the compassion of HWHY comes, a
Man who effects righteousness, and He will work
mercy on all who are far and near.
5

5 In the fortieth year of my life, I saw on the Mount of
Olives east of Yerushalayim that the sun and the moon
stood still.
And behold, Yitsḥaq, my father’s father, was saying
to us, Run forth, seize them, each according to his
capacity; to the one who grasps them will the sun and
the moon belong.
2

All of them ran, but Lĕwi seized the sun and
Yahuḏah, outstripping the others, grasped the moon.
Thus they were exalted above others.
3

Lĕwi became like the sun, a certain young man
gave him twelve palm branches.
4

And Yahuḏah became luminous like the moon, and
twelve rays were under his feet. Then running toward
the others, Lĕwi and Yahuḏah seized them.
5

And behold, there was a bull on the earth with two
great horns and an eagle’s wing on his back. They tried
to lay hold of him, but were unable.
6

But Yosĕph overtook them and seized him and
went up with him into the heights.
7

And I looked, since I was there, and behold a
sacred writing appeared to us, which said, Ashshur,
Maḏites, Parasians, Ĕylamites, Galatiyim, Kasidites,
Arameans shall obtain a share in the twelve staffs of
Yisra’ĕl through captivity - shall possess in captivity the
twelve tribes of Yisra’ĕl. 8

400

NAPHTALI

6 And again after the seven months I saw our father,
Ya’aqoḇ, standing by the sea at Yamnia and we, his
sons, were with him.
2 And behold a ship came sailing past full of dried
fish, without sailor or pilot.
3 Inscribed on it was ‘The Ship of Ya’aqoḇ.’ So our
father said to us, Get into the boat.
4 As we boarded it, a violent tempest arose, a great
windstorm, and our father, who had been holding us
on course, was snatched away from us.
5 After being tossed by the storm, the boat was filled
with water and carried along on the waves until it broke
apart.
6 Yosĕph escaped in a light boat while we were
scattered about on ten planks; Lĕwi and Yahuḏah
were on the same one.
7 Thus we were dispersed, even to the ends of the
earth.
8 Lĕwi, putting on sack cloth, prayed to HWHY on
behalf of all of us.
9 When the storm ceased, the ship reached the land,
as it were in peace.
10 Then Ya’aqoḇ, our father, approached, and we all
rejoiced with one accord.

7 These two dreams I recounted to my father, and he
replied, These things must be fulfilled at their
appropriate time, once Yisra’ĕl has endured many
things.
2 Then my father said, I believe that Yosĕph is alive,
for I continually see that HWHY includes him in the
number with you.
3 And he kept saying tearfully, You live, Yosĕph, my
son, and I do not see you, nor do you behold Ya’aqoḇ
who begot you.
4 He made me shed tears by these words of his. I
was burning inwardly with compassion to tell him that
Yosĕph had been sold, but I was afraid of my brothers.
401

NAPHTALI

8 Behold, my children, I have shown you the last
times, all things that will happen in Yisra’ĕl.
2 Command your children that they be in unity with
Lĕwi and Yahuḏah, for through Yahuḏah will salvation
arise for Yisra’ĕl, and in him will Ya’aqoḇ be baruḵ.
3 Through his sovereignly power Elohim will appear,
to save the race of Yisra’ĕl, and to assemble the
righteous from among the nations.
4 If you work that which is good my children, men and
messengers will baraḵ you; and Elohim will be glorified
through you among the gentiles. The devil will flee from
you; wild animals will be afraid of you, and the
messengers will stand by you.
5 As a man who has trained a child well is kept in
kindly remembrance; so also for a good work there is
a good remembrance before Elohim.
6 The one who does not do what is good, men and
messengers will curse, and Elohim will be dishonored
among the gentiles because of him, the devil will
inhabit him as his own instrument. Every wild animal
will dominate him, and HWHY will hate him.
7 For the Commandments of the Torah are two-fold,
and through prudence must they be fulfilled. For there
is a season for a man to embrace his wife, and a
season to abstain therefrom for his prayer. And there
are the two Commandments: Unless they are
performed in due order they leave one open to the
greatest sin. It is the same with the other
Commandments.
8 So be wise in HWHY and discerning, knowing the
order of His Commandments, what is appointed for
every act, so that HWHY will love you.

9 He gave them many similar instructions, urging
them to transfer his bones to Ḥeḇron and bury him with
his fathers.
2 He ate and drank in soulful glee, covered his face,
and died. And his sons acted in accord with the things
commanded by their father, Naphtali.
402

GAD

TESTAMENT OF GAḎ
‫ גד‬dg

1 A copy of the testament of Gaḏ, concerning what
he said to his sons in the one hundred twenty-seventh
year of his life, saying,
2 I was Ya’aqoḇ’s ninth son; among the shepherds,
valiant in keeping the flocks.
3 I guarded the flock at night, and when the lion
came, the wolf, the leopard, the bear or any other wild
animal attacked the flock, I pursued it, and overtaking
it I seized its foot with my hand and hurled it about a
stone’s throw, and so killed it.
4 Now Yosĕph was tending the flocks with me for
about thirty days, and since he was delicate, he
became faint from the heat, and went back to Ḥeḇron
to his father.
5 He made Yosĕph lie down close to him because he
loved him.
6 And Yosĕph said to his father, the sons of Zilpah
and Bilhah are killing the best animals and eating them
against the advice of Yahuḏah and Re’uḇĕn.
7 For he saw that I had delivered a lamb out of the
mouth of a bear, and put the bear to death; but had
slain the lamb, being grieved concerning it that it could
not live, and that we had eaten it.
8 This he told our father. On this matter I was
enraged against Yosĕph until the day he was sold into
Mitsrayim;
9 And the spirit of hatred was in me, and I wished not
either to hear of Yosĕph with the ears, or see him with
the eyes, because he rebuked us to our faces saying
that we were eating of the flock without Yahuḏah.

2 I now confess my sin, children, that frequently I
wanted to kill him; to the depth of my soul I hated him,
because I hated him from my heart.
403

GAḎ

Moreover, I hated him yet more for his dreams, and
I wanted to gobble him from among the living as an ox
gobbles up grass from the ground.
3 And Yahuḏah sold him secretly to the Yishma’ĕlites
for thirty pieces of gold; he hid ten pieces and showed
only the twenty to our brothers.
4 In this way the Elohim of my fathers rescued him
from my hands so that I might not perform a torahless
deed in Yisra’ĕl.
2

3 And now children, listen to the words of truth: to
perform justice and every law of the Most High; not to
be led astray by the spirit of hatred because it is evil
beyond all human deeds.
2 Whatsoever a man does the hater abominates him:
and though a man works the Torah of HWHY, he praises
him not; though a man fear HWHY, and takes pleasure
in that which is righteous, he loves him not.
3 The hater disparages truth, envies the successful
person, relishes in slander, loves arrogance, because
hatred blinds his soul. It was in this way that I regarded
Yosĕph.

4 Beware, my children, of those who hate, because it
leads to torahlessness against HWHY himself.
2 For it will not hear the words of His Commandments
concerning the loving of one’s neighbor, and in this
way, it sins against Elohim.
3 For if a brother stumbles, immediately he wants to
spread the tale to everyone, and is eager to have him
condemned for it, punished, and executed.
4 If the hater is a servant, he conspires against his
master, and whenever difficulty arises it plots how he
might be killed.
5 Hatred collaborates with envy, when it sees or
hears about the prosperity of those who do well, it is
perpetually peevish.
6 Just as love wants to bring the dead back to life and
to recall those under sentence of death, so hate wants
404

GAD

to kill the living and does not wish to preserve alive
those who have committed the slightest sin.
7 For among all men the spirit of hatred works by
Belair through human frailty for the death of mankind;
but the Ruaḥ of love works by the Torah of Elohim
through forbearance for the deliverance of mankind.

5 Hatred is evil, since it is continually a companion
with lying, speaking against the truth; it makes small
things big, turns light into darkness, says that the
sweet is bitter, teaches slander, conﬂict, violence, and
all manner of covetousness; it ﬁlls the heart with
diabolical venom.
2 These things, therefore, I say to you from
experience, my children, that you may drive forth
hatred, which is of the devil, and cleave to the love of
Elohim.
3 Righteousness expels hatred; humility kills envy.
For the person who is just and humble is ashamed to
commit an injustice, not because someone else will
pass judgement on him but out of his own heart,
because HWHY considers his inner deliberations.
4 He will not speak against a fellow man, since
reverence of the Most High overcomes hatred.
5 Being concerned not to arouse HWHY’s anger, he is
completely unwilling to wrong anyone, even in his
thoughts.
6 I understood this at the last, after I had repented
concerning Yosĕph.
7 For according to Elohim’s truth, repentance
destroys disobedience, puts darkness to ﬂight,
illumines the vision, furnishes knowledge for the soul,
and guides the mind to deliverance.
8 What it has not learned from human means, it
understands through repentance.
9 For Elohim brought on me a disease of the liver,
and if it had not been for the prayers of Ya’aqoḇ, my
father, he would shortly have summoned from me my
spirit.
405

GAḎ

For by whatever human capacity anyone
transgresses, by that he is also chastised.
11 Since, therefore, my liver was set mercilessly
against Yosĕph, in my liver too I suffered mercilessly,
and was judged for eleven months, for so long a time
as I had been angry against Yosĕph.
10

6 Now, my children, I exhort each of you love his
brother. Drive hatred out of your hearts. Love one
another in deed and word and inward thoughts.
2 For when I stood before my father I would speak
peaceable about Yosĕph, but when I went out, the
spirit of hatred darkened my mind and aroused my soul
to kill him.
3 Love one another from the heart, therefore, and if
anyone sins against you, speak to him in peace. Expel
the venom of hatred, and do not harbor deceit in your
heart. If anyone confesses and repents, forgive him.
4 But if he deny it, do not get into a passion with him,
lest catching the poison from you he take to swearing
and so you would be sinning doubly.
5 In a dispute do not let an outsider hear your secrets,
since out of hatred for you he may become your
enemy, and commit a great sin against you. He may
talk to you frequently but treacherously, or be much
concerned with you, but for an evil end.
6 Even if he denies it and acts disgracefully out of a
sense of guilt, be quiet and do not become upset. For
he who denies may repent, and avoid offending you
again; indeed he will honor you, will respect you and
be at peace.
7 But even if he is devoid of shame and persists in
his wickedness, forgive him from the heart and leave
vengeance to Elohim.

7 If anyone prospers more than you, do not be
aggrieved, but pray for him that he may prosper
completely, for this is what is precisely to your
advantage.
406

GAD

And if he becomes even more exalted, do not be
envious, but remember that all humanity dies. Offer
praise to HWHY who provides good and beneficial
things for all mankind.
3 Search out HWHY’s judgments, and in this way you
shall gain an inheritance and your mind will be at rest.
4 Even if someone becomes rich by evil schemes, as
did Ĕsaw, your father’s brother, do not be jealous; wait
for HWHY to set the limits.
5 For if he takes away the things obtained by evil
means, those who repent receive forgiveness, and the
impenitent one receives eternal punishment.
6 The man who is poor but free from envy, who is
grateful to HWHY for everything, is richer than all,
because he does not love the foolish things that are a
temptation common to mankind.
7 Drive hatred away from your souls, and love one
another in uprightness of heart.
2

8 Tell these things to your children as well, so that
they will honor Yahuḏah and Lĕwi, because from them
HWHY will raise up a Savior for Yisra’ĕl.
2 I know that at the end your children will depart from
them and will live in all manner of wickedness and
evildoing and corruption in the sight of HWHY.
3 Then after he had been silent for a brief time he
said again to them, My children, obey your father. Bury
me near my fathers.
4 He drew up his feet and fell asleep in peace. And
after five years they took him up and buried him in
Ḥeḇron with his fathers.

407

ASHER

TESTAMENT OF ASHĔR
‫ אשר‬RvA

1 A copy of the testament of Ashĕr, the things he
spoke to his sons in the one hundred twenty-fifth year
of his life.
2 While he was still healthy he said to them, Listen,
children of Ashĕr, to your father, and I will show you
everything that is right in the sight of Elohim.
3 Elohim has granted two ways to the sons of men,
two mind-sets, two lines of action, two models, and two
goals.
4 Accordingly, everything is in pairs, the one over
against the other.
5 The two ways are good and evil; concerning them
are two dispositions within our hearts that choose
between them.
6 If the soul wants to follow the good way, all of its
deeds are done in righteousness and any sin
committed is immediately repented of.
7 Contemplating
just
deeds
and
rejecting
wickedness, the soul overcomes evil and uproots sin.
8 But if the mind is disposed toward evil, all of its
deeds are wicked; driving out the good, it accepts the
evil and is overmastered by Beliar, who,
9 even when good is undertaken, presses the
struggle so as to make the aim of his action into evil,
since the devil’s storehouse is ﬁlled with the vermin of
the evil spirit.

2 A person then may with words help the good for the
sake of the evil, yet the issue of the action leads to
mischief.
2 There is a man who has no mercy on the one who
serves his turn in evil; there are two aspects of this, but
the whole is wicked.
3 And there is a man who loves the one who does the
evil, as he is himself involved in evil, so that he would
choose to die in evil for the evildoer’s sake. There are
408

ASHĔR

also two aspects of this, but the situation as a whole is
evil.
4 Although indeed love is there, yet in wickedness is
evil concealed; in name it is as though it were good,
but the outcome of the act is to do evil.
5 Someone steals, deals unjustly, robs, cheats, but
yet has pity on the poor. This also has two aspects, but
is evil as a whole.
6 He who cheats his neighbor provokes Elohim’s
wrath; he who serves falsely before the Most High, and
yet has mercy on the poor, disregards HWHY who
uttered the Torah’s Commands; he provokes Him, and
yet he alleviates the plight of the poor day laborer.
7 He deﬁles the soul and takes pride in his own body;
he kills many, yet has pity on a few. This also has two
aspects, but is evil as a whole.
8 Someone else commits adultery and is sexually
promiscuous, yet is moderate in his eating. While
fasting, he is committing evil deeds. Through the
power of his wealth he ravages many, and yet in spite
of his excessive evil, he performs the Commandments.
9 This also has two aspects, but is evil as a whole.
Such persons are hares, because although they are
halfway clean, in truth they are unclean.
10 For this is what Elohim has said on the tablets of
the Commandments.

3 But you, my children, do not be two-faced like them,
one good and the other evil; rather, cling only to
goodness, for Elohim has His habitation therein, and
men desire it.
2 But from wickedness flee away, destroying the evil
inclination by your good works; for they that are
double-faced serve not Elohim, but their own lusts, so
that they may please Beliar and men like unto
themselves.

4 For persons who are good, who are single-minded
even though they are considered by the two-faced to
be sinners are righteous before Elohim.
409

ASHER

For many in killing the wicked do two works, of good
and evil; but the whole is good, because he hath
uprooted and destroyed that which is evil.
3 One person hates the man who, though merciful, is
also unjust, or who is an adulterer, even though he
fasts, and thus is two-faced. But his work is good as a
whole, because he imitates HWHY, not accepting the
seeming good as though it were the truly good.
4 Another person does not want to see any pleasant
days among the festive, lest they disgrace the body
and pollute the soul. This also has two aspects, but is
good on the whole.
5 For such persons are like gazelles and stags: In
appearance they seem wild and unclean, but as a
whole they are clean. They live by zeal for HWHY,
abstaining from what Elohim hates and has forbidden
through His commandments, staving off evil by the
good.
2

5 Children, you see how in everything there are two
factors, one against the other, one concealed by the
other: In possessions is greed, in merriment is
drunkenness, in laughter is lamentation, in marriage is
dissoluteness.
2 Death is successor to ḥai, dishonor to glory, night
to day, darkness to light, but all these things lead
ultimately to day: righteous actions to ḥai, unjust
actions to death, since eternal ḥai wards off death.
3 One cannot say truth is a lie, nor a righteous act is
unjust, because all truth is subject ultimately to the
light, just as all things are subject ultimately to Elohim.
4 I have demonstrated all these things in my life, and
have not strayed from HWHY’s truth. I have searched
out the Commandments of the Most High and lived
them according to all my strength.

6 You also, my children, give attention to HWHY’s
Command, pursuing the Truth with singleness of mind.
2 The two-faced are doubly punished because they
both practice evil and approve of others who practice
410

ASHĔR

it; they imitate the spirits of error and join in the struggle
against mankind.
3 You therefore, my children, keep the Torah of
HWHY; do not pay attention to evil as to good, but have
regard for what is really good and keep it thoroughly in
all HWHY’s Commandments, taking it as your way of ḥai
and having your conversation in it, and resting in it.
4 For the latter ends of men do show their
righteousness or unrighteousness, when they meet
the messengers of HWHY and of Belair.
5 For when the evil soul departs, it is harassed by the
evil spirit which it served through its desires and evil
works. But if anyone is peaceful with joy he comes to
know the messenger of peace and enters eternal ḥai.

7 Do not become like Seḏom, which did not recognize
HWHY’s messengers and sinned against them, and
perished forever.
2 For I know that you will sin and be delivered into the
hands of your enemies; your land shall be made
desolate and your sanctuary wholly polluted.
3 You will be scattered to the four corners of the
earth; in the dispersion you shall be regarded as
worthless, like useless water, until such time as the
Bĕn of Elohim visits the earth. His Bĕn shall come as
a Man eating and drinking with human beings,
crushing the dragon’s head in the sea. He will save
Yisra’ĕl and all the nations, speaking like a man.
4 Tell these things, my children, to your children, so
that they will not disobey Him.
5 For I know that you will be thoroughly disobedient,
that you will not be qodesh, heeding not Elohim’s
Torah but human commandments, being corrupted by
evil.
6 For this reason, you will be scattered like Dan and
Gaḏ, my brothers, you shall not know your own lands,
tribe, or language.
7 But He will gather you in faith and truth through His
compassion and on account of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ.
411

ASHER

8 After he had said these things he gave instructions,
saying, Bury me in Ḥeḇron. And he died, having fallen
into a beautiful sleep.
2 And his sons did as he commanded them: They
took him up to Ḥeḇron and buried him with his fathers.

412

ISSACHAR

TESTAMENT OF YISSASḴAR
‫ יששכר‬RKvvY

1 The copy of the words of Yissasḵar.
For he called his sons and said to them: Hearken,
my children, to Yissasḵar your father; give ear to the
words of him who is beloved of HWHY.
3 I was born the fifth son to Ya’aqoḇ, by way of hire
for the mandrakes.
4 For Re’uḇĕn my brother brought in mandrakes from
the field, and Raḥĕl met him and took them.
5 And Re’uḇĕn wept, and at his voice Lĕ’ah my
mother came forth.
6 Now these mandrakes were sweet-smelling apples
which were produced in the land of Ḥaran below a
ravine of water.
7 And Raḥĕl said: I will not give them to thee, but they
shall be to me instead of children.
8 For HWHY hath despised me, and I have not borne
children to Ya’aqoḇ.
9 Now there were two apples; and Lĕ’ah said to
Raḥĕl: Let it suffice thee that thou hast taken my
husband: wilt thou take these also?
10 And Raḥĕl said to her: Thou shalt have Ya’aqoḇ
this night for the mandrakes of thy son,
11 and Lĕ’ah said to her: Ya’aqoḇ is mine, for I am the
wife of his youth.
12 But Raḥĕl said: Boast not, and vaunt not thyself; for
he espoused me before thee, and for my sake he
served our father fourteen years.
13 And had not craft increased on the earth and the
wickedness of men prospered, thou wouldst not now
see the face of Ya’aqoḇ.
14 For thou art not his wife, but in craft wert taken to
him in my stead.
15 And my father deceived me, and removed me on
that night, and did not suffer Ya’aqoḇ to see me; for
had I been there, this had not happened to him.
2

413

YISSAḴAR

Nevertheless, for the mandrakes I am hiring
Ya’aqoḇ to thee for one night.
17 And Ya’aqoḇ knew Lĕ’ah, and she conceived and
bare me, and on account of the hire I was called
Yissasḵar.
18 Then appeared to Ya’aqoḇ a messenger of HWHY,
saying: Two children shall Raḥĕl bear, inasmuch as
she hath refused company with her husband, and hath
chosen continency.
19 And had not Lĕ’ah my mother paid the two apples
for the sake of his company, she would have borne
eight sons; for this reason she bare six, and Raḥĕl bare
the two: for on account of the mandrakes HWHY visited
her.
20 For He knew that for the sake of children she
wished to company with Ya’aqoḇ, and not for lust of
pleasure.
21 For on the morrow also she again gave up Ya’aqoḇ.
22 Because of the mandrakes, therefore, HWHY
hearkened to Raḥĕl.
23 For though she desired them, she ate them not, but
offered them in the house of HWHY, presenting them to
the kohĕn of the Most High who was at that time.
24 When, therefore, I grew up, my children, I walked
in uprightness of heart, and I became a husbandman
for my father and my brethren, and I brought in fruits
from the field according to their season.
25 And my father baraḵ me, for he saw that I walked
in rectitude before him.
26 And I was not a busybody in my doings, nor envious
and malicious against my neighbour.
27 I never slandered any one, nor did I censure the life
of any man, walking as I did in singleness of eye.
28 Therefore, when I was thirty-five years old, I took to
myself a wife, for my labour wore away my strength,
and I never thought upon pleasure with women; but
owing to my toil, sleep overcame me.
16

414

ISSACHAR

And my father always rejoiced in my rectitude,
because I offered through the kohĕn to HWHY all firstfruits; then to my father also.
30 And HWHY increased ten thousand-fold His benefits
in my hands; and also Ya’aqoḇ, my father, knew that
Elohim aided my singleness.
31 For on all the poor and oppressed I bestowed the
good things of the earth in the singleness of my heart.
32 And now, hearken to me, my children, and walk in
singleness of your heart, for I have seen in it all that is
well-pleasing to HWHY.
33 The single-minded man coveteth not gold, he
overreacheth not his neighbour, he longeth not after
manifold dainties, he delighteth not in varied apparel.
34 He doth not desire to live a long life, but only waiteth
for the will of Elohim.
35 And the spirits of deceit have no power against him,
for he looketh not on the beauty of women, lest he
should pollute his mind with corruption.
36 There is no envy in his thoughts, no malicious
person maketh his soul to pine away, nor worry with
insatiable desire in his mind.
37 For he walketh in singleness of soul, and beholdeth
all things in uprightness of heart, shunning eyes made
evil through the error of the world, lest he should see
the perversion of any of the Commandments of HWHY.
38 Keep, therefore, my children, the Torah of Elohim,
and get singleness, and walk in guilelessness, not
playing the busybody with the business of your
neighbour, but love HWHY and your neighbour, have
compassion on the poor and weak.
39 Bow down your back unto husbandry, and toil in
labours in all manner of husbandry, offering gifts to
HWHY with thanksgiving.
40 For with the first-fruits of the earth will HWHY baraḵ
you, even as He baraḵ all the saints from Heḇel even
until now.
41 For no other portion is given to you than of the
fatness of the earth, whose fruits are raised by toil.
29

415

YISSAḴAR

For our father Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ me with beraḵah of
the earth and of first-fruits.
43 And Lĕwi and Yahuḏah were glorified by HWHY
even among the sons of Ya’aqoḇ; for HWHY gave them
an inheritance, and to Lĕwi He gave the kehunnah,
and to Yahuḏah the sovereignty.
44 And do ye therefore obey them, and walk in the
singleness of your father; for unto Gaḏ hath it been
given to destroy the troops that are coming upon
Yisra’ĕl.
42

2 Know ye therefore, my children, that in the last times
your sons will forsake singleness, and will cleave unto
insatiable desire.
2 And leaving guilelessness, will draw near to malice;
and forsaking the Commandments of HWHY, they will
cleave unto Beliar.
3 And leaving husbandry, they will follow after their
own wicked devices, and they shall be dispersed
among the Gentiles, and shall serve their enemies.
4 And do you therefore give these commands to your
children, that, if they sin, they may more quickly return
to HWHY; For He is merciful, and will deliver them, even
to bring them back into their land.
5 Behold, therefore, as ye see, I am a hundred and
twenty-six years old and am not conscious of
committing any sin.
6 Except my wife I have not known any woman. I
never committed fornication by the uplifting of my
eyes.
7 I drank not wine, to be led astray thereby;
8 I coveted not any desirable thing that was my
neighbour’s.
9 Guile arose not in my heart;
10 A lie passed not through my lips.
11 If any man were in distress I joined my sighs with
his.
12 And I shared my bread with the poor.
13 I wrought reverence, all my days I kept truth.
416

ISSACHAR

I loved HWHY; likewise also every man with all my
heart.
15 So do you also these things, my children, and every
spirit of Beliar shall flee from you, and no deed of
wicked men shall rule over you;
16 And every wild beast shall ye subdue, since you
have with you the Elohim of the shamayim and earth
and walk with men in singleness of heart.
17 And having said these things, he commanded his
sons that they should carry him up to Ḥeḇron, and bury
him there in the cave with his fathers.
18 And he stretched out his feet and died, at a good
old age; with every limb sound, and with strength
unabated, he slept the eternal sleep.
14

417

ZEBULUN

TESTAMENT OF ZEḆULUN
‫! זבולון‬WLWBz

1 The copy of the words of Zeḇulun, which he
enjoined on his sons before he died in the hundred and
fourteenth year of his life, two years after the death of
Yosĕph.
2 And he said to them: Hearken to me, ye sons of
Zeḇulun attend to the words of your father.
3 I, Zeḇulun, was born a good gift to my parents.
4 For when I was born my father was increased very
exceedingly, both in flocks and herds, when with the
streaked rods he had his portion.
5 I am not conscious that I have sinned all my days,
save in thought.
6 Nor yet do I remember that I have done any iniquity,
except the sin of ignorance which I committed against
Yosĕph; for I covenanted with my brethren not to tell
my father what had been done.
7 But I wept in secret many days on account of
Yosĕph, for I feared my brethren, because they had all
agreed that if any one should declare the secret, he
should be slain.
8 But when they wished to kill him, I adjured them
much with tears not to be guilty of this sin.
9 For Shim’on and Gaḏ came against Yosĕph to kill
him, and he said unto them with tears: Pity me, my
brethren, have mercy upon the bowels of Ya’aqoḇ our
father: lay not upon me your hands to shed innocent
blood, for I have not sinned against you.
10 And if indeed I have sinned, with chastening
chastise me, my brethren, but lay not upon me your
hand, for the sake of Ya’aqoḇ our father.
11 And as he spoke these words, wailing as he did so,
I was unable to bear his lamentations, and began to
weep, and my liver was poured out, and all the
substance of my bowels was loosened.
418

ZEḆULUN

And I wept with Yosĕph and my heart sounded, and
the joints of my body trembled, and I was not able to
stand.
13 And when Yosĕph saw me weeping with him, and
them coming against him to slay him, he fled behind
me, beseeching them.
14 But meanwhile Re’uḇĕn arose and said: Come, my
brethren, let us not slay him, but let us cast him into
one of these dry pits, which our fathers dug and found
no water.
15 For this cause HWHY forbade that water should rise
up in them in order that Yosĕph should be preserved.
16 And they did so, until they sold him to the
Yishma’ĕlites.
17 For in his price I had no share, my children.
18 But Shim’on and Gaḏ and six other of our brethren
took the price of Yosĕph, and bought sandals for
themselves, and their wives, and their children, saying:
19 We will not eat of it, for it is the price of our brother’s
blood, but we will assuredly tread it under foot,
because he said that he would be sovereign over us,
and so let us see what will become of his dreams.
20 Therefore it is written in the writing of the Torah of
Mosheh, that whosoever will not raise up seed to his
brother, his sandal should be unloosed, and they
should spit in his face.
21 And the brethren of Yosĕph wished not that their
brother should live, and HWHY loosed from them the
sandal which they wore against Yosĕph their brother.
22 For when they came into Mitsrayim they were
unloosed by the servants of Yosĕph outside the gate,
and so they made obeisance to Yosĕph after the
fashion of Sovereign Pharaoh.
23 And not only did they make obeisance to him, but
were spit upon also, falling down before him forthwith,
and so they were put to shame before the Mitsrites.
24 For after this the Mitsrites heard all the evils that
they had done to Yosĕph.
12

419

ZEBULUN

And after he was sold my brothers sat down to eat
and drink.
26 But I, through pity for Yosĕph, did not eat, but
watched the pit, since Yahuḏah feared lest Shim’on,
Dan, and Gaḏ should rush off and slay him.
27 But when they saw that I did not eat, they set me to
watch him, till he was sold to the Yishma’ĕlites.
28 And when Re’uḇĕn came and heard that while he
was away Yosĕph had been sold, he rent his
garments, and mourning, said:
29 How shall I look on the face of my father Ya’aqoḇ?
And he took the money and ran after the merchants
but as he failed to find them he returned grieving.
30 But the merchants had left the broad road and
marched through the Troglodytes by a short cut.
31 But Re’uḇĕn was grieved, and ate no food that day.
32 Dan therefore came to him and said: Weep not,
neither grieve; for we have found what we can say to
our father Ya’aqoḇ.
33 Let us slay a kid of the goats, and dip in it the coat
of Yosĕph; and let us send it to Ya’aqoḇ, saying: Know,
is this the coat of thy son?
34 And they did so. For they stripped off from Yosĕph
his coat when they were selling him, and put upon him
the garment of a slave.
35 Now Shim’on took the coat, and would not give it
up, for he wished to rend it with his sword, as he was
angry that Yosĕph lived and that he had not slain him.
36 Then we all rose up and said unto him: If thou givest
not up the coat, we will say to our father that thou alone
didst this evil thing in Yisra’ĕl.
37 And so he gave it unto them, and they did even as
Dan had said.
25

2 And now children, I urge you to keep the Commands
of HWHY, and to show mercy to your neighbours, and
to have compassion towards all, not towards men only,
but also towards beasts.
420

ZEḆULUN

For all this thing’s sake HWHY baraḵ me, and when
all my brethren were sick, I escaped without sickness,
for HWHY knoweth the purposes of each.
3 Have, therefore, compassion in your hearts, my
children, because even as a man doeth to his
neighbour, even so also will HWHY do to him.
4 For the sons of my brethren were sickening and
were dying on account of Yosĕph, because they
showed no mercy in their hearts; but my sons were
preserved without sickness, as ye know.
5 And when I was in the land of Kena’an, by the seacoast, I made a catch of fish for Ya’aqoḇ my father; and
when many were choked in the sea, I continued
unhurt.
6 I was the first to make a boat to sail upon the sea,
for HWHY gave me understanding and wisdom therein.
7 And I let down a rudder behind it, and I stretched a
sail upon another upright piece of wood in the midst.
8 And I sailed therein along the shores, catching fish
for the house of my father until we came to Mitsrayim.
9 And through compassion I shared my catch with
every stranger.
10 And if a man were a stranger, or sick, or aged, I
boiled the fish, and dressed them well, and offered
them to all men, as every man had need, grieving with
and having compassion upon them.
11 Wherefore also HWHY satisfied me with abundance
of fish when catching fish; for he that shareth with his
neighbour receiveth manifold more from HWHY.
12 For five years I caught fish and gave thereof to
every man whom I saw, and sufficed for all the house
of my father.
13 And in the summer I caught fish, and in the winter I
kept sheep with my brethren.
14 Now I will declare unto you what I did.
15 I saw a man in distress through nakedness in
wintertime, and had compassion upon him, and stole
away a garment secretly from my father’s house, and
gave it to him who was in distress.
2

421

ZEBULUN

Do you, therefore, my children, from that which
Elohim bestoweth upon you, show compassion and
mercy without hesitation to all men, and give to every
man with a good heart.
17 And if ye have not the wherewithal to give to him
that needeth, have compassion for him in bowels of
mercy.
18 I know that my hand found not the wherewithal to
give to him that needed, and I walked with him weeping
for seven furlongs, and my bowels yearned towards
him in compassion.
19 Have, therefore, yourselves also, my children,
compassion towards every man with mercy, that HWHY
also may have compassion and mercy upon you.
20 Because also in, the last days Elohim will send His
compassion on the earth, and wheresoever He findeth
bowels of mercy He dwelleth in him.
21 For in the degree in which a man hath compassion
upon his neighbours, in the same degree hath HWHY
also have compassion upon him.
22 And when we went down into Mitsrayim, Yosĕph
bore no malice against us.
23 To whom taking heed, do ye also, my children,
approve yourselves without malice, and love one
another; and do not set down in account, each one of
you, evil against his brother.
24 For this breaketh unity and divideth all kindred, and
troubleth the soul, and weareth away the countenance.
25 Observe, therefore, the waters, and know when
they flow together, they sweep along stones, trees,
earth, and other things.
26 But if they are divided into many streams, the earth
swalloweth them up, and they vanish away.
27 So shall ye also be if ye be divided. Be not ye,
therefore, divided into two heads for everything which
HWHY made hath but one head, and two shoulders, two
hands, two feet, and all the remaining members.
16

422

ZEḆULUN

For I have learnt in the writing of my fathers, that ye
shall be divided in Yisra’ĕl, and ye shall follow two
kings, and shall work every abomination.
29 And your enemies shall lead you captive, and ye
shall be evil entreated among the Gentiles, with many
infirmities and tribulations.
30 And after these things ye shall remember HWHY and
repent, and He shall have mercy upon you, for He is
merciful and compassionate.
31 And He setteth not down in account evil against the
sons of men, because they are flesh, and are deceived
through their own wicked deeds.
32 And after these things shall there arise unto you
HWHY Himself, the light of righteousness, and ye shall
return unto your land.
33 And ye shall see Him in Yerushalayim, for His
name’s sake.
34 And again through the wickedness of your works
shall ye provoke Him to anger,
35 and ye shall be cast away by Him unto the time of
consummation.
36 And now, my children, grieve not that I am dying,
nor be cast down in that I am coming to my end.
37 For I shall rise again in the midst of you, as a ruler
in the midst of his sons; and I shall rejoice in the midst
of my tribe, as many as shall keep the Torah of HWHY,
and the commandments of Zeḇulun their father.
38 But upon the perverse shall HWHY bring eternal fire,
and destroy them throughout all generations.
39 But I am now hastening away to my rest, as did also
my fathers.
40 But do ye reverence HWHY our Elohim with all your
strength all the days of your life.
41 And when he had said these things he fell asleep,
at a good old age.
42 And his sons laid him in a wooden coffin. And
afterwards they carried him up and buried him in
Ḥeḇron, with his fathers.
28

423

JOSEPH

TESTAMENT OF YOSĔPH
‫ יוסף‬psWY

1 A copy of the testament of Yosĕph. When he was
about to die, he called his sons and his brothers and
said to them:
2 My brothers and my children. Listen to Yosĕph, the
one beloved of Yisra’ĕl. Give ear to the words of my
mouth.
3 In my life I have seen envy and death. But I have
not gone astray: I persevered in the Truth of HWHY.
4 These, my brothers, hated me but HWHY loved me.
They wanted to kill me, but the Elohim of my fathers
preserved me. Into a pit they lowered me; the Most
High raised me up.
5 They sold me into slavery; HWHY of all set me free.
I was taken into captivity; the strength of His hand
came to my aid. I was overtaken by hunger; HWHY
Himself fed me generously.
6 I was alone, and Elohim came to help me. I was in
weakness, and HWHY showed His concern for me. I
was in prison, and the Savior acted graciously on my
behalf. I was in bonds, and He loosened me;
7 Slandered, and He testiﬁed on my behalf.
Assaulted by bitter words of the Mitsrites, and He
rescued me. Envied by my fellow slaves, and He
exalted me.

2 And this chief ofﬁcer of Pharaoh entrusted to me his
household.
2 I struggled with a shameless woman who kept
prodding me to transgress with her, but the Elohim of
my father rescued me from the burning ﬂame.
3 I was jailed, I was whipped, I was sneered at, but
HWHY granted me mercy in the sight of the prisonkeeper.
4 For HWHY does not abandon those who fear and
reverence Him, neither in darkness, or chains, or
tribulation or direct need.
424

YOSĔPH

For Elohim does not disappoint as does man, nor
is He apprehensive like a son of man nor like an earthborn is He weak or frightened away.
6 In all these matters He takes His stand, and in
various ways He offers assistance, even though for a
brief time He may stand aside in order to test the
inclination and disposition of the soul.
7 In ten testings He showed that I was approved, and
in all of them I persevered, because perseverance is a
powerful medicine and endurance provides many
good things.
5

3 How often the Mitsrite woman threatened me with
death! How often, after turning me over to the
tormentors she would call me back and threaten me!
But since I was unwilling to have intercourse with her,
she kept saying to me,
2 You will be master over me and all my household if
you will only give yourself over to me; then you will be
our ruler.
3 But I recalled my father’s words, went weeping into
my quarters, and prayed to HWHY.
4 For those seven years I fasted, and yet seemed to
the Mitsrites like someone who was living luxuriously,
for those who fast for the sake of Elohim receive
graciousness of countenance.
5 If my master was absent, I drank no wine; for threeday periods I would take no food but give it to the poor
and the ill.
6 I would awaken early and pray to HWHY, weeping
over the Mitsrite woman of Memphis because she
troubled me exceedingly and relentlessly.
7 In the night she would come in to me, pretending a
mere visit. Because she had no male child, she
pretended to regard me as a son.
8 For a time she would embrace me as a son, but
then I realized later that she was trying to lure me into
fornication.
9 When I became aware of this I lamented to the
point of death. After she had gone out, I came to myself
425

JOSEPH

and mourned on her behalf for many days, because I
had recognized her deceit and her deviousness.
10 I declared to her the words of the Most High, hoping
he might divert her from evil desire.

4 How often, then, did she flatter me with words as a
qodesh man, deceitfully praising my self-control
through her words in the presence of her husband, but
when we were alone she sought to seduce me.
2 Publicly she honored me for my self-control, while
privately she said to me, Have no fear of my husband,
for he is convinced of your chastity so that even if
someone were to tell him about you, he would not
believe it.
3 During all these affairs I stretched out on the ground
praying Elohim to rescue me from her treachery.
4 When she achieved nothing by means of it, she
began to approach me for instruction, so that she might
learn the Word of Elohim.
5 And she kept saying to me, If you want me to
abandon the idols, have intercourse with me, and I
shall persuade my husband to put away the idols, and
we shall walk in the Torah of your Elohim.
6 But I kept telling her that HWHY did not want
worshipers who come by means of uncleanness, nor
would He be pleased with adulterers, but with those
who were pure in heart and undeﬁled in speech.
7 Nevertheless, she was consumed with jealousy,
wanting to fulﬁll her desire.
8 But I devoted myself the more to fasting and prayer
that HWHY might rescue me from her.

5 Again on another occasion she said to me, If you do
not want to commit adultery, I shall kill my husband by
a drug and take you as my husband.
2 When I heard this, I tore my clothing and said to
her, Woman, show reverence to Elohim; do not commit
this wicked deed, lest you be utterly destroyed. For you
should know that I shall make it known to all that this
is your scheme.
426

YOSĔPH

Filled with fear, she pleaded with me not to disclose
her plan.
4 Then she withdrew, but kept trying to entice me with
gifts and every manner of pleasurable things.
3

6 Later she sent me food mixed with enchantments.
When the eunuch who was carrying it arrived, I
looked up and saw a frightening man who offered me
a sword along with the bowl. So I perceived it was a
trick to lead me astray.
3 When he departed, I wept; I tasted neither one item
nor the other of the food he brought.
4 A day later she came to me and said, when she
recognized the food, Why didn’t you eat the food?
5 And I said to her because you ﬁlled it with a deadly
enchantment. How can you say, I do not go near idols,
but only to HWHY.
6 Now then understand that the Elohim of my father
revealed to me through a messenger your wickedness,
but I have kept it for this reason: to shame you if
somehow by seeing it you might repent.
7 In order for you to learn that the evil of beliya’al will
not triumph over those who exercise self-control in
their worship of Elohim, I will take this and eat it in your
presence. When I had said that, I prayed aloud, may
the Elohim of my fathers and the Messenger of
Aḇraham be with me.
8 And I ate. When she saw this, she fell upon her face
at my feet weeping. I raised her up and warned her,
and she agreed with me that she should no longer
commit this impiety.
2

7 But her heart was still inclined to evil and she turned
over in her mind how she might entrap me. Shortly she
was sighing deeply and depressed, even though she
was not sick.
2 When her husband saw her, he said to her, Why
are you so downcast? She responded to him, I am
suffering from a pain in my heart, and groans of my
spirit have taken hold of me.
427

JOSEPH

He tried to cure her with words. Then she seized
the occasion and came running in to me, while her
husband was still outside, and said to me, I shall hang
myself, or hurl myself over the cliff if you will not lie with
me.
4 Since I perceived that the spirit of Beliar was
troubling her, I prayed to HWHY, but I said to her:
5 Why, wretched woman, are you troubled and
disturbed, blinded by sin? Remember that if you kill
yourself, Astetha, your husband’s concubine, who is
ﬁlled with envy of you, will beat your children; thus you
will destroy your memory from the earth.
6 And she said, See, then, you do love me. That is
enough. Only keep contending for my life and that of
my children, and I shall cling to my expectation of
gaining my desire.
7 She did not understand that I spoke in this way for
my master’s sake and not for hers.
8 For if anyone is subjected to the passion of desire
and is enslaved by it, as she was, even when he hears
something good, he receives it with a view to aid his
wicked desire.
3

8 I tell you, my children, it was about the sixth hour
when she left me. Bending my knees before HWHY, I
prayed a whole day and a whole night. Toward dawn I
arose, crying and begging deliverance from her.
2 Finally, she grasped my clothing, determined to
force me into having intercourse with her.
3 When I saw, therefore, that in her madness she had
seized my garment, I left it and fled naked.
4 She held on to it, and brought false accusation
against me. Her husband came and threw me in prison
in his own house; then the next day he whipped me
and sent me to the Pharaoh’s prison.
5 When I was in fetters, the Mitsrite woman was
overtaken with grief. She came and heard the report
how I gave thanks to HWHY and sang praise in the
house of darkness, and how I rejoiced with a cheerful
428

YOSĔPH

voice, glorifying my Elohim, because I was set free
from this Mitsrite woman.

9 Many times she sent messages to me saying,
Acquiesce in fulfilling my desire, and I will release you
from the fetters and liberate you from the darkness.
2 Not even in my mind did I yield to her, for Elohim
loves him who in a den of wickedness combines
fasting with chastity, rather than the man who in
sovereigns’ chambers combines luxury with license.
3 If a man strives for self-control and at the same time
desires glory – and the Most High knows that it is
appropriate for him – He brings it about for him, even
as He did for me.
4 How often, as though she were ill, she came down
at odd hours and listened to my voice as I prayed!
When I was aware of her groaning, I fell silent.
5 For when I had been with her in her house, she
would bare her arms, thighs and breasts so that I might
lie with her. For she was wholly beautiful and
splendidly decked out to entice me, but HWHY
protected me from her manipulations.

10 So you see, my children, how great are the things
that patience and prayer with fasting accomplish.
2 You also, if you pursue self-control and purity with
patience and prayer with fasting in humility of heart,
HWHY will dwell among you, because He loves selfcontrol.
3 And where the Most High dwells, even if envy befall
someone, or slavery or slander, HWHY who dwells with
him on account of his self-control not only will rescue
him from these evils, but will exalt him and glorify him
as He did for me.
4 For these problems beset all mankind either in
deed or word or thought.
5 For my brothers knew how much my father loved
me, yet I was not puffed up in my thoughts. Even while
I was a child I had the reverence of Elohim in my heart,
for I understood that all things pass away.
429

JOSEPH

I did not arouse myself with evil intent, but honored
my brothers, and out of regard for them even when
they sold me I was silent rather than tell the
Yishma’ĕlites that I was the son of Ya’aqoḇ, a great
and righteous man.
6

11 You, therefore, my children, in every act keep the
reverence of Elohim before your eyes and honor your
brothers. For everyone who does the Torah of HWHY
will be loved by Him.
2 As I was going with the Yishma’ĕlites, they kept
asking me, Are you a slave? And I replied, I am a
home-born slave, so as not to disgrace my brothers.
3 The greatest of them said to me, You are not a
slave; even your appearance discloses that. But I told
them that I was a slave.
4 As we were reaching Mitsrayim they began to
squabble over me as to which of them would put up
the money and take me.
5 Accordingly it seemed good to all of them that I
should be left in Mitsrayim with a trader handling their
trading post until they returned bringing their
merchandise.
6 HWHY granted me favor in the eyes of the trader and
he entrusted me with his household.
7 And Elohim baraḵ him by my hand, and he
prospered in gold and silver and in business. And I was
with him three months and five days.

12 At that time the Memphian woman, Potiphar’s
wife, came down in a palanquin with great splendor,
because she had heard about me from one of her
eunuchs.
2 She said to her husband that through a certain
young Iḇri the trader had become rich; they say that he
surely stole him out of the land of Kena’an.
3 Now, then, work justice concerning him; take the
young man to your household, and the Elohim of the
Iḇrim will baraḵ you, because grace from the
shamayim is with him.
430

YOSĔPH

13 Potiphar believed her words, ordered the trader to
come, and said to him, What is this I hear about you,
that you steal persons from the land of Kena’an and
sell them as slaves?
2 The trader fell at his feet and besought him saying,
I pray you, my master, I do not know what you are
saying.
3 Potiphar said to him, Where is this Iḇri from, then?
And he said, The Yishma’ĕlites left him with me until
they return.
4 But he did not believe the trader and ordered that
he be stripped and beaten.
5 But since he persisted in his statements, Potiphar
said, Bring in the young man. When I entered I
prostrated myself before Potiphar, for he was third in
rank among Pharaoh’s ofﬁcers.
6 And taking me aside from the trader he said to me,
Are you a slave or a freeman?
7 I said to him, A slave. He said, Of whom? I replied,
Of the Yishma’ĕlites.
8 He said, How did you become a slave? And I said,
They bought me out of the land of Kena’an.
9 But he said to me, You are lying, and immediately
he ordered that I also be stripped and whipped.

14 The Memphian woman was watching through the
doors as they beat me, for her residence was nearby.
So she sent a message to him. Your sentence is
unjust, because you have punished as a wrongdoer
someone who, though a freeman, was stolen.
2 But since I did not change my statement while they
were beating me, he ordered me to be imprisoned
until, he said, the masters of the servant boy arrive.
3 But the woman said to her husband, Why do you
detain in bonds this young man who, though a captive,
is well-born?
4 Rather he should be set free and attended to by my
servants. She wanted to see me by reason of her sinful
passion, but I was ignorant of all these things.
431

JOSEPH

He said to her, It is not proper for Mitsrites to take
away what belongs to others before the evidence has
been presented. He said this concerning the trader,
but the young man he kept incarcerated.
5

15 Twenty-four days later the Yishma’ĕlites came;
they had heard that Ya’aqoḇ, my father, was mourning
greatly over me, and they came and told me.
2 Why did you tell us that you were a slave? Look,
we now know that you are the son of a great man in
the land of Kena’an, and that your father is mourning
for you in sackcloth and ashes.
3 When I heard this my inner being was dissolved
and my heart melted, and I wanted to weep very much,
but I restrained myself so as not to bring disgrace on
my brothers. So I said to them, I know nothing; I am a
slave.
4 Then they conferred about selling me so that I
might not be discovered in bondage to them, for they
feared my father,
5 that he might come and avenge himself powerfully
against them. They had heard that he was a great
person in the sight of Elohim and men.
6 Then the trader said to them, Release me from
Potiphar’s judgment. So they came and requested of
me, Say that you were purchased by us with money,
and then he will release us from responsibility.

16 The Memphian woman said to her husband, buy
the young man, for I hear it said that they are selling
him.
2 Immediately
she sent a eunuch to the
Yishma’ĕlites, requesting them to sell me.
3 But the eunuch was not willing to buy me and came
away after testing them out. He told his mistress that
they were asking a great deal of money for the boy.
4 She sent the eunuch back again and told him, Even
if they are asking two minas; offer it. Do not be sparing
of the gold; just buy the boy and bring him to me.
432

YOSĔPH

The eunuch went and gave them eighty pieces of
gold and took me away, but he told the Mitsrite woman
he had paid a hundred. Although I knew the facts, I
kept quiet in order not to bring the eunuch under
disgrace.
5

17 So you see, my children, how many things I
endured in order not to bring my brothers into disgrace.
2 Do you also, therefore, love one another, and with
long-suffering hide one anothers faults.
3 Elohim is delighted by harmony among brothers
and by the intention of a kind heart that takes pleasure
in goodness.
4 When my brothers came to Mitsrayim they learned
that I had returned their money to them, that I did not
scorn them, and that I sought to comfort them.
5 After the death of Ya’aqoḇ, my father, I loved them
beyond measure, and everything he had wanted for
them I did abundantly on their behalf.
6 I did not permit them to be troubled by the slightest
matter, and everything I had under my control I gave
to them.
7 Their sons were mine, and mine were as their
servants; their life was as my life, and every pain of
theirs was my pain; every ailment of theirs was my
sickness; their wish was my wish.
8 I did not exalt myself above them arrogantly
because of my worldly position of glory, but I was
among them as one of the least.

18 If you live in accord with HWHY’s Commands,
Elohim will exalt you with good things forever.
2 And if anyone wishes to do you harm, you should
pray for him, along with doing good, and you will be
rescued by HWHY from every evil.
3 Indeed you can see that on account of my humility
and patient endurance I took to myself a wife, the stepdaughter of the priest of Heliopolis; a hundred talents
of gold were given to me along with her, and HWHY
caused them to be my servants.
433

JOSEPH

And he also gave me mature beauty, more than
those of mature beauty in Yisra’ĕl; he preserved me
until old age with strength and beauty. In every way I
was like Ya’aqoḇ.
4

19 Listen, my children, concerning the dream that I
saw.
2 Twelve stags were grazing at a certain place; nine
were scattered over the whole earth, and likewise also
the three.
3 And as I looked, the three stags became three
lambs; they cried out to HWHY, and HWHY led them into
a fertile, well-watered place. He led them out of
darkness into the light.
4 And there they cried out to HWHY until the nine stags
were gathered to him, and they all became like twelve
sheep. After a short time they multiplied and became
many herds.
5 Later as I was looking, twelve bulls were nursing
from one cow, who furnished a sea of milk.
6 The twelve herds and the innumerable herds drank
from it. And the horns of the fourth bull ascended to the
shamayim and became as a rampart for the herds. And
from between the two horns there sprouted forth yet
another horn.
7 And I saw a heifer which surrounded them twelve
times and which became to perfection an aide to the
bulls.
8 And I saw in the midst of the horns a certain young
maiden wearing a multicolored stole; from her came
forth a lamb. Rushing from the left were all sorts of wild
animals and reptiles, and the lamb conquered them.
9 Because of him the bull rejoiced and the cow and
the stags were also glad with them.
10 These things must take place in their appropriate
time.
11 And you, my children, honor Lĕwi and Yahuḏah,
because from them shall arise the deliverance of
Yisra’ĕl.
434

YOSĔPH

For my sovereignty shall have an end among you,
like an orchard guard who disappears after the
summer.
12

20 For I know that after my death the Mitsrites will
oppress you, but Elohim will work vengeance on your
behalf, and will lead you into the promises made to
your fathers.
2 You shall carry my bones along with you, for when
you are taking my bones up there, HWHY will be with
you in the light, while Beliar will be with the Mitsrites in
the dark.
3 Take Asenath, your mother, and bury her by the
hippodrome, near Raḥĕl, your grandmother.
4 And when he had said this he stretched out his feet
and fell into a beautiful sleep.
5 And all Yisra’ĕl and all Mitsrayim mourned with
great lamentation.
6 And at the departure of the sons of Yisra’ĕl from
Mitsrayim, they took along Yosĕph’s bones and buried
him in Ḥeḇron with his fathers. The years of his life
were one hundred ten.

435

BENJAMIN

TESTAMENT OF BINYAMIN
‫! בנימין‬YmY!B

1 A copy of the words of Binyamin which he testified
to his sons, having lived one hundred twenty-five
years.
2 He kissed them and said, Just as Yitsḥaq was born
to Aḇraham in his old age, so I was born to Ya’aqoḇ.
3 Since Raḥĕl, my mother, died as she was bearing
me, I had no milk from her, but was nursed instead by
Bilhah, her maid servant.
4 For after Raḥĕl bore Yosĕph she was barren for
twelve years; she prayed to HWHY, with fasting,
5 and conceived and gave birth to me. My father
loved Raḥĕl exceedingly, and prayed that he might see
two sons born from her.
6 For this reason I was called Binyamin, that is son of
days.

2 When I came to Yosĕph in Mitsrayim and my brother
recognized me, he said, What did they say to my father
when they sold me?
2 And I replied to him, They spattered your coat with
blood and sent it to him and said, Do you know if this
shirt belongs to your son?
3 And Yosĕph said to me, Yes, brother. When they
stripped off my shirt and gave me to the Yishma’ĕlites,
they gave me a loincloth, beat me, and told me to run.
4 One of them who had whipped me was met by a
lion and it slew him.
5 So his partners were horrified and kept me under a
looser rein.

3 Now, my children, love HWHY Elohim of the
shamayim and earth; keep His Commandments;
pattern your life after the good and pious man Yosĕph.
2 Let your thoughts incline to the good, as you know
to be so with me, because he who has the right set of
mind sees everything rightly.
436

BINYAMIN

Reverence HWHY and love your neighbor. Even if
the spirits of Beliar seek to derange you with all sorts
of wicked oppression, they will not dominate you, even
as they were not able to dominate Yosĕph, my brother.
4 How many men wanted to destroy him, and Elohim
shielded him! For the person who fears and
reverences Elohim and loves his neighbor cannot be
plagued by the spirit of Beliar since he is sheltered by
the fear and reverence of Elohim.
5 Neither man’s schemes nor those of animals can
prevail over him, for he is aided in living by this: by the
love which he has toward his neighbor; therefore
Elohim helps him.
6 Yosĕph also urged our father to pray for his
brothers, that HWHY would not hold them accountable
for their sin which they so wickedly committed against
him.
7 And Ya’aqoḇ cried out, O noble child, you have
crushed the inner feelings of Ya’aqoḇ, your father. He
embraced him and kept kissing him for two hours,
saying,
8 In you will be fulﬁlled the neḇuah of the shamayim
which says that the spotless One will be deﬁled by
torahless men and the sinless One will die for the sake
of impious men in the blood of the Covenant, for the
deliverance of the Gentiles and of Yisra’ĕl, and shall
destroy Beliar and his servants.
3

4 See then, my children, what is the end goal of the
good man. Be imitators of him in his goodness
because of his compassion, in order that you may wear
crowns of glory.
2 For a good man does not have a dark eye, but he
is merciful to all, even though they may be sinners.
3 And even if persons plot against him for evil ends,
by doing good this man conquers evil, being shielded
by Elohim. He loves the righteous and those who
wrong him as he loves his own life.
4 If anyone is exalted, he holds no envy. If anyone
becomes rich, he is not jealous. If anyone is brave, he
437

BENJAMIN

praises him. The virtuous man he commends; he
shows mercy to the impoverished; to the weak he
shows compassion; unto HWHY he sings praises.
5 He loves the person who has the grace of a good
Ruaḥ as he loves his own life.

5 If your mind is set toward good, even evil men will
be at peace with you; the depraved will respect you
and will turn back to the good. The greedy will not only
abstain from their passion but will give to the
oppressed the things which they covetously hold.
2 If you continue to do good, even the unclean spirits
will flee from you and wild animals will fear you.
3 For where someone has within himself respect for
good works and has light in the mind, darkness will flee
away from that person.
4 For if anyone unashamedly attacks a qodesh man,
he repents, since the qodesh man shows mercy to the
one who abused him, and maintains silence. And if
anyone betrays a righteous man, the righteous man
prays. Even though for a brief time he may be
humbled, later he will appear far more glorious, as
happened with Yosĕph, my brother.

6 The deliberations of the good man are not in the
control of the deceitful spirit, Beliar, for the Messenger
of Shalom guides his life.
2 For he does not look with passionate longing at
corruptible things, nor does he accumulate wealth out
of love for pleasure.
3 He does not ﬁnd delight in pleasure, nor does he
grieve his neighbor, nor does he stuff himself with
delicacies, nor is he led astray by visual excitement:
HWHY is his portion.
4 The good mindset does not receive glory or
dishonor from men, nor does it know deceit, or lying,
or conﬂict, or abuse. For HWHY dwells in him, illumines
his life, and he rejoices in everything at every
appropriate time.
438

BINYAMIN

The good set of mind does not talk from both sides
of its mouth: praises and curses, abuse and honor,
calm and strife, hypocrisy and truth, poverty and
wealth, but it has one disposition, uncontaminated and
pure, toward all men.
6 There is no duplicity in its perception or its hearing.
Whatever it does, or speaks, or perceives, it knows
that HWHY is watching over its life,
7 for he cleanses his mind in order that he will not be
suspected of wrongdoing either by men or by Elohim.
The works of Beliar are two-fold, and have in them no
integrity.
5

7 So I tell you, my children, flee from the evil of Beliar,
because he offers a sword to those who obey him.
2 And the sword is the mother of the seven evils; it
receives them through Beliar: The first is moral
corruption, the second is destruction, the third is
oppression, the fourth is captivity, the fifth is want, the
sixth is turmoil, the seventh is desolation.
3 It is for this reason that Qayin was handed over by
Elohim for seven punishments, for in every hundredth
year HWHY brought upon him one plague.
4 When he was two hundred years old suffering
began and in his nine hundredth year he was deprived
of life. For he was condemned on account of Heḇel his
brother as a result of all his evil deeds, but Lemeḵ was
condemned by seventy times seven.
5 Until eternity those who are like Qayin in envy and
hatred of brother shall be punished with similar
judgment.

8 But you, my children, run from evil, envy, and hatred
of brothers;
2 Cling to goodness and love. For the person with a
mind that is pure with love does not look on a woman
for the purpose of having sexual relations.
3 He has no pollution in his heart, because upon him
is resting the Ruaḥ of Elohim. For just as the sun is
unpolluted, though it shines on dung and slime, but
439

BENJAMIN

dries up both and drives off the bad odor, so also the
pure mind, though surrounded with the corruptions of
earth, cleanses instead and is not itself corrupted.

9 From the words of Ḥanoḵ the Righteous I tell you
that you will be sexually promiscuous like the
promiscuity of the Seḏomites and will perish, save a
few. You shall resume your actions with loose women,
and the sovereignty of HWHY will not be among you, for
He will take it away forthwith.
2 But in your allotted place will be the Hĕyḵal of
Elohim, and the last Hĕyḵal will exceed the former in
glory. The twelve tribes shall be gathered there and all
the nations, until such time as the Most High shall send
forth His deliverance through the ministration of the
only begotten Naḇi.
3 And He shall enter into the Hĕyḵal, and there shall
the Aḏonai be treated with outrage, and He shall be
lifted up upon a tree.
4 And the veil of the Hĕyḵal shall be rent, and the
Ruaḥ of Elohim shall pass on to the Gentiles as fire
poured forth.
5 And He shall ascend from She’ol and shall pass
from earth into the shamayim. And I know how lowly
He shall be upon earth, and how glorious in shamayim.

10 When Yosĕph was in Mitsrayim I earnestly
desired to see his appearance and the form of his face,
and through my father Ya’aqoḇ’s prayers I saw him,
while I was awake during the day, just as he was, his
whole appearance.
2 After he had spoken these things to them he said,
You know then, my children, that I am dying. Do the
truth, each of you to his neighbor;
3 Keep the Torah of HWHY and His Commandments.
4 For I leave you these things instead of an
inheritance. Give them, then, to your children for an
eternal possession; this is what Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ did.
440

BINYAMIN

They gave us all these things as an inheritance,
saying, Keep Elohim’s Commandments until HWHY
reveals His deliverance to all the tribes.
6 And then you will see Ḥanoḵ and Shĕth and
Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ being raised up at
the right hand in great joy.
7 Then shall we also be raised, each of us over our
tribe, and we shall worship the Sovereign of the
shamayim, who appeared upon earth in the form of a
Man in humility. And as many as believe on Him on the
earth shall rejoice with Him. Then also all men shall
rise, some unto glory and some unto shame.
8 And the Aḏon shall judge Yisra’ĕl first, for their
unrighteousness; for when He appeared as the Bĕn of
Elohim in the flesh to deliver them they believed Him
not.
9 And then He shall do the same for all the nations,
as many as believed Him not when He appeared upon
earth.
10 Then He shall judge Yisra’ĕl by the chosen people
as He tested Ĕsaw by the Miḏyanites who loved their
brothers. You, therefore, my children, may your lot
come to be with those who fear and reverence HWHY.
11 Therefore, my children, if you live in qodeshah, in
accord with HWHY’s Commands, you shall again dwell
with me in hope, all Yisra’ĕl will be gathered to HWHY.
5

11 And I shall no longer be called a rapacious wolf
on account of your rapine, but ‘HWHY’s worker’
providing food for those who do good works.
2 And in later times there shall rise up the beloved of
HWHY, from the lineage of Yahuḏah and Lĕwi, One who
does His good pleasure by His mouth, enlightening all
the nations with new knowledge. The light of
knowledge will mount up in Yisra’ĕl for her deliverance,
seizing them like a wolf coming upon them, gathering
the tribes.
3 Until the consummation of the ages He shall be in
the congregations of the nations and among the rulers,
like a musical air in the mouths of all.
441

BENJAMIN

He shall be written of in Sacred Books, both His
work and His word. And He shall be HWHY’s Chosen
One forever.
5 He shall range widely among them, like my father,
Ya’aqoḇ, saying, He shall ﬁll up what was lacking of
your tribe.
4

12 And when he had ﬁnished his statements he said,
I command you, my children, carry my bones up out of
Mitsrayim; bury me in Ḥeḇron near my fathers.
2 Binyamin died last of all in his one hundred twentyﬁfth year at a ripe old age, and they placed him in a
coffin.
3 And in the ninety-ﬁrst year after the departure of the
sons of Yisra’ĕl for Mitsrayim, they and their brothers
took up the bones of their fathers secretly, because of
the war with Kena’an, and buried them in Ḥeḇron by
the feet of their fathers.
4 Then they returned from the land of Kena’an and
resided in Mitsrayim until the day of the departure from
Mitsrayim.

442

JUBILEES

YOḆELIM
‫ יובלים‬mYLBWY

1 And it came to be in the first year of the children of
Yisra’ĕl coming out of Mitsrayim, in the third month, on
the sixteenth day of the month, that Elohim spoke to
Mosheh, saying, “Come up to Me on the mountain, and
I shall give you two tablets of stone of the Torah and
of the Command, which I have written, that you may
teach them.”
2 And Mosheh went up into the mountain of Elohim,
and the esteem of hWhY dwelt on Mount Sinai, and a
cloud overshadowed it six days.
3 And He called to Mosheh on the seventh day out of
the midst of the cloud, and the appearance of the
esteem of hWhY was like a flaming fire on the top of
the mountain.
4 And Mosheh was on the mountain forty days and
forty nights, and Elohim taught him the earlier and the
latter history of the division of all the days of the Law
and of the Witness.
5 And He said, “Incline your heart to every Word
which I shall speak to you on this mountain, and write
them in a Book in order that their generations may see
how I have not forsaken them for all the evil which they
have done in transgressing the Covenant which I
establish between Me and you for their generations
this day on Mount Sinai.
6 “And so it shall come to be when all these matters
come upon them, that they shall recognise that I am
more righteous than they in all their judgments and in
all their actions, and they shall recognise that I have
been true with them.
7 “And you shall write for yourself all these Words
which I declare to you this day, for I know their rebellion
and their stiff neck, before I bring them into the land of
which I swore to their fathers; to Aḇraham and to
Yitsḥaq and to Ya’aqoḇ, saying, ‘Unto your seed I shall
give a land flowing with milk and honey.’
443

YOḆELIM

“And they shall eat and be satisfied, and they shall
turn to strange mighty ones, to mighty ones which
cannot deliver them from any of their tribulation, and
this witness shall be heard for a witness against them.
9 “For they shall forget all My Commands, even all
that I command them, and they shall walk after the
gentiles, and after their uncleanness, and after their
shame, and shall serve their mighty ones. And these
shall come to be an offence to them and a tribulation
and an affliction and a snare.
10 “And many shall perish and they shall be taken
captive, and shall fall into the hands of the enemy,
because they have forsaken My Laws and My
Commands, and the Festivals of My Covenant, and My
Shabbathoth, and My Qodesh Place which I have
qadosh for Myself in their midst, and My Mishkan, and
My Miqdash, which I have qadosh for Myself in the
midst of the land, that I should place My Name upon it,
and there it should dwell.
11 “And they shall make for themselves high places
and Ashĕrim and carved images, and they shall
worship, each his own, so as to go astray, and they
shall offer their children to demons, and to all the works
of the straying of their hearts.
12 “And I shall send witnesses to them, that I may
witness against them, but they shall not hear, and shall
slay the witnesses also, and they shall persecute those
who seek the Law, and they shall overturn and change
all so as to work evil before My eyes.
13 “And I shall hide My face from them, and I shall
deliver them into the hand of the gentiles for captivity,
and for a prey, and for devouring. And I shall remove
them from the midst of the land, and I shall scatter
them among the gentiles.
14 “And they shall forget all My Torah and all My
Commands and all My Right-Rulings, and shall go
astray as to new moons, and Shabbathoth, and
Festivals, and Yoḇelim, and Laws.
8

444

JUBILEES

“And after this they shall turn to Me from among the
gentiles with all their heart and with all their being and
with all their strength, and I shall gather them from
among all the gentiles, and they shall seek Me, so that
I shall be found by them, when they seek Me with all
their heart and with all their being.
16 “And I shall reveal to them great peace with
righteousness, and I shall plant them in this land in
truth, with all My heart and with all My being, and they
shall be for a beraḵah and not for a curse, and they
shall be the head and not the tail.
17 “And I shall build My Miqdash in their midst, and I
shall dwell with them, and I shall be their Elohim and
they shall be My people in truth and righteousness.
18 “And I shall not forsake them nor fail them; for I am
hWhY their Elohim.”
19 And Mosheh fell on his face and prayed and said,
“O Aḏonai my Elohim, do not forsake Your people and
Your inheritance, so that they should wander in the
straying of their hearts. And do not deliver them into
the hands of their enemies, the gentiles, lest they
should rule over them and cause them to sin against
You.
20 “Let Your kindness, O Aḏonai, be lifted up on Your
people, and create in them an upright spirit, and do not
let the spirit of beliya’al rule over them to accuse them
before You, and to ensnare them from all the paths of
righteousness, so that they might perish from before
Your face.
21 “But they are Your people and Your inheritance,
which You have delivered with Your great power from
the hands of the Mitsrites. Create in them a clean heart
and a qodesh spirit, and do not let them be ensnared
in their sins from this time and forever.”
22 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “I know their unruliness
and their thoughts and they are stiff-necked, and they
shall not be obedient till they confess their own sin and
the sin of their fathers.
15

445

YOḆELIM

“And after this they shall turn to Me in all
uprightness and with all their heart and with all their
being, and I shall circumcise the foreskin of their heart
and the foreskin of the heart of their seed, and I shall
create in them a qodesh spirit, and I shall cleanse them
so that they shall not turn away from Me from that day
unto eternity.
24 “And their beings shall cling to Me and to all My
Commands, and they shall perform My Commands,
and I shall be their Father and they shall be My
children.
25 “And they shall all be called children of the living
Elohim, and every messenger and every spirit shall
know, even they shall know that these are My children,
and that I am their Father in uprightness and
righteousness, and that I love them.
26 “And you shall write down for yourself all these
Words which I declare unto you on this mountain, the
first and the last, which shall come to be in all the
divisions of the days in the Law and in the Witness and
in the Shabbathoth and the Yoḇelim forever, until I
descend and dwell with them forever.”
27 And He said to the messenger of the presence,
“Write for Mosheh, from the beginning of creation till
My Miqdash has been built among them forever.
28 “And hWhY shall appear to the eyes of all, and all
shall know that I am the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl and the
Father of all the children of Ya’aqoḇ, and Sovereign on
Mount Tsiyon forever. And Tsiyon and Yerushalayim
shall be qodesh.”
29 And the messenger of the presence who went
before the camp of Yisra’ĕl took the tablets of the
divisions of the years from the time of the creation of
the Law and of the Witness of the Shabbathoth, of the
Yoḇelim, according to the individual years, according
to all the number of the Yoḇelim, from the day of the
creation when the shamayim and the earth shall be
renewed and all their creation according to the powers
of the shamayim, and according to all the creation of
23

446

JUBILEES

the earth, until the Miqdash of hWhY shall be made in
Yerushalayim on Mount Tsiyon, and all the lights be
renewed for healing and for peace and for a beraḵah
for all the chosen of Yisra’ĕl, and so it shall be from
that day and to all the days of the earth.

2 And the messenger of the presence spoke to
Mosheh according to the word of hWhY, saying, “Write
the complete history of the creation, how in six days
hWhY Elohim finished all His works and all that He
created, and guarded the Shabbath on the seventh
day and qadosh it for all ages, and appointed it as a
sign for all His works.”
2 For on the first day He created the shamayim which
are above and the earth and the waters and all the
ruaḥoth which serve before Him - the messengers of
the presence, and the messengers of qodeshah, and
the messengers of the Ruaḥ ha’Ruaḥoth, and the
messengers of the ruaḥ of the clouds, and of darkness,
and of snow and of hail and of hoar frost, and the
messengers of the voices and of the thunder and of
the lightning, and the messengers of the ruaḥ of cold
and of heat, and of winter and of spring and of autumn
and of summer, and of all the ruaḥoth of His creatures
which are in the shamayim and on the earth, the
abysses and the darkness, evening and night, and the
light, dawn and day, which He has prepared in the
knowledge of His heart.
3 And we looked upon His works, and praised Him,
and exalted before Him because of all His works; for
seven great works He created on the first day.
4 And on the second day He created the expanse in
the midst of the waters, and the waters were divided
on that day - half of them went up above and half of
them went down below the expanse in the midst over
the face of the whole earth. And this was the only work
created on the second day.
5 And on the third day He commanded the waters to
pass from off the face of the whole earth into one
place, and the dry land to appear.
447

YOḆELIM

And the waters did so, as He commanded them,
and they withdrew from off the face of the earth into
one place outside of this expanse, and the dry land
appeared.
7 And on that day He created for them all the seas
according to their separate gatherings, and all the
rivers, and the gatherings of the waters in the
mountains and on all the earth, and all the lakes, and
all the dew of the earth, and the seed which is sown,
and all sprouting matters, and fruit-bearing trees, and
trees of the forest, and the garden of Ĕḏen, in Ĕḏen,
and all plants after their kind. These four great works
Elohim created on the third day.
8 And on the fourth day He created the sun and the
moon and the stars, and placed them in the expanse
of the shamayim, to give light upon all the earth, and
to rule over the day and the night, and divide the light
from the darkness.
9 And Elohim appointed the sun to be a great sign on
the earth for days and for Shabbathoth and for months
and for Festivals and for years and for Shabbathoth of
years and for Yoḇelim and for all seasons of the years.
10 And it divides the light from the darkness for good,
that all matters may thrive sprout and grow on the
earth. These three kinds He made on the fourth day.
11 And on the fifth day He created great Liwiathans in
the depths of the waters, for these were the first
matters of flesh that were created by His hands: the
fish and all that moves in the waters, and all that flies;
the birds and all their kind.
12 And the sun rose above them to prosper them, and
above all that was on the earth, all that sprouts out of
the earth, and all fruit-bearing trees, and all flesh; these
three kinds He created on the fifth day.
13 And on the sixth day He created all the beasts of
the earth, and all cattle, and all that moves on the
earth.
14 And after all this He created man - man and a
woman He created them - and gave him rulership over
6

448

JUBILEES

all that is on the earth, and in the seas, and over all
that flies, and over beasts and over cattle, and over all
that moves on the earth, and over the whole earth, and
over all this He gave him rulership. And these four
kinds He created on the sixth day.
15 And there were altogether twenty-two kinds.
16 And He finished all His work on the sixth day; all
that is in the shamayim and on the earth, and in the
seas and in the abysses, and in the light and in the
darkness, and in all.
17 And He gave us a great sign - the Shabbath day,
that we should work six days, but guard the Shabbath
on the seventh day from all work.
18 And all the messengers of the presence, and all the
messengers of qodeshah - these two great classes He has hidden us to guard the Shabbath with Him in
the shamayim and on earth.
19 And He said to us, “See, I shall separate unto
Myself a people from among all the peoples, and they
shall guard the Shabbath day, and I shall qadosh them
unto Myself as My people, and shall baraḵ them. As I
have qadosh the Shabbath day and qadosh it unto
Myself, even so shall I baraḵ them, and they shall be
My people and I shall be their Elohim.
20 “And I have chosen the seed of Ya’aqoḇ from
among all that I have seen, and have written him down
as My first-born son, and have qadosh him unto Myself
forever and ever. And I shall teach them the Shabbath
day, that they may guard the Shabbath thereon from
all work.”
21 And so He created therein a sign in accordance
with which they should guard the Shabbath with us on
the seventh day, to eat and to drink, and to baraḵ Him
who has created all matters as He has baraḵ and
qadosh unto Himself a treasured possession; a people
above all peoples, and that they should guard the
Shabbath together with us.
22 And He caused His Commands to ascend as a
sweet fragrance acceptable before Him all the days.
449

YOḆELIM

There were twenty-two heads of mankind from
Aḏam to Ya’aqoḇ, and twenty-two kinds of work were
made until the seventh day - this is baruḵ and qodesh.
And the former also is baruḵ and qodesh, and this one
serves with that one for qodeshah and beraḵah.
24 And to them - Ya’aqoḇ and his seed - it was granted
that they should always be the baruḵ and qodeshim of
the first Witness and Torah, even as He had qadosh
and baraḵ the Shabbath day on the seventh day.
25 He created the shamayim and earth and all that He
created in six days, and Elohim made the seventh day
qodesh for all His works. Therefore He commanded for
this reason, that whoever does any work on it shall die,
and that he who defiles it shall certainly die.
26 Therefore you shall command the children of
Yisra’ĕl to observe this day that they may qodesh it and
not do any work on it, and not to defile it, as it is more
qodesh than all other days.
27 And whoever profanes it shall certainly die, and
whoever does any work on it shall certainly die forever,
that the children of Yisra’ĕl may observe this day
throughout their generations, and not be rooted out of
the land; for it is a qodesh day and a baruḵ day.
28 And every one who observes it and guards the
Shabbath thereon from all his work, shall be qodesh
and baruḵ throughout all days like us.
29 Declare and say to the children of Yisra’ĕl the Law
of this day both that they should guard the Shabbath
on it, and that they should not forsake it in the straying
of their hearts; that it is not right to do any work on it
which is improper, to do their own pleasure on it. And
that they should not prepare whatever on it to be eaten
or drunk, and to draw water, or bring in or take out
through their gates any burden on it, which they had
not prepared for themselves on the sixth day in their
dwellings.
30 And they shall not bring in nor take out from house
to house on that day, for that day is more qodesh and
baruḵ than any Yoḇĕl day of the Yoḇelim. On this we
23

450

JUBILEES

guarded the Shabbath in the shamayim before it was
made known to any flesh to guard the Shabbath
thereon on the earth.
31 And the Creator of all matters baraḵ it, but He did
not qadosh all peoples and nations to guard the
Shabbath on it, but Yisra’ĕl alone - they alone He
permitted to eat and drink and to guard the Shabbath
thereon on the earth.
32 And the Creator of all matters baraḵ this day which
He had created for a beraḵah and a qodeshah and an
esteem above all days.
33 This Torah and Witness was given to the children
of Yisra’ĕl as a Law forever unto their generations.

3 And on the six days of the second week, according
to the word of Elohim, we brought to Aḏam all the
beasts, and all the cattle, and all the birds, and all that
moves on the earth, and all that moves in the water,
according to their kinds, and according to their types:
the beasts on the first day; the cattle on the second
day; the birds on the third day; and all that which
moves on the earth on the fourth day; and that which
moves in the water on the fifth day.
2 And Aḏam named them all by their respective
names, and as he called them, so their name was.
3 And on these five days Aḏam saw all these, male
and female, according to every kind that was on the
earth, but he was alone and found no helper for
himself.
4 And hWhY said to us, “It is not good that the man
should be alone; let Us make a helper for him.”
5 And hWhY our Elohim caused a deep sleep to fall
upon him, and he slept, and He took for the woman
one rib from among his ribs, and this rib was the origin
of the woman from among his ribs, and He built up the
flesh in its stead, and made the woman.
6 And He woke Aḏam out of his sleep, and upon
waking he rose on the sixth day, and He brought her
to him, and he knew her, and said to her, “This is now
451

YOḆELIM

bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. She shall be
called ‘woman’, because she was taken out of man.”
7 Therefore man and wife shall be one, and therefore
a man shall leave his father and his mother, and cling
to his wife, and they shall be one flesh.
8 In the first week Aḏam was created, and the rib his wife - in the second week He showed her to him.
And for this reason the Command was given to keep
in their defilement, for a male seven days, and for a
female twice seven days.
9 And after Aḏam had completed forty days in the
land where he had been created, we brought him into
the Garden of Ĕḏen to till and keep it, but his wife they
brought in on the eightieth day, and after this she
entered into the Garden of Ĕḏen.
10 And for this reason the Command is written on the
tablets of the shamayim in regard to her that gives
birth: If she brings forth a male, she shall remain in her
uncleanness seven days according to the first week of
days, and thirty-three days she shall remain in the
blood of her purifying. And she shall not touch any
qodesh matter, nor enter into the Miqdash, until she
accomplishes these days which are commanded in the
case of a male child.
11 But in the case of a female child she shall remain
in her uncleanness two weeks of days, according to
the first two weeks, and sixty-six days in the blood of
her purification, and they shall be eighty days in all.
12 And when she had completed these eighty days we
brought her into the Garden of Ĕḏen, for it is more
qodesh than all the earth besides, and every tree that
is planted in it is qodesh.
13 Therefore, there was ordained regarding her who
brings forth a male or a female child, the law of those
days that she should touch no qodesh matter, nor
enter into the Miqdash until these days for the male or
female child are accomplished.

452

JUBILEES

This is the Torah and witness which was written
down for Yisra’ĕl, in order that they should observe it
forever.
15 And in the first week of the first Yoḇĕl, Aḏam and
his wife were in the Garden of Ĕḏen for seven years
tilling and keeping it, and we gave him work and we
instructed him to do all that is suitable for serving.
16 And he tilled the garden, and was naked and was
not aware of it, and was not ashamed, and he
protected the garden from the birds and beasts and
cattle, and gathered its fruit, and ate, and put aside the
remainder for himself and for his wife.
17 And after the completion of the seven years which
he had completed there, seven years exactly, and in
the second month, on the seventeenth day of the
month, the serpent came and approached the woman.
And the serpent said to the woman, “Has Elohim
commanded you, saying, ‘You shall not eat of every
tree of the garden?’ ”
18 And she said to him, “Of all the fruit of the trees of
the garden Elohim has said to us, ‘Eat,’ but of the fruit
of the tree which is in the midst of the garden Elohim
has said to us, ‘You shall not eat of it, neither shall you
touch it, lest you die.’ ”
19 And the serpent said to the woman, “You shall
certainly not die. For Elohim knows that on the day you
eat of it, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be
like Elohim, and you shall know good and evil.”
20 And the woman saw the tree that it was agreeable
and pleasant to the eye, and that its fruit was good for
food, and she took of it and ate.
21 And when she had first covered her shame with fig
leaves, she gave of it to Aḏam and he ate, and his eyes
were opened, and he saw that he was naked.
22 And he took fig leaves and sewed them together,
and made a covering for himself, and covered his
shame.
23 And Elohim cursed the serpent, and was wroth with
it forever.
14

453

YOḆELIM

And He was wroth with the woman, because she
listened to the voice of the serpent, and ate. And He
said to her, “I shall greatly multiply your sorrow and
your pains. In sorrow you shall bring forth children, and
your return shall be unto your husband, and he shall
rule over you.”
25 And to Aḏam also He said, “Because you have
listened to the voice of your wife, and have eaten of
the tree which I commanded you that you should not
eat of it, cursed be the ground for your sake. Thorns
and thistles it shall bring forth to you, and you shall eat
your bread in the sweat of your face, till you return to
the earth from where you were taken; for dust you are,
and to dust shall you return.”
26 And He made for them coats of skin, and clothed
them, and sent them out from the Garden of Ĕḏen.
27 And on that day on which Aḏam went out from the
garden, he offered as a sweet fragrance an offering:
frankincense, galbanum, and fragrant gum, and spices
in the morning with the rising of the sun from the day
when he covered his shame.
28 And on that day the mouth of all beasts was closed,
and of cattle, and of birds, and of whatever walks, and
of whatever moves, so that they could no longer speak,
for they had all spoken, one with another with one lip
and with one tongue.
29 And He sent out of the Garden of Ĕḏen all flesh that
was in the Garden of Ĕḏen, and all flesh was scattered
according to their kinds, and according to their types
to the places which had been created for them.
30 And to Aḏam alone He gave the means to cover his
shame, of all the beasts and cattle.
31 On this account, it is prescribed on the tablets of
the shamayim as regarding all those who know the
Right-Ruling of the Torah, that they should cover their
shame, and should not uncover themselves as the
gentiles uncover themselves.
32 And on the new moon of the fourth month, Aḏam
and his wife went out from the Garden of Ĕḏen, and
24

454

JUBILEES

they dwelt in the land of Elda, in the land of their
creation.
33 And Aḏam called the name of his wife Ḥawwah.
34 And they had no son till the first Yoḇĕl, and after
this he knew her.
35 Now he tilled the land as he had been instructed in
the Garden of Ĕḏen.

4 And in the third week in the second Yoḇĕl she gave
birth to Qayin, and in the fourth she gave birth to Heḇel,
and in the fifth she gave birth to her daughter Awan.
2 And in the first year of the third Yoḇĕl, Qayin slew
Heḇel because Elohim accepted the offering of Heḇel,
and did not accept the offering of Qayin.
3 And he slew him in the field, and his blood cried
from the ground to the shamayim, lamenting because
he had slain him.
4 And hWhY reproved Qayin because of Heḇel,
because he had slain him, and he made him a fugitive
on the earth because of the blood of his brother, and
he cursed him upon the earth.
5 And on this account it is written on the tablets of the
shamayim, “Cursed is he who smites his neighbour
treacherously.” And let all who have seen and heard
say, “So be it.” And the man who has seen and not
declared, let him be accursed as the other.
6 And for this reason we announce when we come
before hWhY our Elohim all the sin which is committed
in the shamayim and on earth, and in light and in
darkness, and everywhere.
7 And Aḏam and his wife mourned for Heḇel four
weeks of years, and in the fourth year of the fifth week
they became joyful, and Aḏam knew his wife again,
and she bore him a son, and he called his name Shĕth,
for he said, “Elohim has raised up a second seed for
us on the earth instead of Heḇel, for Qayin slew him.”
8 And in the sixth week he brought forth his daughter
Azura.
9 And Qayin took Awan his sister to be his wife, and
she bore him Ḥanoḵ at the close of the fourth Yoḇĕl.
455

YOḆELIM

And in the first year of the first week of the fifth Yoḇĕl,
dwellings were built on the earth, and Qayin built a city,
and called its name after the name of his son Ḥanoḵ.
10 And Aḏam knew Ḥawwah his wife and she bore a
further nine sons.
11 And in the fifth week of the fifth Yoḇĕl, Shĕth took
Azura his sister to be his wife, and in the fourth year of
the sixth week she bore him Enosh.
12 He began to call on the Name of hWhY on the earth.
13 And in the seventh Yoḇĕl in the third week, Enosh
took No’am his sister to be his wife, and she bore him
a son in the third year of the fifth week, and he called
his name Qĕynan.
14 And at the close of the eighth Yoḇĕl Qĕynan took
Mu’alĕlĕth his sister to be his wife, and she bore him a
son in the ninth Yoḇĕl, in the first week in the third year
of this week, and he called his name Mahalal’ĕl.
15 And in the second week of the tenth Yoḇĕl
Mahalal’ĕl took as wife, Dinah, the daughter of
Baraḵi’ĕl the daughter of his father’s brother. And she
bore him a son in the third week in the sixth year, and
he called his name Yereḏ, for in his days the
messengers of hWhY descended on the earth - those
who are named the Watchers - that they should
instruct the children of men, and that they should do
right-ruling and uprightness on the earth.
16 And in the eleventh Yoḇĕl, Yereḏ took a wife, and
her name was Beraḵah, the daughter of Rasuyal, a
daughter of his father’s brother, in the fourth week of
this Yoḇĕl. And she bore him a son in the fifth week, in
the fourth year of the Yoḇĕl, and he called his name
Ḥanoḵ.
17 And he was the first among men that are born on
earth who learned writing and knowledge and wisdom
and who wrote down the signs of the shamayim
according to the order of their months in a Book, that
men might know the seasons of the years according to
the order of their separate months.
456

JUBILEES

And he was the first to write a witness, and he
witnessed to the sons of men among the generations
of the earth, and recounted the weeks of the Yoḇelim,
and made known to them the days of the years, and
put in order the months and recounted the
Shabbathoth of the years as we made known to him.
19 And what was and what shall be he saw in a vision
of his sleep, as it shall happen to the children of men
throughout their generations until the Day of judgment.
He saw and understood all, and wrote his witness, and
placed the witness on earth for all the children of men
and for their generations.
20 And in the twelfth Yoḇĕl, in the seventh week, he
took a wife, and her name was Edni, the daughter of
Danĕl, the daughter of his father’s brother. And in the
sixth year in this week she bore him a son and he
called his name Methushelaḥ.
21 And he was furthermore with the messengers of
Elohim these six Yoḇelim of years, and they showed
him all which is on earth and in the shamayim - the rule
of the sun - and he wrote it all down.
22 And he witnessed to the Watchers, who had sinned
with the daughters of men; for these had begun to unite
themselves - so as to be defiled - with the daughters
of men, and Ḥanoḵ witnessed against them all.
23 And he was taken from among the children of men,
and we conducted him into the Garden of Ĕḏen in
majesty and honour, and see, there he writes down the
condemnation and judgment of the world, and all the
wickedness of the children of men.
24 And on account of it Elohim brought the waters of
the flood upon all the land of Ĕḏen; for there he was
appointed as a sign and that he should witness against
all the children of men, that he should recount all the
deeds of the generations until the Day of
condemnation.
25 And he burned the incense of the Miqdash: sweet
spices, acceptable before hWhY on the Mountain.
18

457

YOḆELIM

For hWhY has four places on the earth: the Garden
of Ĕḏen, and the Mountain of the East, and this
mountain on which you are this day, Mount Sinai, and
Mount Tsiyon which shall be qadosh in the new
creation for a qodeshah of the earth; through it the
earth shall be qadosh from all guilt and its uncleanness
throughout the generations of the world.
27 And in the fourteenth Yoḇĕl Methushelaḥ took a
wife, Eḏna the daughter of Azri’ĕl, the daughter of his
father’s brother, in the third week, in the first year of
this week, and he brought forth a son and called his
name Lemeḵ.
28 And in the fifteenth Yoḇĕl in the third week, Lemeḵ
took a wife, and her name was Bĕtĕnos the daughter
of Baraḵi’ĕl, the daughter of his father’s brother. And in
this week she bore him a son, and he called his name
Noaḥ, saying, “This one shall comfort me for my
trouble and all my work, and for the ground which
hWhY has cursed.”
29 And at the close of the nineteenth Yoḇĕl, in the
seventh week in the sixth year, Aḏam died, and all his
sons buried him in the land of his creation, and he was
the first to be buried in the earth.
30 And he was less seventy years from one thousand
years; for one thousand years are as one day in the
witness of the shamayim, and therefore was it written
concerning the tree of knowledge, “On the day that you
eat of it you shall die.” For this reason he did not
complete the years of this day; for he died during it.
31 At the close of this Yoḇĕl Qayin was killed after him
in the same year; for his house fell upon him and he
died in the midst of his house, and he was killed by its
stones, for with a stone he had killed Heḇel, and by a
stone he was killed in righteous judgment.
32 For this reason it was ordained on the tablets of the
shamayim: With the instrument with which a man kills
his neighbour with, the same shall he be killed; after
the manner that he wounded him, in like manner shall
they deal with him.
26

458

JUBILEES

And in the twenty-fifth Yoḇĕl, Noaḥ took a wife, and
her name was Ĕmzara, the daughter of Raḵe’ĕl, the
daughter of his father’s brother, in the first year in the
fifth week. And in the third year she bore him Shĕm, in
the fifth year she bore him Ḥam, and in the first year in
the sixth week she bore him Yepheth.
33

5 And it came to be when the children of men began
to multiply on the face of the earth and daughters were
born to them, that the messengers of Elohim saw them
on a certain year of this Yoḇĕl, that they were lovely to
look upon; and they took themselves wives of all whom
they chose, and they bore unto them sons and they
were giants.
2 And lawlessness increased on the earth and all
flesh corrupted its way, alike; men and cattle and
beasts and birds and all that walks on the earth - all of
them corrupted their ways and their orders, and they
began to devour each other, and lawlessness
increased on the earth and every imagination of the
thoughts of all men was only evil continually.
3 And Elohim looked upon the earth, and see, it was
corrupt, and all flesh had corrupted its orders, and all
that were upon the earth had wrought all kinds of evil
before His eyes.
4 And He said, “I shall destroy man and all flesh upon
the face of the earth which I have created.”
5 But Noaḥ found favour before the eyes of hWhY.
6 And against the messengers whom He had sent
upon the earth, He was exceedingly wroth, and He
gave a command to root them out of all their reign, and
He commanded us to bind them in the depths of the
earth, and see, they are bound in the midst of it, and
are kept separate.
7 And against their sons went forth a command from
before His face that they should be smitten with the
sword, and be removed from under the shamayim.
8 And He said, “Your spirit shall not always abide on
man; for they also are flesh and their days shall be one
hundred and twenty years.”
459

YOḆELIM

And He sent His sword into their midst that each
should slay his neighbour, and they began to slay each
other till they all fell by the sword and were destroyed
from the earth.
10 And their fathers were witnesses of their
destruction, and after this they were bound in the
depths of the earth forever, until the Day of the great
condemnation when judgment is executed on all those
who have corrupted their ways and their works before
hWhY.
11 And He destroyed all from their places, and not one
remained of them whom He did not judge according to
all their wickedness.
12 And He appointed for all His works a new and
righteous nature, so that they should not sin in their
whole nature forever, but should be all righteous each
in his kind always.
13 And the judgment of all is ordained and written on
the tablets of the shamayim in righteousness - even
the judgment of all who depart from the path which is
ordained for them to walk in. And if they do not walk
therein, judgment is written down for every creature
and for every kind.
14 And there is none in the shamayim or on earth, or
in light or in darkness, or in the grave or in the depth,
or in the place of darkness which is not judged; and all
their judgments are ordained and written and
engraved.
15 In regard to all He shall rightly rule: the great
according to his greatness, and the small according to
his smallness, and each according to his way.
16 And He is not one who shall regard the face of any,
nor is He one who shall receive bribes. If He says that
He shall execute judgment on each; if one gave all that
is on the earth, He shall not regard the bribes or the
face of any, nor accept any matter at his hands, for He
is a righteous Judge.
17 And of the children of Yisra’ĕl it has been written
and ordained: If they turn to Him in righteousness, He
9

460

JUBILEES

shall forgive all their transgressions and pardon all
their sins.
18 It is written and ordained that He shall show
kindness to all who turn from all their guilt once each
year.
19 And as for all those who corrupted their ways and
their thoughts before the flood, no man’s face was
accepted except that of Noaḥ alone; for his face was
accepted in behalf of his sons, whom Elohim saved
from the waters of the flood on his account; for his
heart was righteous in all his ways, accordingly as it
was commanded regarding him, and he had not
departed from any matter that was ordained for him.
20 And hWhY said that He would destroy all which was
upon the earth, both men and cattle, and beasts, and
birds of the air, and that which moves on the earth.
21 And He commanded Noaḥ to make himself an ark,
that he might save himself from the waters of the flood.
22 And Noaḥ made the ark in all respects as He
commanded him, in the twenty-seventh Yoḇĕl of
years, in the fifth week in the fifth year on the new
moon of the first month.
23 And he entered in the sixth year, in the second
month, on the new moon of the second month, till the
sixteenth. And he entered, and all that we brought to
him, into the ark, and hWhY closed it from without on
the seventeenth evening.
24 And hWhY opened seven windows of the
shamayim, and the mouths of the fountains of the great
deep - seven mouths in number.
25 And the windows began to pour down water from
the shamayim forty days and forty nights, and the
fountains of the deep also sent up waters, until the
whole earth was filled with water.
26 And the waters increased upon the earth; fifteen
ammah the waters rose above all the high mountains.
And the ark was lifted up above the earth, and it moved
upon the face of the waters.
461

YOḆELIM

And the waters were mighty on the face of the earth
five months - one hundred and fifty days.
28 And the ark went and rested on the top of Luḇar,
one of the mountains of Ararat.
29 And on the new moon in the fourth month, the
fountains of the great deep were closed and the
windows of the shamayim were restrained. And on the
new moon of the seventh month, all the mouths of the
abysses of the earth were opened, and the water
began to descend into the deep below.
30 And on the new moon of the tenth month the tops
of the mountains were visible, and on the new moon of
the first month the earth became visible.
31 And the waters disappeared from above the earth
in the fifth week in the seventh year, and on the
seventeenth day in the second month the earth was
dry.
32 And on the twenty-seventh, he opened the ark, and
sent out from it beasts, and cattle, and birds, and every
moving creature.
27

6 And on the new moon of the third month he went
out from the ark, and built an altar on the mountain.
2 And he made atonement for the earth, and took a
young goat and made atonement with its blood for all
the guilt of the earth; for all that had been on it had
been destroyed, except those that were in the ark with
Noaḥ.
3 And he placed the fat of it on the altar, and he took
a bull, and a goat, and a male goat, and salt, and a
turtledove, and the young pigeon, and placed a burnt
offering on the altar, and poured an offering on it mixed
with oil, and sprinkled wine and spread frankincense
over all, and caused a sweet fragrance to arise,
acceptable before hWhY.
4 And hWhY smelled the sweet fragrance, and He
made a Covenant with him that there should no longer
be a flood to destroy the earth. “That all the days of the
earth; seedtime and harvest should never cease. Cold
462

JUBILEES

and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
should not change their order, nor cease, forever.
5 “And you, increase and multiply upon the earth, and
become numerous upon it, and be a beraḵah upon it.
The fear of you and the dread of you I shall inspire in
all that is on earth and in the sea.
6 “And see, I have given to you all beasts, and all
flying creatures, and all that moves on the earth, and
the fish in the waters, and all matters for food; as the
green plants, I have given you all matters to eat.
7 “But flesh, with its life, with the blood, you shall not
eat; for the life of all flesh is in the blood, lest your blood
of your lives be required. At the hand of every man, at
the hand of every beast, I shall require the blood of
man.
8 “Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man shall his
blood be shed.” For in the image of Elohim He made
man.
9 “And you, increase, and multiply on the earth.”
10 And Noaḥ and his sons swore that they would not
eat any blood that was in any flesh, and he made a
Covenant before hWhY Elohim forever throughout all
the generations of the earth in this month.
11 On this account He spoke to you that you should
make a Covenant with the children of Yisra’ĕl in this
month upon the mountain with an oath, and that you
should sprinkle blood upon them because of all the
words of the Covenant, which hWhY made with them
forever.
12 And this Witness is written concerning you that you
should observe it continually, so that you should not
eat on any day, any blood of beasts or birds or cattle
during all the days of the earth, and the man who eats
the blood of beast or of cattle or of birds during all the
days of the earth, he and his seed shall be rooted out
of the land.
13 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl to
eat no blood, so that their names and their seed may
be before hWhY our Elohim continually.
463

YOḆELIM

And for this Law there is no limit of days, for it is
forever. They shall observe it throughout their
generations, so that they may continue atonement on
your behalf with blood before the altar; every day and
at the time of morning and evening they shall seek
forgiveness on your behalf continually before hWhY,
that they may keep it and not be rooted out.
15 And He gave to Noaḥ and his sons a sign that there
should not be a flood on the earth again.
16 He placed His rainbow in the cloud for a sign of the
everlasting Covenant that there should not be a flood
again on the earth to destroy it all the days of the earth.
17 For this reason it is ordained and written on the
tablets of the shamayim, that they should celebrate the
Festival of Shabuoth in this month once a year, to
renew the Covenant every year.
18 And this whole Festival was celebrated in the
shamayim from the day of creation till the days of
Noaḥ: twenty-six Yoḇelim and five weeks of years. And
Noaḥ and his sons observed it for seven Yoḇelim and
one week of years, till the day of Noaḥ’s death. And
from the day of Noaḥ’s death his sons forsook it until
the days of Aḇraham, and they ate blood.
19 But Aḇraham observed it, and Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ
and his children observed it up to your days, and in
your days the children of Yisra’ĕl forgot it until you
celebrated it anew on this mountain.
20 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl to
observe this Festival in all their generations for a
Command unto them: one day in the year in this month
they shall celebrate the Festival.
21 For it is the Festival of Shabuoth and the Feast of
First-Fruits: this Feast is two-fold and of a double
nature: according to what is written and engraved
concerning it, celebrate it.
22 For I have written in the Book of the first Torah, in
that which I have written for you, that you should
celebrate it in its season, one day in the year, and I
explained to you its slaughterings that the children of
14

464

JUBILEES

Yisra’ĕl should remember and should celebrate it
throughout their generations in this month, one day in
every year.
23 And on the new moon of the first month, and on the
new moon of the fourth month, and on the new moon
of the seventh month, and on the new moon of the
tenth month are the days of remembrance, and the
days of the seasons in the four divisions of the year.
These are written and ordained as a Witness forever.
24 And Noaḥ ordained them for himself as Festivals
for the generations forever, so that they have become
thereby a memorial to Him.
25 And on the new moon of the first month he was told
to make an ark, and on that day the earth became dry
and he opened the ark and saw the earth.
26 And on the new moon of the fourth month, the
mouths of the depths of the abysses beneath were
closed. And on the new moon of the seventh month,
all the mouths of the abysses of the earth were
opened, and the waters began to descend into them.
27 And on the new moon of the tenth month, the tops
of the mountains were seen, and Noaḥ was glad.
28 And on account of this he ordained them for himself
as Festivals for a memorial forever, and thus are they
ordained.
29 And they placed them on the tablets of the
shamayim; each had thirteen weeks; their memorial
passed from one to another, from the first to the
second, and from the second to the third, and from the
third to the fourth.
30 And all the days of the Command shall be fifty-two
weeks of days, and these shall make the entire year
complete.
31 Thus it is engraved and ordained on the tablets of
the shamayim. And there is no neglecting this
Command for a single year or from year to year.
32 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl that
they observe the years according to this reckoning:
three hundred and sixty-four days, and these shall
465

YOḆELIM

constitute a complete year, and they shall not disturb
its time from its days and from its Festivals; for all shall
fall out in them according to their witness, and they
shall not leave out any day nor disturb any Festivals.
33 But if they neglect and do not observe them
according to His Command, then they shall disturb all
their seasons, and the years shall be dislodged from
this order, and they shall neglect their Laws.
34 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl shall forget, and shall
not find the path of the years, and shall forget the new
moons, and seasons, and Shabbathoth, and they shall
go astray as to all the order of the years.
35 For I know, and from this time on I shall declare it
to you, and it is not of my own devising; for the Book is
written before me. And on the tablets of the shamayim
the division of days is ordained, lest they forget the
Festivals of the Covenant and walk according to the
festivals of the gentiles after their straying and after
their ignorance.
36 For there shall be those who shall assuredly make
observations of the moon - now it disturbs the seasons
and comes in from year to year ten days too soon.
37 For this reason the years shall come upon them
when they shall disturb the order, and make an
abominable day the day of witness, and an unclean
day a feast day, and they shall confuse all the days,
the qodesh with the unclean, and the unclean day with
the qodesh; for they shall go astray as to the months
and Shabbathoth and Festivals and Yoḇelim.
38 For this reason I command and witness to you that
you may witness to them; for after your death your
children shall confuse them, so that they shall not
make the year three hundred and sixty-four days only,
and for this reason they shall go astray as to the new
moons and seasons and Shabbathoth and Festivals,
and they shall eat all kinds of blood with all kinds of
flesh.

7 And in the seventh week in the first year, in this
Yoḇĕl, Noaḥ planted vines on the mountain on which
466

JUBILEES

the ark had rested, named Luḇar, one of the Mountains
of Ararat. And they produced fruit in the fourth year,
and he guarded their fruit, and gathered it in this year
in the seventh month.
2 And he made wine from them and put it into a
vessel, and kept it until the fifth year, until the first day,
on the new moon of the first month.
3 And he celebrated with joy the day of this Festival,
and he made a burnt offering to hWhY: one young bull
and one ram, and seven sheep, each a year old, and
a young goat, that he might make atonement thereby
for himself and his sons.
4 And he prepared the young goat first, and placed
some of its blood on the flesh that was on the altar
which he had made, and all the fat he laid on the altar
where he made the burnt offering, and the bull and the
ram and the sheep, and he arranged all their flesh on
the altar.
5 And he placed all their offerings mixed with oil on it,
and afterwards he sprinkled wine on the fire which he
had previously made on the altar, and he placed
incense on the altar and caused a sweet fragrance to
ascend, acceptable before hWhY his Elohim.
6 And he rejoiced and drank of this wine, he and his
children with joy.
7 And it was evening, and he went into his tent, and
being drunk he lay down and slept, and was uncovered
in his tent as he slept.
8 And Ḥam saw Noaḥ his father naked, and went out
and told his two brothers outside.
9 And Shĕm took his garment and arose, he and
Yepheth, and they placed the garment on their
shoulders and went backward and covered the shame
of their father, and their faces were backward.
10 And Noaḥ awoke from his sleep and knew all that
his younger son had done to him, and he cursed his
son and said, “Cursed be Kena’an, let him become a
servant of servants to his brothers.”
467

YOḆELIM

And he baraḵ Shĕm, and said, “Baruḵ be hWhY
Elohim of Shĕm, and let Kena’an become his servant.
12 “Let Elohim enlarge Yepheth, and let Elohim dwell
in the dwelling of Shĕm, and let Kena’an become his
servant.”
13 And Ḥam knew that his father had cursed his
younger son, and he was displeased that he had
cursed his son, and he parted from his father, he and
his sons with him, Kush and Mitsrayim and Put and
Kena’an.
14 And he built a city and called its name after the
name of his wife Ne’elatama’uk.
15 And Yepheth saw it, and became envious of his
brother, and he too built a city, and he called its name
after the name of his wife Aḏataneses.
16 And Shĕm dwelt with his father Noaḥ, and he built
a city close to his father on the mountain, and he too
called its name after the name of his wife
Tseḏeqetelĕḇaḇ.
17 And see, these three cities are near Mount Luḇar;
Tseḏeqetelĕḇaḇ before the mountain on its east; and
Ne’elatama’uk on the south; Aḏataneses towards the
west.
18 And these are the sons of Shĕm: Ĕylam, and
Asshur, and Arpaḵshaḏ - this son was born two years
after the flood - and Luḏ, and Aram.
19 The sons of Yepheth: Gomer and Maḡoḡ and
Maḏai and Yawan, Tuḇal and Mesheḵ and Tiras.
These are the sons of Noaḥ.
20 And in the twenty-eighth Yoḇĕl Noaḥ began to
command his sons’ sons the Laws and Commands,
and all the Right-Rulings that he knew, and he urged
his sons to observe righteousness, and to cover the
shame of their flesh, and to baraḵ their Creator, and
honour father and mother, and love their neighbour,
and guard their beings from whoring and uncleanness
and all wickedness.
21 For owing to these three matters the flood came
upon the earth, namely, due to the whoring by which
11

468

JUBILEES

the Watchers - against the Torah of their Laws - went
whoring after the daughters of men, and took wives for
themselves of all they chose, and they made the
beginning of uncleanness.
22 And they brought forth sons, the Naphidim, but they
were all evil, and they devoured one another. And the
Giants slew the Naphil, and the Naphil slew the Elyo,
and the Elyo mankind, and one another.
23 And everyone sold himself to work wickedness and
to shed much blood, and the earth was filled with
wickedness.
24 And after this they sinned against the beasts and
birds, and all that moves and walks on the earth. And
much blood was shed on the earth, and every
inclination and desire of men planned worthlessness
and evil continually.
25 And hWhY destroyed all from off the face of the
earth because of the wickedness of their deeds, and
because of the blood which they had shed in the midst
of the earth. He destroyed all.
26 “And we were left, you and I, my sons, and all that
entered with us into the ark, and look, I see your works
before me that you do not walk in righteousness; for
you have begun to walk in the path of destruction, and
you are parting from one another, and are envious of
one another, and so it is that you are not in unity, my
sons, each with his brother.
27 “For I look, and see, the demons have begun their
enticements against you and against your children.
And now I fear on your behalf, that after my death you
shall shed the blood of men upon the earth, and that
you shall also be destroyed from the face of the earth.
28 “For whoever sheds man’s blood, and whoever
eats the blood of any flesh, shall all be destroyed from
the earth.
29 “And there shall not be left any man that eats blood,
or that sheds the blood of man on the earth, nor shall
there be left to him any seed or descendants living
under the shamayim. For they shall go into the grave,
469

YOḆELIM

and they shall descend into the place of
condemnation, and they shall all be removed into the
darkness of the deep by a violent death.
30 “No blood is to be seen upon you. Of all the blood
there shall be, all the days in which you have killed any
beasts or cattle or whatever flies upon the earth, and
you perform a good work toward your beings by
covering that which has been shed on the face of the
earth.
31 “And you shall not be like him who eats with blood,
but guard yourselves that none may eat flesh before
you cover the blood, for thus have I been commanded
to witness to you and your children, together with all
flesh.
32 “And do not allow the life to be eaten with the flesh,
that your blood, which is your life, may not be required
at the hand of any flesh that sheds it on the earth.
33 “For the earth shall not be clean from the blood
which has been shed upon it; for only through the
blood of him that shed it shall the earth be purified
throughout all its generations.
34 “And now, my children, listen! Work right-ruling and
righteousness that you may be planted in
righteousness over the face of the whole earth, and
your esteem lifted up before my Elohim, who saved me
from the waters of the flood.
35 “And see, you shall go and build for yourselves
cities, and plant in them all the plants that are upon the
earth, and also all fruit-bearing trees.
36 “For three years the fruit of all that is eaten shall not
be gathered, and in the fourth year its fruit shall be
reckoned qodesh, acceptable before the Most High Ĕl,
who created the shamayim and earth and all matters.
Let them offer in abundance the first of the wine and
oil as first-fruits on the altar of hWhY, who receives it,
and what is left let the servants of the house of hWhY
eat before the altar which receives it.
37 “And in the fifth year you perform the release, so
that you release it in righteousness and uprightness,
470

JUBILEES

and you shall be righteous, and all that you plant shall
prosper.
38 “For so Ḥanoḵ, the father of your father
commanded Methushelaḥ, his son, and Methushelaḥ
his son Lemeḵ, and Lemeḵ commanded me all the
matters which his fathers commanded him.
39 “And I also shall give you command, my sons, as
Ḥanoḵ commanded his son in the first Yoḇelim. While
still living, the seventh in his generation, he
commanded and witnessed to his son and to his sons’
sons until the day of his death.”

8 In the twenty-ninth Yoḇĕl, in the first week, in the
beginning of it Arpaḵshaḏ took a wife, and her name
was Rasu’ĕyah, the daughter of Ĕylam, and she bore
him a son in the third year in this week, and he called
his name Qĕynam.
2 And the son grew, and his father taught him writing,
and he went to seek a place where he might seize a
city.
3 And he found a writing which former generations
had carved on the rock, and he read what was on it,
and he transcribed it and sinned in regard to it; for it
contained the teaching of the Watchers in accordance
with which they used to observe the signs of the sun
and moon and stars in all the signs of the shamayim.
4 And he wrote it down but said naught regarding it;
for he was afraid to speak to Noaḥ about it lest he
should be wroth with him because of it.
5 And in the thirtieth Yoḇĕl, in the second week, in
the first year, he took a wife, and her name was
Melkah, the daughter of Maḏai, the son of Yepheth.
And in the fourth year he brought forth a son, and
called his name Shelaḥ, for he said, “Truly I have been
sent.”
6 And Shelaḥ grew up and took a wife, and her name
was Mu’aḵ, the daughter of Keseḏ, his father’s brother,
in the thirty-first Yoḇĕl, in the fifth week, in the first year.
7 And she bore him a son in the fifth year, and he
called his name Ĕḇer, and he took a wife for himself,
471

YOḆELIM

and her name was Azuraḏ the daughter of Neḇroḏ, in
the thirty-second Yoḇĕl, in the seventh week, in the
third year.
8 And in the sixth year, she bore him a son, and he
called his name Peleḡ; for in the days when he was
born the children of Noaḥ began to divide the earth
among themselves: for this reason he called his name
Peleg.
9 And they divided it secretly among themselves, and
told it to Noaḥ.
10 And it came to be in the beginning of the thirty-third
Yoḇĕl that they divided the earth into three parts, for
Shĕm and Ḥam and Yepheth, according to the
inheritance of each, in the first year in the first week,
when one of us, who had been sent, was with them.
11 And he called his sons, and they came near to him,
they and their children, and he divided the earth into
the lots, which his three sons were to take in
possession, and they reached out their hands, and
took the writing out of the bosom of Noaḥ, their father.
12 And there came forth on the writing as Shĕm’s lot
the middle of the earth which he should take as an
inheritance for himself and for his sons for the
generations forever, from the middle of the mountain
range of Rapha, from the mouth of the water from the
river Tina. And his portion goes towards the west
through the midst of this river, and it extends till it
reaches the water of the abysses, out of which this
river goes forth and pours its waters into the Sea Mĕ’at,
and this river flows into the Great Sea. And all that is
towards the north is Yepheth’s, and all that is towards
the south belongs to Shĕm.
13 And it extends till it reaches Karaso: this is in the
bottom of the tongue which looks towards the south.
14 And his portion extends along the Great Sea, and
it extends in a straight line till it reaches the west of the
tongue which looks towards the south; for this sea is
named the Tongue of the Mitsrite Sea.
472

JUBILEES

And it turns from here towards the south towards
the mouth of the Great Sea on the shore of its waters,
and it extends to the west to Aphra and it extends till it
reaches the waters of the river Giḥon, and to the south
of the waters of Giḥon, to the banks of this river.
16 And it extends towards the east, till it reaches the
Garden of Ĕḏen, to the south from there, and from the
east of the whole land of Ĕḏen and of the whole east,
it turns to the east, and proceeds till it reaches the east
of the mountain named Rapha, and it descends to the
bank of the mouth of the river Tina.
17 This portion came forth by lot for Shĕm and his
sons, that they should possess it forever unto his
generations forever.
18 And Noaḥ rejoiced that this portion came forth for
Shĕm and for his sons, and he remembered all that he
had spoken with his mouth in neḇuah; for he had said,
“Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Shĕm, and let hWhY dwell
in the dwelling of Shĕm.”
19 And he knew that the Garden of Ĕḏen is the Most
Qodesh Place, and the dwelling of hWhY, and Mount
Sinai the centre of the desert, and Mount Tsiyon - the
centre of the navel of the earth. These three were
created as qodesh places facing each other.
20 And he baraḵ the Elohim of mighty ones, who had
put the Word of hWhY into his mouth, and hWhY the
everlasting.
21 And he knew that a baruḵ portion and a beraḵah
had come to Shĕm and his sons to the generations
forever - the whole land of Ĕḏen and the whole land of
the Sea of Reeds, and the whole land of the East, and
Hodu, and on the Sea of Reeds and the mountains
thereof, and all the land of Bashan, and all the land of
Leḇanon and the islands of Kaphtor, and all the
mountains of Sanir and Amana, and the mountains of
Ashshur in the north, and all the land of Ĕylam,
Ashshur, and Baḇel, and Shushan and Maḏai and all
the mountains of Ararat, and all the region beyond the
Sea, which is beyond the mountains of Ashshur
15

473

YOḆELIM

towards the north, a baruḵ and spacious land, and all
that is in it is very good.
22 And for Ḥam came forth the second portion,
beyond the Giḥon towards the south to the right of the
Garden, and it extends towards the South and it
extends to all the mountains of fire, and it extends
towards the west to the Sea of Atel and it extends
towards the west till it reaches the Sea of Ma’oḵ - that
sea into which all which is not destroyed descends.
23 And it extends towards the north to the limits of
Gaḏir, and it extends to the coast of the waters of the
sea to the waters of the Great Sea till it draws near to
the river Giḥon, and passes along the river Giḥon till it
reaches the right of the Garden of Ĕḏen.
24 And this is the land which came forth for Ḥam as
the portion which he was to occupy forever; he and his
sons to their generations forever.
25 And for Yepheth came forth the third portion
beyond the river Tina to the north of the outflow of its
waters, and it extends north-easterly to the whole
region of Goḡ and to all the country east of there.
26 And it extends northerly to the north, and it extends
to the mountains of Qelt towards the north, and
towards the Sea of Ma’oḵ, and it extends to the east of
Gaḏir as far as the region of the waters of the Sea.
27 And it extends until it approaches the west of Phara
and it returns towards Apheraḡ, and it extends easterly
to the waters of the Sea of Mĕ’at.
28 And it extends to the region of the river Tina in a
north-easterly direction until it approaches the
boundary of its waters towards the mountain of Rapha,
and it turns round towards the north.
29 This is the land which came forth for Yepheth and
his sons as the portion of his inheritance which he
should possess for himself and his sons, to their
generations forever; five great islands, and a great
land in the north.

474

JUBILEES

But it is cold, and the land of Ḥam is hot, and the
land of Shĕm is neither hot nor cold, but it is mixed of
cold and heat.
30

9 And Ḥam divided among his sons, and the first
portion came forth for Kush towards the east, and to
the west of him for Mitsrayim, and to the west of him
for Put, and to the west of him on the sea for Kena’an.
2 And Shĕm also divided among his sons, and the
first portion came forth for Ĕylam and his sons: to the
east of the river Tigris till it approaches the East, the
whole land of Hodu, and on the Sea of Reeds on its
coast, and the waters of Deḏan, and all the mountains
of Meḇri and Ĕlah, and all the land of Shushan and all
that is on the side of Pharnaḵ to the Sea of Reeds and
the river Tina.
3 And for Asshur came forth the second portion: all
the land of Ashshur and Ninewĕh and Shin’ar and to
the border of Hodu, and it ascends and surrounds the
river.
4 And for Arpaḵshaḏ came forth the third portion: all
the land of the region of the Kasdim to the east of the
Perath, bordering on the Sea of Reeds, and all the
waters of the desert close to the tongue of the sea
which looks towards Mitsrayim, all the land of Leḇanon
and Sanir and Armana to the border of the Perath.
5 And for Aram there came forth the fourth portion: all
the land of Aram-Naharayim between the Tigris and
the Perath to the north of the Kasdim to the border of
the mountains of Ashshur and the land of Arara.
6 And there came forth for Luḏ the fifth portion: the
mountains of Ashshur and all belonging to them till it
reaches the Great Sea, and till it reaches the east of
Asshur his brother.
7 And Yepheth also divided the land of his
inheritance among his sons.
8 And the first portion came forth for Gomer: to the
east from the north side to the river Tina; and in the
north there came forth for Maḡoḡ all the inner portions
of the north until it reaches to the Sea of Mĕ’at.
475

YOḆELIM

And for Maḏai came forth as his portion: that he
should possess from the west of his two brothers to the
islands, and to the coasts of the islands.
10 And for Yawan came forth the fourth portion: every
island and the islands which are towards the border of
Luḏ.
11 And for Tuḇal there came forth the fifth portion: in
the midst of the tongue which approaches towards the
border of the portion of Luḏ to the second tongue, to
the region beyond the second tongue to the third
tongue.
12 And for Mesheḵ came forth the sixth portion: all the
region beyond the third tongue till it approaches the
east of Gaḏir.
13 And for Tiras there came forth the seventh portion:
four great islands in the midst of the sea, which reach
to the portion of Ḥam.
14 And thus the sons of Noaḥ divided to their sons in
the presence of Noaḥ their father, and he bound them
all by an oath, proclaiming a curse on every one that
sought to seize the portion which had not fallen to him
by his lot.
15 And they all said, “So be it; so be it.” For themselves
and their sons forever throughout their generations till
the Day of judgment, on which hWhY Elohim shall
judge them with sword and with fire, for all the unclean
wickedness of their strayings, with which they have
filled the earth with transgression and uncleanness
and whoring and sin.
9

10 And in the third week of this Yoḇĕl the unclean
demons began to lead astray the children of the sons
of Noaḥ, and to mislead and destroy them.
2 And the sons of Noaḥ came to Noaḥ their father,
and they informed him concerning the demons which
were, leading astray and blinding and slaying his sons’
sons.
3 And he prayed before hWhY his Elohim, and said,
“Elohim of the spirits of all flesh, who has shown
kindness to me, and has saved my sons and I from the
476

JUBILEES

waters of the flood, and has not caused me to perish
as You did the sons of destruction; for Your favour has
been great towards me, and Your kindness has been
great to my being. Let Your favour be lifted upon my
sons, and let not wicked spirits rule over them lest they
should destroy them from the earth.
4 “But may You baraḵ my sons and I, that we may
increase and multiply and fill the earth.
5 “And You know how Your Watchers, the fathers of
these spirits, acted in my day. And as for these spirits
which are living, imprison them and hold them fast in
the place of condemnation, and let them not bring
destruction on the sons of your servant, my Elohim; for
these are evil, and created in order to destroy.
6 “And let them not rule over the spirits of the living;
for You alone exercise rule over them. And let them
not have power over the sons of the righteous from this
time and forever.”
7 And hWhY our Elohim commanded us to bind all.
8 And the chief of the spirits, Mastĕma, came and
said, “Aḏonai, Creator, let some of them remain before
me, and let them listen to my voice, and do all that I
shall say to them; for if some of them are not left to me,
I shall not be able to execute the power of my purpose
on the sons of men; for these are for corruption and
leading astray before my right-ruling, for the
wickedness of the sons of men is great.”
9 And He said, “Let the tenth part of them remain
before him, and let nine parts descend into the place
of condemnation.”
10 And one of us He commanded that we should teach
Noaḥ all their medicines; for He knew that they would
not walk in uprightness, nor strive in righteousness.
11 And we did according to all His words: all the
wicked evil ones we bound in the place of
condemnation, and a tenth part of them we left that
they might be subject before Satan on the earth.

477

YOḆELIM

And we explained to Noaḥ all the medicines of their
diseases, together with their accomplishments, how he
might heal them with herbs of the earth.
13 And Noaḥ wrote down all matters in a Book as we
instructed him concerning every kind of medicine.
Thus the evil spirits were prevented from hurting the
sons of Noaḥ.
14 And he gave all that he had written to Shĕm, his
eldest son; for he loved him exceedingly above all his
sons.
15 And Noaḥ slept with his fathers, and was buried on
Mount Luḇar in the land of Ararat.
16 Nine hundred and fifty years he completed in his
life, nineteen Yoḇelim and two weeks and five years.
17 And in his life on earth he excelled the children of
men except Ḥanoḵ because of the righteousness,
wherein he was perfect. For Ḥanoḵ’s office was
ordained for a witness to the generations of the world,
so that he should recount all the deeds of generation
unto generation, till the Day of judgment.
18 And in the thirty-third Yoḇĕl, in the first year, in the
second week, Peleḡ took a wife, whose name was
Lomnah the daughter of Sina’ar. And she bore him a
son in the fourth year of this week, and he called his
name Re’u; for he said, “See, the children of men have
become evil through the wicked purpose of building for
themselves a city and a tower in the land of Shin’ar.”
19 For they departed from the land of Ararat eastward
to Shin’ar; for in his days they built the city and the
tower, saying, “Come, let us ascend thereby into the
shamayim.”
20 And they began to build, and in the fourth week they
made brick with fire, and the bricks served them for
stone, and the clay with which they cemented them
together was asphalt which comes out of the sea, and
out of the fountains of water in the land of Shin’ar.
21 And they built it; forty-three years they were
building it. Its breadth was two hundred and three
bricks, and the height of a brick was the third of one.
12

478

JUBILEES

Its height amounted to five thousand, four hundred and
thirty-three ammah and two tophaḥ, and the extent of
one wall was thirteen stades and of the other thirty
stades.
22 And hWhY our Elohim said to us, “See, they are one
people, and this they begin to do, and now naught shall
be withheld from them. Come, let us go down and
confuse their language, that they may not understand
one another’s speech, and they may be dispersed into
cities and nations, and one purpose shall no longer
endure with them till the day of judgment.”
23 And hWhY descended, and we descended with Him
to see the city and the tower which the children of men
had built.
24 And He confused their language, and they no
longer understood one another’s speech, and they
ceased then to build the city and the tower.
25 For this reason the whole land of Shin’ar is called
Baḇel, because there hWhY confounded all the
language of the children of men, and from there they
were dispersed into their cities, each according to his
language and his nation.
26 And hWhY sent a mighty wind against the tower and
overthrew it upon the earth, and see, it was between
Ashshur and Baḇel in the land of Shin’ar, and they
called its name, ‘Overthrow.’
27 In the fourth week in the beginning of the first year
in the thirty-fourth Yoḇĕl, they were dispersed from the
land of Shin’ar.
28 And Ḥam and his sons went into the land which he
was to occupy, which he acquired as his portion in the
land of the South.
29 And Kena’an saw the land of Leḇanon to the river
of Mitsrayim that it was very good, but he did not go
into the land of his inheritance to the west that is to the
sea, but he dwelt in the land of Leḇanon, eastward and
westward from the border of Yardĕn and from the
border of the sea.
479

YOḆELIM

And Ḥam, his father, and Kush and Mitsrayim, his
brothers, said to him, “You have settled in a land which
is not yours, and which did not fall to us by lot. Do not
do so; for if you do so, you and your sons shall fall in
the land and be accursed through rebellion; for by
rebellion you have settled, and by rebellion your
children shall fall, and you shall be rooted out forever.
31 “Do not dwell in the dwelling of Shĕm; for to Shĕm
and to his sons it came by their lot.
32 “Cursed are you, and cursed shall you be over all
the sons of Noaḥ, with the curse by which we bound
ourselves with an oath in the presence of the qodesh
Judge, and in the presence of Noaḥ our father.”
33 But he did not listen to them, and dwelt in the land
of Leḇanon from Ḥamath as far as the entrance of
Mitsrayim, he and his sons to this day.
34 And for this reason that land is named Kena’an.
35 And Yepheth and his sons went towards the sea
and dwelt in the land of their portion. And Maḏai saw
the land of the sea and it did not please him, and he
begged a portion from Ĕylam and Asshur and
Arpaḵshaḏ, his wife’s brother, and he dwelt in the land
of Maḏai, near to his wife’s brother to this day.
36 And he called his dwelling, and the dwelling of his
sons, Maḏai, after the name of their father Maḏai.
30

11 And in the thirty-fifth Yoḇĕl, in the third week, in
the first year, Re’u took a wife, and her name was Ora,
the daughter of Ur, the son of Keseḏ. And she bore
him a son, in the seventh year of this week in this
Yoḇĕl, and he called his name Seroḥ.
2 And the sons of Noaḥ began to fight with each
other, to capture and to slay each other, and to shed
the blood of men on the earth, and to eat blood, and to
build strong cities, and walls, and towers. And some
exalted themselves above the nation, and established
the beginnings of reigns, and went to battle; people
against people, and nation against nation, and city
against city. And all did evil, and acquired weapons,
480

JUBILEES

and taught their sons battle, and they began to capture
cities, and to sell male and female slaves.
3 And Ur, the son of Keseḏ, built the city of Ara of the
Kasdim, and called its name after his own name and
the name of his father.
4 And they made for themselves moulded images,
and they each worshipped the idol, the moulded image
which they had made for themselves, and they began
to make carved images and unclean likenesses, and
evil spirits assisted and seduced them into committing
transgression and uncleanness.
5 And the prince Mastĕma exerted himself to do all
this, and he sent out other spirits, those which were put
under his hand, to do all kinds of evil and sin, and all
kinds of transgression, to corrupt and destroy, and to
shed blood on the earth.
6 For this reason he called the name of Seroḥ, Seruḡ,
for everyone turned to do all kinds of sin and
transgression.
7 And he grew up, and dwelt in Ur-Kasdim, near to
the father of his wife’s mother, and he worshipped
idols, and he took a wife in the thirty-sixth Yoḇĕl, in the
fifth week, in the first year, and her name was Melka,
the daughter of Kaḇĕr, the daughter of his father’s
brother.
8 And she bore him Naḥor, in the first year of this
week, and he grew and dwelt in Ur-Kasdim, and his
father taught him the researches of the Kasdim to
divine and foretell, according to the signs of the
shamayim.
9 And in the thirty-seventh Yoḇĕl, in the sixth week,
in the first year, he took a wife, and her name was
Iyaska, the daughter of Nestaḡ of the Kasdim.
10 And she bore him Teraḥ in the seventh year of this
week.
11 And the prince Mastĕma sent ravens and birds to
devour the seed which was sown in the land, in order
to destroy the land, and rob the children of men of their
481

YOḆELIM

labours. Before they could plough in the seed, the
ravens pecked it from the surface of the ground.
12 And for this reason he called his name Teraḥ,
because the ravens and the birds reduced them to
destitution and devoured their seed.
13 And the years began to be barren, because of the
birds, and they devoured all the fruit of the trees from
the trees. It was only with great effort that they could
save a little of all the fruit of the earth in their days.
14 And in this thirty-ninth Yoḇĕl, in the second week in
the first year, Teraḥ took a wife, and her name was
Eḏna, the daughter of Aḇram the daughter of his
father’s sister.
15 And in the seventh year of this week she bore him
a son, and he called his name Aḇram, by the name of
the father of his mother; for he had died before his
daughter had conceived a son.
16 And the child began to understand the strayings of
the earth, that all went astray after carved images and
after uncleanness. And his father taught him writing,
and he was fourteen years old, and he separated
himself from his father that he might not worship idols
with him.
17 And he began to pray to the Creator of all matters
that He might save him from the strayings of the
children of men, and that his portion should not fall into
straying after uncleanness and wickedness.
18 And the seedtime came for the sowing of seed on
the land, and they all went out together to protect their
seed against the ravens, and Aḇram went out with
those that went, and the child was a lad of fourteen
years.
19 And a cloud of ravens came to devour the seed,
and Aḇram ran to meet them before they settled on the
ground, and cried to them before they settled on the
ground to devour the seed, and said, “Do not descend!
Return to the place where you came.” And they
proceeded to turn back.
482

JUBILEES

And he caused the clouds of ravens to turn back
that day seventy times, and of all the ravens
throughout all the land where Aḇram was, not so much
as one settled there.
21 And all who were with him throughout all the land
saw him cry out, and all the ravens turn back, and his
name became great in all the land of the Kasdim.
22 And there came to him this year all those that
wished to sow, and he went with them until the time of
sowing ceased. And they sowed their land, and that
year they brought enough grain home and ate and
were satisfied.
23 And in the first year of the fifth week, Aḇram taught
those who made implements for oxen - the craftsmen
in wood - and they made a vessel above the ground,
facing the frame of the plough, in order to put the seed
on, and the seed fell down from there upon the share
of the plough, and was hidden in the earth, and they
no longer feared the ravens.
24 And in this way they made vessels above the
ground on all the frames of the ploughs, and they
sowed and tilled all the land accordingly, as Aḇram
commanded them, and they no longer feared the birds.
20

12 And it came to be in the sixth week, in the seventh
year, that Aḇram spoke to Teraḥ his father, saying,
“Father.” And he said, “See, here I am, my son.”
2 And he said, “What help and profit have we from
those idols which you worship, and before which you
bow yourself?
3 “For there is no spirit in them, for they are dumb
images, and a misleading of the heart. Do not worship
them!
4 “Worship the Elohim of the shamayim, who causes
the rain the dew to descend on the earth, and does all
upon the earth, and has created all by His Word, and
all life is from before His face.
5 “Why do you worship matters that have no spirit in
them? For they are the work of hands, and you carry
them on your shoulders, and you have no help from
483

YOḆELIM

them, but they are a great cause of shame to those
who make them, and a misleading of the heart to those
who worship them. Do not worship them!”
6 And his father said to him, “I also know it, my son,
but what shall I do with a people who have made me
to serve before them?
7 “And if I tell them the truth, they shall slay me; for
their being clings to them to worship them and honour
them. Keep silent, my son, lest they slay you.”
8 And he spoke these words to his two brothers, but
they were wroth with him and he kept silent.
9 And in the fortieth Yoḇĕl, in the second week, in the
seventh year, Aḇram took a wife, and her name was
Sarai, the daughter of his father, and she became his
wife.
10 And Haran, his brother, took a wife in the third year
of the third week, and she bore him a son in the
seventh year of this week, and he called his name Lot.
11 And Naḥor, his brother, took a wife.
12 And in the sixtieth year of the life of Aḇram, that is,
in the fourth week, in the fourth year, Aḇram arose by
night, and burned the house of the idols, and he
burned all that was in the house, and no man knew it.
13 And they arose in the night and sought to save their
mighty ones from the midst of the fire.
14 And Haran hurried to save them, but the fire burned
over him, and he was burned in the fire, and he died in
Ur-Kasdim before Teraḥ his father, and they buried
him in Ur-Kasdim.
15 And Teraḥ went out from Ur-Kasdim, he and his
sons, to go to the land of Leḇanon and to the land of
Kena’an, and he dwelt in the land of Ḥaran. And
Aḇram, dwelt with Teraḥ his father in Ḥaran fourteen
years.
16 And in the sixth week, in the fifth year, Aḇram sat
up throughout the night, on the new moon of the
seventh month, to observe the stars from the evening
to the morning, in order to see what would be the
484

JUBILEES

character of the year with regard to the rains. And he
was alone as he sat and observed.
17 And a word came into his heart and he said, “All the
signs of the stars, and the signs of the moon and of the
sun are all in the hand of hWhY. Why do I search them
out?
18 “If He desires, He causes it to rain, morning and
evening. And if He desires, He withholds it, and all
matters are in His hand.”
19 And he prayed that night and said, “My Elohim,
Elohim Most High, You alone are my Elohim, and You
and Your rule I have chosen. And You have created all
matters, and all matters that exist are the work of Your
hands.
20 “Deliver me from the hands of evil spirits who have
power over the thoughts of men’s hearts, and do not
let them lead me astray from You, my Elohim. And may
You establish my seed and I forever that we do not go
astray, from this time and forever.”
21 And he said, “Shall I return to Ur-Kasdim that I may
return to them who seek my face, or am I to remain
here in this place? Prosper the right path before You
in the hands of Your servant that he may fill it, and that
I may not walk in the deceitfulness of my heart, O my
Elohim.”
22 And he made an end of speaking and praying. And
see, the word of hWhY was sent to him through me,
saying, “Get up from your land, and from your clan and
from the house of your father, to a land which I shall
show you, and I shall make you a great and numerous
nation.
23 “And I shall baraḵ you and I shall make your name
great, and you shall be baruḵ in the earth, and in you
shall all generations of the earth be baruḵ, and I shall
baraḵ them that baraḵ you, and curse them that curse
you.
24 “And I shall be an Elohim to you and your son, and
to your son’s son, and to all your seed. Do not fear;
485

YOḆELIM

from this time and to all generations of the earth, I am
your Elohim.”
25 And hWhY Elohim said, “Open his mouth and his
ears, that he may hear and speak with his mouth, with
the language which has been revealed.” For it had
ceased from the mouths of all the children of men from
the day of the overthrow.
26 And I opened his mouth, and his ears and his lips,
and I began to speak with him in Iḇri in the tongue of
the creation.
27 And he took the Books of his fathers - and these
were written in Iḇri - and he transcribed them, and he
began from this time to study them. And I made known
to him that which he could not understand, and he
studied them during the six rainy months.
28 And it came to be in the seventh year of the sixth
week that he spoke to his father, and informed him that
he would leave Ḥaran to go to the land of Kena’an to
see it and return to him.
29 And Teraḥ his father said to him, “Go in peace. May
the everlasting Elohim make your path straight, and
hWhY protect you from all evil, and grant to you favour,
kindness and peace before those who see you, and
may none of the children of men have power over you
to harm you. Go in peace.
30 “And if you see a land pleasant to your eyes to dwell
in, then arise and bring me to you and take Lot with
you, the son of Haran your brother, as your own son.
hWhY be with you.
31 “But leave Naḥor your brother with me till you return
in peace, and we go with you all together.”

13 And Aḇram journeyed from Ḥaran, and he took
Sarai, his wife, and Lot his brother Haran’s son, to the
land of Kena’an. And he came to the land, and
proceeded to Sheḵem, and dwelt near a great
terebinth.
2 And he looked, and see, the land was very pleasant
from the entering of Ḥamath to the great terebinth.
486

JUBILEES

And hWhY said to him, “To you and to your seed I
shall give this land.”
4 And he built an altar there, and he offered a burnt
offering on it to hWhY, who had appeared to him.
5 And he moved from there to the mountain: Bĕyth Ĕl
on the west and Ai on the east, and pitched his tent
there.
6 And he looked, and see, the land was very wide
and good, and all grew upon it: vines and fig trees and
pomegranates, oaks and mulberries, and terebinths
and olive trees, and cedars and cypresses and date
palms, and all trees of the field, and there was water
on the mountains.
7 And he baraḵ hWhY who had led him out of UrKasdim, and had brought him to this land.
8 And it came to be in the first year, in the seventh
week, on the new moon of the first month, that he built
an altar on this mountain, and called on the Name of
hWhY, “You, the everlasting Elohim, are my Elohim.”
9 And he offered on the altar a burnt offering to hWhY
that He should be with him and not forsake him all the
days of his life.
10 And he moved from there and went towards the
Negeḇ, and he came to Ḥeḇron, and Ḥeḇron was built
at that time, and he dwelt there two years. And he went
to the land of the Negeḇ, to Be’aloth, and there was a
scarcity of food in the land.
11 And Aḇram went into Mitsrayim in the third year of
the week, and he dwelt in Mitsrayim five years before
his wife was taken away from him.
12 Now Tanais in Mitsrayim was at that time built seven years after Ḥeḇron.
13 And it came to be when Pharaoh seized Sarai, the
wife of Aḇram, that hWhY plagued Pharaoh and his
house with great plagues because of Sarai, Aḇram’s
wife.
14 And Aḇram was very rich by reason of possessions
in sheep, and cattle, and donkeys, and horses, and
camels, and male and female servants, and in silver
3

487

YOḆELIM

and gold exceedingly. And Lot also, his brother’s son,
was wealthy.
15 And Pharaoh gave back Sarai, the wife of Aḇram,
and he sent him out of the land of Mitsrayim, and he
journeyed to the place where he had pitched his tent
at the beginning, to the place of the altar, with Ai on the
east, and Bĕyth Ĕl on the west, and he baraḵ hWhY his
Elohim who had brought him back in peace.
16 And it came to be in the forty-first Yoḇĕl, in the third
year of the first week, that he returned to this place and
offered a burnt offering there, and called on the Name
of hWhY, and said, “You, the Most High Ĕl, are my
Elohim forever and ever.”
17 And in the fourth year of this week Lot parted from
him, and Lot dwelt in Seḏom. And the men of Seḏom
were exceedingly wicked.
18 And it grieved him in his heart that his brother’s son
had parted from him; for he had no children.
19 In that year when Lot was taken captive, hWhY said
to Aḇram, after Lot had parted from him, in the fourth
year of this week, “Lift up your eyes from the place
where you are dwelling, northward and southward, and
westward and eastward.
20 “For all the land which you see, I shall give to you
and to your seed forever, and I shall make your seed
as the sand of the sea: though a man may number the
dust of the earth, yet your seed shall not be numbered.
21 “Arise, walk in the length of it and the breadth of it,
and see it all; for to your seed I shall give it.” And
Aḇram went to Ḥeḇron, and dwelt there.
22 And in this year Keḏorla’omer, sovereign of Ĕylam,
and Amraphel, sovereign of Shin’ar, and Aryoḵ,
sovereign of Ellasar and Tiḏ’al, sovereign of Goyim,
came and slew the sovereign of Amorah, and the
sovereign of Seḏom fled, and many fell through
wounds in the valley of Siddim, by the Salt Sea.
23 And they took Seḏom and Aḏam and Tseḇoyim
captive, and they also took Lot captive, the son of
488

JUBILEES

Aḇram’s brother, and all his possessions, and they
went to Dan.
24 And one who had escaped came and told Aḇram
that his brother’s son had been taken captive, and he
armed his household servants.
25 . . .For Aḇram, and for his seed, a tenth of the firstfruits to hWhY, and hWhY ordained it as a Law forever
that they should give it to the kohenim who served
before Him, that they should possess it forever.
26 And to this Law there is no limit of days; for He has
ordained it for the generations forever that they should
give to hWhY the tenth of all, of the seed and of the
wine and of the oil and of the cattle and of the sheep.
27 And He gave it to His kohenim to eat and to drink
with joy before Him.
28 And the sovereign of Seḏom came to him and
bowed himself before him, and said, “Our master
Aḇram, give to us the beings which you have rescued,
but let the booty be yours.”
29 But Aḇram said to him, “I lift up my hands to the
Most High Ĕl, that from a thread to a sandal strap I
shall not take any that is yours, lest you should say, ‘I
have made Aḇram rich.’ Except only what the young
men have eaten, and the portion of the men who went
with me - Anĕr, Eshkol, and Mamrĕ, these shall take
their portion.”

14 After these matters, in the fourth year of this week,
on the new moon of the third month, the word of hWhY
came to Aḇram in a dream, saying, “Do not fear,
Aḇram; I am your defender, and your reward shall be
exceedingly great.”
2 And he said, “Aḏonai, Aḏonai, what shall you give
me, seeing I go childless, and the son of Masĕq, the
son of my female servant, is Ĕl‘azar of Dammeseq: he
shall be my heir, and to me you have given no seed.”
3 And He said to him, “This shall not be your heir, but
one that shall come out of your own body; he shall be
your heir.”
489

YOḆELIM

And He brought him outside, and said to him, “Look
toward the shamayim and number the stars, if you are
able to number them.”
5 And he looked toward the shamayim, and saw the
stars. And He said to him, “So shall your seed be.”
6 And he believed in hWhY, and it was reckoned to
him for righteousness.
7 And He said to him, “I am hWhY that brought you
out of Ur-Kasdim, to give you the land of the
Kena’anites to possess it forever. And I shall be Elohim
to you and to your seed after you.”
8 And he said, “Aḏonai, Aḏonai, whereby shall I know
that I shall inherit it?”
9 And he said to him, “Bring Me a three-year-old
heifer, and a three-year-old ram, and a three-year-old
sheep, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon.”
10 And he took all these in the middle of the month;
and he dwelt at the terebinth tree of Mamrĕ, which is
near Ḥeḇron.
11 And he built there an altar, and slaughtered all
these; and he poured their blood on the altar, and cut
them in the middle, and placed each half opposite the
other; but he did not cut the birds.
12 And birds of prey came down upon the carcasses,
but Aḇram drove them away, and did not allow the
birds of prey to touch them.
13 And it came to be, when the sun had gone down,
that a deep sleep fell on Aḇram, and see, a frightening
great darkness fell upon him, and it was said to Aḇram,
“Know for certainty that your seed shall be sojourners
in a land that is not theirs, and they shall bring them
into bondage, and afflict them four hundred years.
14 “And the nation also to whom they shall be in
bondage I shall judge, and after that they shall come
out from there with great possessions.
15 “And you shall go to your fathers in peace, and be
buried in a good old age.
4

490

JUBILEES

“But in the fourth generation they shall return here;
for the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet
complete.”
17 And he awoke from his sleep, and he arose, and
the sun had gone down; and there was a flame, and
see, a smoking oven, and a burning torch passed
between the pieces.
18 And on that day hWhY made a Covenant with
Aḇram, saying, “To your seed I shall give this land:
from the river of Mitsrayim to the great river, the river
Perath, the Qĕynites, the Qenizzites, the Qaḏmonites,
the Perizzites, and the Repha’im, the Phakorites, and
the Ḥiwwites, and the Amorites, and the Kena’anites,
and the Girgashites, and the Yeḇusites.”
19 And the day passed, and Aḇram offered the pieces,
and the birds, and their grain offerings, and their drink
offerings, and the fire devoured them.
20 And on that day we made a Covenant with Aḇram
accordingly, as we had Covenanted with Noaḥ in this
month; and Aḇram renewed the Festival and Law for
himself forever.
21 And Aḇram rejoiced, and made all these matters
known to Sarai his wife; and he believed that he would
have seed, but she did not bear.
22 And Sarai advised her husband Aḇram, and said to
him, “Go in to Haḡar, my Mitsrite female servant, it may
be that I shall build up seed to you by her.”
23 Aḇram listened to the voice of Sarai his wife, and
said to her, “Do so.” And Sarai took Haḡar, her female
servant, the Mitsrite, and gave her to Aḇram, her
husband, to be his wife.
24 And he went in to her, and she conceived and bore
him a son, and he called his name Yishma’ĕl, in the
fifth year of this week; and this was the eighty-sixth
year in the life of Aḇram.
16

15 And in the fifth year of the fourth week of this
Yoḇĕl, in the third month, in the middle of the month,
Aḇram celebrated the Festival of the First-Fruits of the
grain harvest.
491

YOḆELIM

And he offered new offerings on the altar, the firstfruits of the produce to hWhY: a heifer and a goat and
a sheep on the altar as a burnt offering to HWHY; their
grain offerings and their drink offerings he offered on
the altar with frankincense.
3 And hWhY appeared to Aḇram, and said to him, “I
am Ĕl Shaddai - approve yourself before Me and be
perfect.
4 “And I shall make My Covenant between Me and
you, and I shall multiply you exceedingly.”
5 And Aḇram fell on his face, and Elohim spoke with
him, and said,
6 “See, My Law is with you, and you shall be the
father of many nations.
7 “No longer shall your name be called Aḇram, but
your name from this time, even forever, shall be
Aḇraham, for I have made you the father of many
nations.
8 “And I shall make you very great, and I shall make
you into nations, and sovereigns shall come forth from
you.
9 “And I shall establish My Covenant between Me
and you, and your seed after you, throughout their
generations, for an everlasting Covenant, so that I may
be Elohim to you, and to your seed after you,
10 to give to you the land where you have been a
sojourner - the land of Kena’an - that you may possess
it forever, and I shall be their Elohim.”
11 And hWhY said to Aḇraham, “And as for you, you
shall keep My Covenant, you and your seed after you,
and circumcise every male among you, and circumcise
your foreskins, and it shall be a sign of an everlasting
Covenant between Me and you.
12 “And the child on the eighth day you shall
circumcise. Every male throughout your generations,
he that is born in the house, or whom you have bought
with silver from any stranger, whom you have acquired
who is not of your seed.
2

492

JUBILEES

“He that is born in your house shall surely be
circumcised, and those whom you have bought with
silver shall be circumcised, and My Covenant shall be
in your flesh for an everlasting Law.
14 “And the uncircumcised male who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin on the eighth
day, that being shall be cut off from his people, for he
has broken My Covenant.”
15 And Elohim said to Aḇraham, “As for Sarai your
wife, her name shall no longer be called Sarai, but
Sarah shall be her name.
16 “And I shall baraḵ her, and give you a son by her,
and I shall baraḵ him, and he shall become a nation,
and sovereigns of nations shall proceed from him.”
17 And Aḇraham fell on his face, and rejoiced, and
said in his heart, “Shall a son be born to him that is a
hundred years old, and shall Sarah, who is ninety
years old, bring forth?”
18 And Aḇraham said to Elohim, “Oh, let Yishma’ĕl live
before you!”
19 And Elohim said, “Yes, but Sarah shall also bear
you a son, and you shall call his name Yitsḥaq, and I
shall establish My Covenant with him, an everlasting
Covenant, and for his seed after him.
20 “And as for Yishma’ĕl I have also heard you, and
see, I shall baraḵ him, and make him great, and
multiply him exceedingly, and he shall bring forth
twelve princes, and I shall make him a great nation.
21 “But My Covenant I shall establish with Yitsḥaq,
whom Sarah shall bear to you, in these days, in the
next year.”
22 And He left off speaking with him, and Elohim went
up from Aḇraham.
23 And Aḇraham did accordingly, as Elohim had said
to him, and he took Yishma’ĕl his son, and all that were
born in his house, and whom he had bought with his
silver, every male in his house, and circumcised the
flesh of their foreskin.
13

493

YOḆELIM

And on the same day, Aḇraham was circumcised,
and all the men of his house, and all those, whom he
had bought with silver from the children of the stranger,
were circumcised with him.
25 This Law is for all the generations forever, and
there is no circumcision of the days, and no omission
of one day out of the eight days; for it is an everlasting
Law, ordained and written on the tablets of the
shamayim.
26 And every one that is born, the flesh of whose
foreskin is not circumcised on the eighth day, does not
belong to the children of the Covenant which hWhY
made with Aḇraham, but to the children of destruction;
nor is there, moreover, any sign on him that he is of
hWhY, but to be destroyed and slain from the earth,
and to be rooted out of the earth, for he has broken the
Covenant of hWhY our Elohim.
27 For all the messengers of the presence and all the
messengers of qodeshah have been so created from
the day of their creation, and before the messengers
of the presence and the messengers of qodeshah He
has qadosh Yisra’ĕl, that they should be with Him and
with His qodesh messengers.
28 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl and
let them observe the sign of this Covenant for their
generations as an everlasting Law, and they shall not
be rooted out of the land.
29 For the Command is ordained for a Covenant, that
they should observe it forever among all the children
of Yisra’ĕl.
30 For Yishma’ĕl and his sons and his brothers and
Ĕsaw, hWhY did not cause to approach Him, and He
did not choose them because they are the children of
Aḇraham, because He knew them, but He chose
Yisra’ĕl to be His people.
31 And He qadosh them, and gathered them from
among all the children of men; for there are many
nations and many peoples, and all are His, and over
24

494

JUBILEES

all He has placed spirits in authority to lead them astray
from Him.
32 But over Yisra’ĕl He did not appoint any messenger
or Ruaḥ, for He alone is their Ruler, and He shall
preserve them and require them at the hand of His
messengers and His Ruaḥoth, and at the hand of all
His powers in order that He may preserve them and
baraḵ them, and that they may be His and He may be
theirs from this time and forever.
33 And now I announce to you that the children of
Yisra’ĕl shall not keep true to this Law, and they shall
not circumcise their sons according to all this Torah;
for in the flesh of their circumcision they shall omit this
circumcision of their sons, and all of them, sons of
Beliya’al, shall leave their sons uncircumcised as they
were born.
34 And there shall be great wrath from hWhY against
the children of Yisra’ĕl, because they have forsaken
His Covenant and turned aside from His Word, and
provoked and blasphemed, inasmuch as they do not
observe the Law of this Torah; for they have treated
their members like the gentiles, so that they may be
removed and rooted out of the land. And there shall no
more be pardon or forgiveness to them for all the sin
of this straying forever.

16 And on the new moon of the fourth month we
appeared to Aḇraham, at the terebinth of Mamrĕ, and
we talked with him, and we announced to him that a
son would be given to him by Sarah his wife.
2 And Sarah laughed, for she heard that we had
spoken these words with Aḇraham, and we
admonished her, and she became afraid, and denied
that she had laughed on account of the words.
3 And we told her the name of her son - as his name
is ordained and written in the tablets of the shamayim:
Yitsḥaq,
4 and when we returned to her at an appointed time,
she would have conceived a son.
495

YOḆELIM

And in this month hWhY executed His judgments on
Seḏom, and Amorah, and Tseḇoyim, and all the region
of the Yardĕn, and He burned them with fire and
sulphur, and destroyed them until this day, even as I
have declared to you all their works, that they are evil
and exceedingly wicked, and that they defile
themselves and commit whoring in their flesh, and
work uncleanness on the earth.
6 And, in like manner, Elohim shall execute judgment
on the places where they have done according to the
uncleanness of the Seḏomites, like the judgment of
Seḏom.
7 But Lot we saved; for Elohim remembered
Aḇraham, and sent him out from the midst of the
overthrow.
8 And he and his daughters committed sin on the
earth, such as had not been on the earth since the
days of Aḏam till his time; for the man lay with his
daughters.
9 And, see, it was commanded and engraved
concerning all his seed, on the tablets of the
shamayim, to remove them and root them out, and to
execute judgment upon them like the judgment of
Seḏom, and to leave no seed of the man on earth on
the Day of condemnation.
10 And in this month Aḇraham moved from Ḥeḇron,
and departed and dwelt between Qaḏĕsh and Shur in
the mountains of Gerar.
11 And in the middle of the fifth month he moved from
there, and dwelt at Be’ĕrsheḇa.
12 And in the middle of the sixth month hWhY visited
Sarah and did to her as He had spoken, and she
conceived,
13 and she bore a son in the third month. And in the
middle of the month, at the time of which hWhY had
spoken to Aḇraham, on the Festival of the First-Fruits
of the Harvest, Yitsḥaq was born.
5

496

JUBILEES

And Aḇraham circumcised his son on the eighth
day; he was the first that was circumcised according to
the Covenant which is ordained forever.
15 And in the sixth year of the fourth week we came to
Aḇraham, to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and we appeared to him, as
we had told Sarah that we would return to her, and she
would have conceived a son.
16 And we returned in the seventh month, and found
Sarah with child before us, and we baraḵ him, and we
announced to him all the matters which had been
established concerning him, that he should not die till
he should bring forth six more sons, and should see
them before he died; but in Yitsḥaq should his name
and seed be called.
17 And all the seed of his sons should be gentiles, and
be reckoned with the gentiles; but from the sons of
Yitsḥaq, one should become a qodesh seed, and
should not be reckoned among the gentiles.
18 For he should become the portion of the Most High,
and all his seed had fallen into the possession of
Elohim, that it should be to hWhY a people for
possession above all nations and that it should
become a reign and kohenim and a qodesh nation.
19 And we went our way, and we announced to Sarah
all that we had told him, and they both rejoiced with
exceedingly great joy.
20 And he built there an altar to hWhY who had
delivered him, and who was making him rejoice in the
land of his sojourning, and he celebrated a Festival of
joy in this month seven days, near the altar which he
had built at Be’ĕrsheḇa.
21 And he built booths for himself and for his servants
on this Festival, and he was the first to celebrate the
Festival of Sukkoth on the earth.
22 And during these seven days he brought each day
to the altar a burnt offering to hWhY: two bulls, two
rams, seven sheep, one goat, for a sin offering, to
make atonement for himself and for his seed.
14

497

YOḆELIM

And, as a slaughtering of thanksgiving: seven
rams, seven young goats, seven sheep, and seven
goats, and their grain offerings and their drink
offerings. And he burned all the fat of them on the altar,
a choice offering to hWhY for a sweet smelling
fragrance.
24 And morning and evening he burned fragrant
substances: frankincense and galbanum, and fragrant
gum, and nard, and myrrh, and spice, and cinnamon;
all these seven he offered crushed, mixed together in
equal parts, pure.
25 And he celebrated this Festival during seven days,
rejoicing with all his heart and with all his being, he and
all those who were in his house; and there was no
stranger with him, nor any that was uncircumcised.
26 And he baraḵ his Creator who had created him in
his generation, for He had created him according to
His good pleasure; for He knew and perceived that
from him would arise the Branch of Righteousness for
the everlasting generations, and from him a Qodesh
Seed, so that it should become like Him who had made
all matters.
27 And he baraḵ and rejoiced, and he called the name
of this Festival the Festival of hWhY, a joy acceptable
to the Most High Ĕl.
28 And we baraḵ him forever, and all his seed after him
throughout all the generations of the earth, because he
celebrated this Festival in its season, according to the
witness of the tablets of the shamayim.
29 For this reason it is ordained on the tablets of the
shamayim concerning Yisra’ĕl, that they shall
celebrate the Festival of Sukkoth seven days with joy,
in the seventh month, acceptable before hWhY – a Law
forever throughout their generations every year.
30 And to this there is no limit of days; for it is ordained
forever regarding Yisra’ĕl that they should celebrate it
and dwell in booths, and put wreaths upon their heads,
and take leafy branches, and willows of the stream.
23

498

JUBILEES

And Aḇraham took branches of palm trees, and the
fruit of good trees, and every day going round the altar
with the branches seven times in the morning, he
praised and gave thanks to his Elohim for all matters
in joy.
31

17 And in the first year of the fifth week, Yitsḥaq was
weaned in this Yoḇĕl, and Aḇraham made a great feast
in the third month, on the day his son Yitsḥaq was
weaned.
2 And Yishma’ĕl, the son of Haḡar, the Mitsrite, was
before the face of Aḇraham, his father, in his place,
and Aḇraham rejoiced and baraḵ Elohim because he
had seen his sons and had not died childless.
3 And he remembered the words which He had
spoken to him on the day on which Lot had parted from
him, and he rejoiced because hWhY had given him
seed upon the earth to inherit the earth, and he baraḵ
with all his mouth the Creator of all matters.
4 And Sarah saw Yishma’ĕl playing and dancing, and
Aḇraham rejoicing with great joy, and she became
jealous of Yishma’ĕl and said to Aḇraham, “Drive out
this female servant and her son; for the son of this
female servant shall not be heir with my son, Yitsḥaq.”
5 And the matter was evil in Aḇraham’s sight,
because of his female servant and because of his son,
that he should drive them from him.
6 And Elohim said to Aḇraham, “Let it not be evil in
your sight, because of the child and because of the
female servant. In all that Sarah has said to you, listen
to her words and act; for in Yitsḥaq shall your name
and seed be called.
7 “But as for the son of this female servant, I shall
make him a great nation, because he is of your seed.”
8 And Aḇraham rose up early in the morning and took
bread and a flask of water, and placed them on the
shoulders of Haḡar and the child, and sent her away.
9 And she departed and wandered in the wilderness
of Be’ĕrsheḇa. And the water in the flask was used up,
499

YOḆELIM

and the child was thirsty, and was not able to go on,
and fell down.
10 And his mother took him and placed him under an
olive tree, and went and sat down opposite him, at the
distance of a bow-shot; for she said, “Let me not see
the death of my child.” And as she sat she wept.
11 And a messenger of Elohim, one of the qodeshim,
said to her, “Why do you weep, Haḡar? Arise, take the
child, and hold him in your hand; for Elohim has heard
your voice, and has seen the child.”
12 And she opened her eyes, and she saw a well of
water, and she went and filled her flask with water, and
she gave her child to drink. And she arose and went
towards the wilderness of Paran.
13 And the child grew and became an archer, and
Elohim was with him; and his mother brought him a
wife from among the daughters of Mitsrayim.
14 And she bore him a son, and he called his name
Neḇayoth; for she said, “hWhY was near to me when I
called upon him.”
15 And it came to be in the seventh week, in the first
year, in the first month in this Yoḇĕl, on the twelfth of
this month, there were voices in the shamayim
regarding Aḇraham, that he was trustworthy in all that
He told him, and that he loved hWhY, and that in every
affliction he was trustworthy.
16 And the prince Mastĕma came and said before
Elohim, “See, Aḇraham loves Yitsḥaq his son, and he
delights in him above all other matters. Command him
to offer him as a burnt offering on the altar, and You
shall see if he shall do this command, and You shall
know if he is trustworthy in all in which You try him.”
17 And hWhY knew that Aḇraham was trustworthy in
all his afflictions; for He had tried him through his land
and with scarcity of food, and had tried him with the
wealth of sovereigns, and had tried him again through
his wife, when she was taken, and with circumcision,
and had tried him through Yishma’ĕl and Haḡar, his
female servant, when he sent them away.
500

JUBILEES

And in all in which He had tried him, he was found
trustworthy, and his being was not impatient, and he
was not slow to act; for he was trustworthy and loved
hWhY.
18

18 And Elohim said to him, “Aḇraham, Aḇraham.”
And he said, “See, here I am.”
2 And He said, “Take your beloved son Yitsḥaq
whom you love, and go to the high country, and offer
him on one of the mountains which I shall point out to
you.”
3 And he rose early in the morning and saddled his
donkey, and took his two young men with him, and
Yitsḥaq his son, and cut the wood for the burnt offering,
and he went to the place on the third day, and he saw
the place far off.
4 And he came to a well of water, and he said to his
young men, “You stay here with the donkey, and I and
the lad shall go on, and when we have worshipped we
shall come again to you.”
5 And he took the wood for the burnt offering and laid
it on Yitsḥaq his son, and he took in his hand the fire
and the knife, and they went, both of them together to
that place.
6 And Yitsḥaq said to his father, “Father.” And he
said, “Here I am, my son.” And he said to him, “See,
the fire, and the knife, and the wood; but where is the
sheep for the burnt offering, father?”
7 And he said, “Elohim shall provide a sheep for a
burnt offering, my son.” And he drew near to the place
of the mountain of Elohim.
8 And he built an altar, and he placed the wood on
the altar, and bound Yitsḥaq his son, and placed him
on the wood which was upon the altar, and stretched
out his hand to take the knife to slay Yitsḥaq his son.
9 And I stood before him, and before the prince of
Mastĕma, and hWhY said, “Command him not to lay
his hand on the lad, nor to do any matter to him, for I
have shown that he reveres hWhY.”
501

YOḆELIM

And I called to him from the shamayim, and said to
him, “Aḇraham, Aḇraham!” And he was afraid and
said, “See, here I am.”
11 And I said to him, “Do not lay your hand on the lad,
neither do any matter to him; for now I have shown that
you revere hWhY, and have not withheld your son, your
first-born son, from Me.”
12 And the prince of Mastĕma was put to shame, and
Aḇraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and see, a
single ram caught by its horns. And Aḇraham went and
took the ram and offered it as a burnt offering instead
of his son.
13 And Aḇraham called that place ‘hWhY Yireh,’ so that
it is said, “hWhY provides.” That is Mount Tsiyon.
14 And hWhY called Aḇraham by his name a second
time from the shamayim, as He caused us to appear
to speak to him in the Name of hWhY.
15 And He said, “By Myself I have sworn, says hWhY.
Because you have done this matter, and have not
withheld your son, your beloved son, from Me, that in
beraḵah I shall baraḵ you and in multiplying I shall
multiply your seed as the stars of the shamayim, and
as the sand which is on the seashore. And your seed
shall inherit the cities of its enemies,
16 “and in your seed all nations of the earth shall be
baruḵ; because you have obeyed My voice, and I have
shown to all that you are trustworthy to Me in all that I
have said to you. Go in peace.”
17 And Aḇraham went to his young men, and they
arose and went together to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and Aḇraham
dwelt by Be’ĕrsheḇa.
18 And he celebrated this Festival every year, seven
days with joy, and he called it the Festival of hWhY
according to the seven days during which he went and
returned in peace.
19 And accordingly it has been ordained and written
on the tablets of the shamayim regarding Yisra’ĕl and
its seed that they should observe this Festival seven
days with the joy of a Festival.
10

502

JUBILEES

19 And in the first year of the first week, in the fortysecond Yoḇĕl, Aḇraham returned and dwelt opposite
Ḥeḇron, that is Qiryath Arba, fourteen years.
2 And in the first year of the third week of this Yoḇĕl
the days of the life of Sarah were accomplished, and
she died in Ḥeḇron.
3 And Aḇraham went to mourn over her and bury her,
and we tried him, if his spirit was patient, but he was
not bitter in the words of his mouth. And he was found
patient in this, and was not disturbed,
4 for in patience of spirit he spoke with the children of
Ḥĕth, to the intent that they should give him a place in
which to bury his dead.
5 And hWhY gave him favour before all who saw him,
and he pleaded with the sons of Ḥeth, and they gave
him the land of the cave of Maḵpĕlah opposite Mamrĕ,
that is Ḥeḇron, for four hundred pieces of silver.
6 And they pleaded with him, saying, “We shall give
it to you for naught!” But he would not take it from their
hands for naught, for he gave the price of the place,
the silver in full, and he bowed down before them
twice; and after this he buried his dead in the cave of
Maḵpĕlah.
7 And all the days of the life of Sarah were one
hundred and twenty-seven years, that is, two Yoḇelim
and four weeks and one year: these are the days of
the years of the life of Sarah.
8 This is the tenth trial with which Aḇraham was tried,
and he was found trustworthy, patient in spirit.
9 And he did not speak; not a single word regarding
the report in the land how that Elohim had said that He
would give it to him and to his seed after him. And he
pleaded a place there to bury his dead; for he was
found trustworthy, and was recorded on the tablets of
the shamayim as the friend of Elohim.
10 And in the fourth year he took a wife for his son
Yitsḥaq, and her name was Riḇqah the sister of Laḇan
and daughter of Bethu’ĕl. And Bethu’ĕl was the son of
503

YOḆELIM

Milkah, who was the wife of Naḥor, the brother of
Aḇraham.
11 And Aḇraham took a third wife, and her name was
Qeturah, from among the daughters of his household
servants, for Haḡar had died before Sarah.
12 And she bore him six sons, Zimran, and Yoqshan,
and Meḏan, and Miḏyan, and Yishbaq, and Shuwaḥ,
in the two weeks of years.
13 And in the sixth week, in the second year, Riḇqah
bore to Yitsḥaq two sons, Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw. And
Ya’aqoḇ was smooth-skinned and an upright man, but
Ĕsaw was fierce, a man of the field, and hairy, and
Ya’aqoḇ dwelt in tents.
14 And the youths grew and Ya’aqoḇ learned to write;
but Ĕsaw did not learn, for he was a man of the field
and a hunter, and he learned battle, and all his deeds
were mighty.
15 And Aḇraham loved Ya’aqoḇ, but Yitsḥaq loved
Ĕsaw.
16 And Aḇraham saw the deeds of Ĕsaw, and he knew
that in Ya’aqoḇ his name and seed should be called.
And he called Riḇqah and gave command regarding
Ya’aqoḇ, for he knew that she loved Ya’aqoḇ much
more than Ĕsaw.
17 And he said to her, “My daughter, watch over my
son Ya’aqoḇ, for he shall be in my place on the earth,
and for a beraḵah in the midst of the children of men,
and for the esteem of the whole seed of Shĕm.
18 “For I know that hWhY shall choose him to be a
people for possession unto Himself, above all peoples
that are on the face of the earth.
19 “And see, Yitsḥaq my son loves Ĕsaw more than
Ya’aqoḇ, but I see that you truly love Ya’aqoḇ.
20 “Add still further to your kindness to him, and let
your eyes be upon him in love; for he shall be a
beraḵah to us on the earth from this time to all
generations of the earth.
21 “Let your hands be strong and let your heart rejoice
in your son Ya’aqoḇ; for I have loved him far beyond
504

JUBILEES

all my sons. He shall be baruḵ forever, and his seed
shall fill the whole earth.
22 “If a man could number the sand of the earth, his
seed shall also be numbered.
23 “And all the bireḵoth with which hWhY has baraḵ my
seed and I, shall belong to Ya’aqoḇ and his seed
always.
24 “And in his seed shall my name be baruḵ, and the
name of my fathers, Shĕm, and Noaḥ, and Ḥanoḵ, and
Mahalal’ĕl, and Enosh, and Shĕth, and Aḏam.
25 “And these shall serve to lay the foundations of the
shamayim, and to strengthen the earth, and to renew
all the luminaries which are in the expanse.”
26 And he called Ya’aqoḇ before the eyes of Riḇqah
his mother, and kissed him, and baraḵ him, and said,
27 “Ya’aqoḇ, my beloved son, whom my being loves,
may Elohim baraḵ you from above the expanse, and
may He give you all the bireḵoth with which He baraḵ
Aḏam, and Ḥanoḵ, and Noaḥ, and Shĕm. And all the
words of which He told me, and all the matters which
He promised to give me, may He cause to cling to you
and to your seed forever, according to the days of the
shamayim above the earth.
28 “And the spirits of Mastĕma shall not rule over you
or over your seed to turn you from hWhY, who is your
Elohim from this time and forever.
29 “And may hWhY Elohim be a Father to you and you,
the first-born son, and to the people always. Go in
peace, my son.”
30 And they both went out together from Aḇraham.
31 And Riḇqah loved Ya’aqoḇ with all her heart and
with all her being, very much more than Ĕsaw; but
Yitsḥaq loved Ĕsaw much more than Ya’aqoḇ.

20 And in the forty-second Yoḇĕl, in the first year of
the seventh week, Aḇraham called Yishma’ĕl, and his
twelve sons, and Yitsḥaq and his two sons, and the six
sons of Qeturah, and their sons.
2 And he commanded them that they should observe
the Way of hWhY; that they should work righteousness,
505

YOḆELIM

and each love his neighbour, and act in this manner
among all men; that they should each so walk with
regard to them as to do Right-Ruling and
righteousness on the earth.
3 That they should circumcise their sons, according
to the Covenant which He had made with them, and
not deviate to the right hand or the left of all the paths
which hWhY had commanded us; and that we should
guard ourselves from all whoring and uncleanness.
4 And if any woman or female servant commit
whoring among you, burn her with fire, and let them
not commit whoring with her after their eyes and their
heart; and let them not take to themselves wives from
the daughters of Kena’an; for the seed of Kena’an shall
be rooted out of the land.
5 And he told them of the judgment of the Repha’ites,
and the judgment of the Seḏomites, how they had
been judged on account of their wickedness, and had
died on account of their whoring, and uncleanness,
and each ones corruption through whoring:
6 “And guard yourselves from all whoring and
uncleanness and from all pollution of sin, lest you
make our name a curse and your whole life a hissing.
And all your sons be destroyed by the sword and you
become accursed like Seḏom and all your remnant as
the sons of Amorah.
7 “I implore you, my sons, love the Elohim of the
shamayim. And you, cling to all His Commands and do
not walk after their idols, and after their
uncleannesses,
8 “And do not make for yourselves moulded or
carved mighty ones; for they are worthless, and there
is no spirit in them. For they are work of hands, and all
who trust in them trust in naught. Do not serve them,
nor worship them.
9 “But you, serve the Most High Ĕl, and worship Him
continually: and trust in His face always, and work
uprightness and righteousness before Him, that He
may have pleasure in you and grant you His kindness,
506

JUBILEES

and send rain upon you morning and evening, and
baraḵ all your works which you have wrought upon the
earth, and baraḵ your bread and your water, and baraḵ
the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your land, and
the herds of your cattle, and the flocks of your sheep.
10 “And you shall be for a beraḵah on the earth, and
all nations of the earth shall desire you, and baraḵ your
sons in my name, that they may be baruḵ as I am.”
11 And he gave to Yishma’ĕl and to his sons, and to
the sons of Qeturah, gifts, and sent them away from
Yitsḥaq his son, and he gave all to Yitsḥaq his son.
12 And Yishma’ĕl and his sons, and the sons of
Qeturah and their sons, went together and dwelt from
Paran to the entering in of Baḇel in all the land which
is towards the East facing the desert.
13 And these intermixed with each other, and their
name was called Araḇs, and Yishma’ĕlites.

21 And in the sixth year of the seventh week of this
Yoḇĕl Aḇraham called Yitsḥaq his son, and
commanded him saying, “I have become old, and do
not know the day of my death, and am full of my days.
2 “And see, I am one hundred and seventy-five years
old, and throughout all the days of my life I have
remembered hWhY, and sought with all my heart to do
His desire, and to walk uprightly in all His Ways.
3 “My being has hated idols, that I might observe to
do the desire of Him who created me.
4 “For He is the living Elohim, and He is qodesh and
trustworthy, and He is righteous beyond all, and with
Him there is no partiality and no accepting of bribes;
for Elohim is righteous, and executes right-ruling on all
those who transgress His Commands and despise His
Covenant.
5 “And you, my son, shall observe His Commands
and His Laws and His Right-Rulings, and do not walk
after the abominations and after the carved images
and after the moulded images.
6 “And eat no blood at all, of beasts or cattle, or of
any bird which flies in the shamayim.
507

YOḆELIM

“And if you slaughter whatever as an acceptable
peace-offering, you slay it, and pour out its blood upon
the altar, and all the fat of the offering offer on the altar
with fine flour mixed with oil, with its drink-offering offer them all together on the altar of burnt offering; it
is a sweet fragrance before hWhY.
8 “And you shall offer the fat of the slaughtering of
thanksgiving on the fire which is upon the altar, and the
fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the
entrails, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on
them by the loins, and the appendage on the liver you
shall remove together with the kidneys.
9 “And offer all these for a sweet fragrance
acceptable before hWhY, with its grain-offering and
with its drink-offering, for a sweet fragrance, the bread
of the offering to hWhY.
10 “And eat its meat on that day and on the second
day, and do not let the sun on the second day go down
on it till it is eaten, and let none be left over for the third
day; for it is not acceptable and let it no longer be
eaten. And all who eat of it shall bring sin upon
themselves; for thus I have found it written in the Books
of my forefathers, and in the words of Ḥanoḵ, and in
the words of Noaḥ.
11 “And you shall put salt on all your offerings, and do
not let the salt of the Covenant be lacking in all your
offerings before hWhY.
12 “And regarding the wood of the slaughterings,
beware lest you bring wood for the altar in addition to
these: cypress, dephran, sagad, pine, fir, cedar,
juniper, palm, olive, myrrh, laurel, and citron, broom,
and balsam.
13 “And of these kinds of wood put upon the altar
under the offering, such as have been tried as to their
appearance - and do not place any split or dark wood
- hard and clean, without fault, a sound and new
growth; and do not place old wood, for there is no
longer fragrance in it as before.
7

508

JUBILEES

“Besides these kinds of wood there is none other
that you shall place, for the fragrance is dispersed, and
the smell of its fragrance does not ascend to the
shamayim.
15 “Observe this Command and do it, my son, that you
may be upright in all your deeds.
16 “And at all times be clean in your body, and wash
yourself with water before you approach to offer on the
altar, and wash your hands and your feet before you
draw near to the altar; and when you are done offering,
wash your hands and your feet again.
17 “And let no blood appear upon you nor on your
clothes; be on your guard, my son, against blood, be
on your guard exceedingly; cover it with dust.
18 “And do not eat any blood, for it is the life; eat no
blood whatsoever.
19 “And take no gifts for the blood of man, lest it be
shed with impunity, without right-ruling; for it is the
blood that is shed that causes the earth to sin, and the
earth cannot be cleansed from the blood of man
except by the blood of him who shed it.
20 “And take no bribe or gift for the blood of man: blood
for blood, that you may be accepted before hWhY, the
Most High Ĕl - for He is the defence of the good - and
that you may be preserved from all evil, and that He
saves you from every kind of death.
21 “I see my son, that all the works of the children of
men are sin and wickedness, and all their deeds are
uncleanness and an abomination and a defilement,
and there is no righteousness with them.
22 “Beware, lest you walk in their ways and tread in
their paths, and sin a sin unto death before the Most
High Ĕl. Else He shall give you back into the hands of
your transgression, and root you out of the land, and
your seed likewise from under the shamayim, and your
name and your seed shall perish from the whole earth.
23 “Turn away from all their deeds and all their
uncleanness, and observe the Law of the Most High
Ĕl, and do His desire and be upright in all matters.
14

509

YOḆELIM

“And He shall baraḵ you in all your deeds, and shall
raise up from you the Branch of Righteousness
through all the earth, throughout all generations of the
earth, and my name and your name shall not be
forgotten under the shamayim forever.
25 “Go in peace, my son. May the Most High Ĕl, my
Elohim and your Elohim, strengthen you to do His
desire, and may He baraḵ all your seed and the
remnant of your seed for generations forever, with all
righteous bireḵoth, that you may be a beraḵah on all
the earth.”
26 And he went out from him rejoicing.
24

22 And it came to be in the first week in the fortyfourth Yoḇĕl, in the second year, that is, the year in
which Aḇraham died, that Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl came
from Be’ĕrsheḇa to celebrate the Feast of Shaḇuoth that is, the feast of the first-fruits of the harvest - to
Aḇraham, their father. And Aḇraham rejoiced because
his two sons had come.
2 For Yitsḥaq had many possessions in Be’ĕrsheḇa,
and Yitsḥaq used to go and see his possessions and
to return to his father.
3 And in those days Yishma’ĕl came to see his father,
and they both came together, and Yitsḥaq offered a
slaughtering for a burnt offering, and presented it on
the altar of his father which he had made in Ḥeḇron.
4 And he offered a slaughtering of thanksgiving and
made a feast of joy before Yishma’ĕl, his brother. And
Riḇqah made new cakes from the new grain, and gave
them to Ya’aqoḇ, her son, to take them to Aḇraham,
his father, from the first-fruits of the land, that he might
eat and baraḵ the Creator of all matters before he died.
5 And Yitsḥaq, too, sent by the hand of Ya’aqoḇ to
Aḇraham a best slaughtering of thanksgiving, that he
might eat and drink.
6 And he ate and drank, and baraḵ the Most High Ĕl,
who has created the shamayim and earth, who has
made all the fatness of the earth, and given them to
510

JUBILEES

the children of men that they might eat and drink and
baraḵ their Creator.
7 “And now I give thanks to You, my Elohim, because
You have caused me to see this day. See, I am one
hundred and seventy-five years, an old man and full of
days, and all my days have been peace unto me.
8 “The sword of the adversary has not overcome me
in all that You have given my children and I, all the
days of my life until this day.
9 “My Elohim, may Your kindness and Your peace be
upon Your servant, and upon the seed of his sons, that
they may be to You a chosen nation and an inheritance
from among all the nations of the earth from this time
to forever of the generations of the earth, unto all the
ages.”
10 And he called Ya’aqoḇ and said, “My son Ya’aqoḇ,
may the Elohim of all baraḵ you and strengthen you to
do righteousness, and His desire before Him, and may
He choose you and your seed that you become a
people for His inheritance according to His desire
always. And you, my son Ya’aqoḇ, draw near and kiss
me.”
11 And he drew near and kissed him, and he said,
“Baruḵ be my son Ya’aqoḇ and all the sons of Elohim
Most High, unto all the ages. May Elohim give unto you
a Seed of Righteousness; and some of your sons may
He qadosh in the midst of the whole earth. May nations
serve you, and all the nations bow themselves before
your seed.
12 “Be strong in the presence of men, and exercise
authority over all the seed of Shĕth. Then your ways
and the ways of your sons shall be declared right, so
that they shall become a qodesh nation.
13 “May the Most High Ĕl give you all the bireḵoth with
which He has baraḵ me and with which He baraḵ Noaḥ
and Aḏam. May they rest on the qodesh head of your
seed from generation to generation forever.
14 “And may He cleanse you from all unrighteousness
and impurity, that you may be forgiven all
511

YOḆELIM

transgressions - your sins of ignorance. And may He
strengthen you, and baraḵ you, and may you inherit
the whole earth.
15 “And may He renew His Covenant with you, that
you may be to Him a nation for His inheritance for all
the ages, and that He may be to you and to your seed
an Elohim in truth and righteousness throughout all the
days of the earth.
16 “And you, my son Ya’aqoḇ, remember my words,
and observe the Commands of Aḇraham, your father.
Separate yourself from the nations, and do not eat with
them and do not do according to their works, and do
not become their associate; for their works are
unclean, and all their ways are defiled and an
abomination and uncleanness.
17 “They offer their offerings to the dead and they
worship evil spirits, and they eat over the graves, and
all their works are worthless and emptiness.
18 “They have no heart to understand and their eyes
do not see what their works are, and how they stray in
saying to a piece of wood, ‘You are my mighty one,’
and to a stone, ‘You are my master and you are my
deliverer.’
19 “And as for you, my son Ya’aqoḇ, may the Most
High Ĕl help you. And the Elohim of the shamayim
baraḵ you and remove you from their uncleanness and
from all their straying.
20 “Beware, my son Ya’aqoḇ, of taking a wife from any
seed of the daughters of Kena’an; for all his seed is to
be rooted out of the earth.
21 “For, owing to the transgression of Ḥam, Kena’an
strayed, and all his seed shall be destroyed from off
the earth and all his remnant, and none springing from
him shall be saved on the Day of judgment.
22 “And as for all the worshippers of idols and the
profane, there shall be no hope for them in the land of
the living; and there shall be no remembrance of them
on the earth; for they shall descend into the grave, and
into the place of condemnation they shall go. As the
512

JUBILEES

children of Seḏom were taken away from the earth, so
shall all those who worship idols be taken away.
23 “Do not fear, my son Ya’aqoḇ, and be not
dismayed, O son of Aḇraham. May the Most High Ĕl
preserve you from destruction, and may He deliver you
from all the paths of straying.
24 “This house I have built for myself that I might put
my name upon it in the earth, and it shall be named,
the house of Aḇraham, it is given to you and to your
seed forever; for you shall build my house and
establish my name before Elohim forever. Your seed
and your name shall stand throughout all generations
of the earth.”
25 And he ceased commanding him and to baraḵ him.
26 And the two lay together on one bed, and Ya’aqoḇ
slept in the bosom of Aḇraham, his father’s father and
he kissed him seven times, and his affection and his
heart rejoiced over him.
27 And he baraḵ him with all his heart and said, “The
Most High Ĕl, the Elohim of all, and Creator of all, who
brought me out from Ur-Kasdim, that He might give me
this land to inherit it forever, and that I might establish
a qodesh seed - baruḵ be the Most High forever.”
28 And he baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ and said, “My son, over
whom with all my heart and my affection I rejoice, may
Your favour and Your kindness be lifted up on him and
upon his seed always.
29 “And do not forsake him, nor despise him from this
time and forever, and may Your eyes be open on him
and upon his seed, that You may preserve him, and
baraḵ him, and may qadosh him as a nation for Your
inheritance.
30 “And baraḵ him with all Your bireḵoth from this time
and forever, and renew Your Covenant and Your
favour with him and with his seed according to all Your
good pleasure unto all the generations of the earth.”

23 And he placed two fingers of Ya’aqoḇ on his eyes,
and he baraḵ the Elohim of mighty ones, and he
513

YOḆELIM

covered his face and stretched out his feet and slept
the everlasting sleep, and was gathered to his fathers.
2 And through all this Ya’aqoḇ was lying in his
bosom, and did not know that Aḇraham, his father’s
father, was dead.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ awoke from his sleep, and see,
Aḇraham was cold as ice, and he said, “Father,
father!”; but there was none that spoke, and he knew
that he was dead.
4 And he arose from his bosom and ran and told
Riḇqah, his mother; and Riḇqah went to Yitsḥaq in the
night and told him; and they went together, and
Ya’aqoḇ with them, and a lamp was in his hand, and
when they had gone in they found Aḇraham lying
dead.
5 And Yitsḥaq fell on the face of his father, and wept
and kissed him.
6 And the voices were heard in the house of
Aḇraham, and Yishma’ĕl his son arose, and went to
Aḇraham his father, and wept over Aḇraham his father,
he and all the house of Aḇraham, and they wept with a
great weeping.
7 And his sons Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl buried him in
the cave of Maḵpĕlah, near Sarah his wife, and they
wept for him forty days, all the men of his house, and
Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl, and all their sons, and all the
sons of Qeturah in their places, and the days of
weeping for Aḇraham were ended.
8 And he lived three Yoḇelim and four weeks of years
- one hundred and seventy-five years - and completed
the days of his life, being old and full of days.
9 For the days of the forefathers, of their life, were
nineteen Yoḇelim; but after the Flood they began to
grow less than nineteen Yoḇelim, and to decrease in
Yoḇelim, and to grow old quickly, and to be full of their
days by reason of much tribulation and the wickedness
of their ways, with the exception of Aḇraham.
10 For Aḇraham was perfect in all his deeds with
hWhY, and well-pleasing in righteousness all the days
514

JUBILEES

of his life; and see, he did not complete four Yoḇelim
in his life, when he had grown old by reason of the
wickedness and was full of his days.
11 And all the generations which shall arise from this
time until the Day of the great judgment shall grow old
quickly, before they complete two Yoḇelim, and their
knowledge shall forsake them by reason of their old
age.
12 And in those days, if a man lives a Yoḇĕl and a half
of years, they shall say regarding him, “He has lived
long.” But the greater part of his days are pain and
sorrow and tribulation, and there is no peace.
13 “For calamity follows on calamity, and wound on
wound, and tribulation on tribulation, and evil words on
evil words, and sickness on sickness, and all evil
judgments such as these, one with another, sickness
and overthrow, and snow and frost and ice, and fever,
and chills, and languishing, and scarcity of food, and
death, and sword, and captivity, and all kinds of
calamities and pains.”
14 And all these shall come on an evil generation,
which transgresses on the earth: their works are
uncleanness and whoring, and pollution and
abominations.
15 Then they shall say, “The days of the forefathers
were many: to a thousand years, and were good; but
see, the days of our life, if a man has lived many, are
seventy years, and, if he is strong, eighty years, and
those evil and there is no peace in the days of this evil
generation.”
16 And in that generation the sons shall convict their
fathers and their elders of sin and unrighteousness,
and of the words of their mouth and the great
wickednesses which they do, and concerning their
forsaking the Covenant which hWhY made between
them and Him, that they should observe and do all His
Commands and His Laws and all His Torot, without
departing either to the right hand or to the left.
515

YOḆELIM

For all have done evil, and every mouth speaks
wickedness and all their works are an uncleanness
and an abomination, and all their ways are pollution,
uncleanness and destruction.
18 See the earth shall be destroyed on account of all
their works, and there shall be no seed of the vine, and
no oil; for their works are altogether unbelieving, and
they shall all perish together, beasts and cattle and
birds, and all the fish of the sea, on account of the
children of men.
19 And they shall strive, one with another, the young
with the old, and the old with the young, the poor with
the rich, and the lowly with the great, and the needy
with the prince, on account of the Torah and the
Covenant; for they have forgotten Command, and
Covenant, and Festivals, and New Moons, and
Shabbathoth, and Yoḇelim, and all Right-Rulings.
20 And they shall stand with swords, and battle to turn
them back to the Way; but they shall not return until
much blood has been shed on the earth, one by
another.
21 And those who have escaped shall not turn from
their wickedness to the Way of righteousness, but they
shall all exalt themselves to deceit and wealth, that
they may each take all that is his neighbour’s, and they
shall name the great Name, but not in truth and not in
righteousness, and they shall defile the Most Qodesh
Place with their uncleanness and the corruption of their
pollution.
22 And a great punishment shall come upon the deeds
of this generation from hWhY, and He shall give them
over to the sword and to judgment and to captivity, and
to be plundered and devoured.
23 And He shall wake against them - the sinners of the
gentiles, who have neither kindness nor compassion,
and who shall respect the face of none, neither old nor
young, nor anyone, for they are more wicked and
mighty to do evil than all the children of men. And they
shall use violence against Yisra’ĕl and transgression
17

516

JUBILEES

against Ya’aqoḇ, and much blood shall be shed upon
the earth, and there shall be none to gather and none
to bury.
24 In those days they shall cry aloud, and call and pray
that they may be saved from the hand of the sinners,
the gentiles; but none shall be saved.
25 And the heads of the children shall be white with
grey hair, and a child of three weeks shall appear old
like a man of one hundred years, and their stature shall
be destroyed by tribulation and oppression.
26 And in those days the children shall begin to study
the Laws, and to seek the Commands, and to return to
the Way of Righteousness.
27 And the days shall begin to grow many and
increase among those children of men, till their days
draw near to one thousand years, and to a greater
number of years than was their number of the days.
28 And there shall be no old man nor one who is not
satisfied with his days, for all shall be children and
youths.
29 And all their days they shall complete and live in
peace and in joy and there shall be no adversary nor
any evil destroyer; for all their days shall be days of
beraḵah and healing.
30 And at that time hWhY shall heal His servants, and
they shall rise up and see great peace, and drive out
their adversaries. And the righteous shall see and be
thankful, and rejoice with joy forever and ever, and
shall see all their judgments and all their curses on
their enemies.
31 And their bones shall rest in the earth, and their
spirits shall have much joy, and they shall know that it
is hWhY who executes right-ruling, and shows
kindness to hundreds and thousands and to all that
love Him.
32 And you, Mosheh, shall write down these words; for
so they are written, and recorded on the tablets of the
shamayim for a witness for the generations forever.
517

YOḆELIM

24 And it came to be after the death of Aḇraham, that
hWhY baraḵ Yitsḥaq his son, and he went up from
Ḥeḇron and went and dwelt at Be’ĕr Laḥai Ro’i in the
first year of the third week of this Yoḇĕl, seven years.
2 And in the first year of the fourth week a scarcity of
food began in the land, besides the first scarcity of
food, which had been in the days of Aḇraham.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ cooked lentil stew, and Ĕsaw came
from the field hungry. And he said to Ya’aqoḇ his
brother, “Give me of this red stew.” And Ya’aqoḇ said
to him, “Sell to me your birthright and shall I give you
bread, and also some of this lentil stew.”
4 And Ĕsaw said in his heart, “I shall die; of what
profit to me is this birthright?” And he said to Ya’aqoḇ,
“I give it to you.”
5 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “Swear to me, this day,” and he
swore unto him.
6 And Ya’aqoḇ gave his brother Ĕsaw bread and
stew, and he ate till he was satisfied. But Ĕsaw
despised his birthright; for this reason was Ĕsaw’s
name called Eḏom, on account of the red stew which
Ya’aqoḇ gave him for his birthright.
7 And Ya’aqoḇ became the elder, and Ĕsaw was
brought down from his dignity.
8 And a scarcity of food was over the land, and
Yitsḥaq departed to go down into Mitsrayim in the
second year of this week, and went to the sovereign of
the Pelishtites, to Gerar, to Aḇimeleḵ.
9 And hWhY appeared to him and said to him, “Do not
go down into Mitsrayim. Dwell in the land that I tell you,
and sojourn in this land, and I shall be with you and
baraḵ you.
10 “For to you and to your seed I shall give all this land,
and I shall establish My oath which I swore unto
Aḇraham your father, and I shall multiply your seed as
the stars of the shamayim, and shall give unto your
seed all this land.
11 “And in your seed shall all the nations of the earth
be baruḵ, because your father obeyed My voice, and
518

JUBILEES

kept My Charge and My Commands, and My Torot,
and My Laws, and My Covenant. And now obey My
voice and dwell in this land.”
12 And he dwelt in Gerar three weeks of years.
13 And Aḇimeleḵ commanded concerning him, and
concerning all that was his, saying, “Any man that
touches him or any that is his shall certainly die.”
14 And Yitsḥaq grew strong among the Pelishtites,
and he gained many possessions: oxen and sheep
and camels and donkeys and a large household.
15 And he sowed in the land of the Pelishtites and
brought in a hundred-fold, and Yitsḥaq became
exceedingly great, and the Pelishtites envied him.
16 Now all the wells which the servants of Aḇraham
had dug during the life of Aḇraham, the Pelishtites had
stopped them up after the death of Aḇraham, and filled
them with earth.
17 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Yitsḥaq, “Go from us, for you
are much mightier than we.” And Yitsḥaq departed
from there in the first year of the seventh week, and
sojourned in the wadi Gerar.
18 And they dug again the wells of water which the
servants of Aḇraham his father had dug, and which the
Pelishtites had stopped up after the death of Aḇraham
his father, and he called their names as Aḇraham his
father had named them.
19 And the servants of Yitsḥaq dug a well in the wadi,
and found running water, and the shepherds of Gerar
strove with the shepherds of Yitsḥaq, saying, “The
water is ours.” And Yitsḥaq called the name of the well
Ĕseq, “Because they strove with us.”
20 And they dug a second well, and they strove for that
too, and he called its name Sitnah. And he arose from
there and they dug another well, and they did not strive
for that, and he called the name of it Reḥoḇoth. And
Yitsḥaq said, “Now hWhY has made room for us, and
we have increased in the land.”
21 And he went up from there to Be’ĕrsheḇa in the first
year of the first week in the forty-fourth Yoḇĕl.
519

YOḆELIM

And hWhY appeared to him that night, on the new
moon of the first month, and said to him, “I am the
Elohim of Aḇraham your father; do not fear, for I am
with you, and shall baraḵ you and shall surely multiply
your seed as the sand of the earth, for the sake of
Aḇraham My servant.”
23 And he built an altar there, which Aḇraham his
father had first built, and he called on the Name of
hWhY, and he offered an offering to the Elohim of
Aḇraham his father.
24 And they dug a well and they found running water.
25 And the servants of Yitsḥaq dug another well but
did not find water, and they went and told Yitsḥaq that
they had not found water, and Yitsḥaq said, “I have
sworn this day to the Pelishtites and this matter has
been announced to us.”
26 And he called the name of that place the
Be’ĕrsheḇa; for there he had sworn to Aḇimeleḵ and
Aḥuzzath his friend and Piḵol the commander of his
army.
27 And Yitsḥaq knew that day that he had sworn to
them under constraint to make peace with them.
28 And Yitsḥaq on that day cursed the Pelishtites and
said, “Cursed be the Pelishtites unto the Day of wrath
and displeasure from the midst of all nations. May
Elohim make them a mockery and a curse and an
object of wrath and displeasure in the hands of the
sinners the gentiles and in the hands of the Kittim.
29 “And whoever escapes the sword of the enemy and
of Kittim, may the righteous nation root out in judgment
from under the shamayim; for they shall be the
enemies and foes of my children throughout their
generations on the earth.
30 “And no remnant shall be left to them, nor one that
shall be saved on the Day of the wrath of judgment; for
destruction and rooting out and expulsion from the
earth is for the whole seed of the Pelishtites, and there
shall no longer be left a name for these Kaphtorim or a
seed on the earth.
22

520

JUBILEES

“For though he ascends to the shamayim, from
there shall he be brought down. And though he makes
himself strong on earth, from there shall he be dragged
out. And though he hides himself among the nations,
even from there shall he be rooted out. And though he
descend into the grave, there also shall his
punishment be great, and there also he shall have no
peace.
32 “And if he goes into captivity, by the hands of those
that seek his life shall they slay him on the way, and
neither name nor seed shall be left to him on all the
earth; for into everlasting reproach he shall depart.”
33 And thus is it written and engraved concerning him
on the tablets of the shamayim, to do unto him on the
Day of judgment, so that he may be rooted out of the
earth.
31

25 And in the second year of this week in this Yoḇĕl,
Riḇqah called Ya’aqoḇ her son, and spoke to him,
saying, “My son, do not take a wife of the daughters of
Kena’an, as Ĕsaw, your brother, who took two wives of
the daughters of Kena’an, and they have embittered
my being with all their unclean deeds, for all their
deeds are whoring and lust, and there is no
righteousness with them, because of evil.
2 “And I love you exceedingly my son, and my heart
and my affection baraḵ you every hour of the day and
watch of the night.
3 “And now, my son, listen to my voice, and do the
desire of your mother, and do not take yourself a wife
of the daughters of this land, but only of the house of
my father, and of my father’s relatives. You shall take
a wife of the house of my father, and the Most High Ĕl
shall baraḵ you, and your children shall be a righteous
generation and a qodesh seed.”
4 And then Ya’aqoḇ spoke to Riḇqah, his mother, and
said to her, “See, mother, I am nine weeks of years
old, and I neither know nor have I touched any woman,
nor have I engaged myself to any, nor even thought of
taking myself a wife of the daughters of Kena’an.
521

YOḆELIM

“For I remember, mother, the words of Aḇraham,
our father, for he commanded me not to take a wife of
the daughters of Kena’an, but to take for myself a wife
from the seed of my father’s house and from my
relatives.
6 “I have heard before, that daughters have been
born to Laḇan, your brother, and I have layed my heart
on them to take a wife from among them.
7 “And for this reason I have guarded myself in my
spirit against sinning or being corrupted in all my ways
throughout all the days of my life; for with regard to lust
and whoring, Aḇraham, my father, gave me many
Commands.
8 “And, despite all that he has commanded me, these
twenty-two years, my brother has strove with me and
spoken frequently to me and said, ‘My brother, take to
wife a sister of my two wives.’ But I refuse to do as he
has done.
9 “I swear before you, mother, that all the days of my
life I shall not take for myself a wife from the daughters
of the seed of Kena’an, and I shall not act wickedly as
my brother has done.
10 “Do not fear, mother; be assured that I shall do your
desire and walk in uprightness, and not corrupt my
ways, forever.”
11 And afterward she lifted up her face to the
shamayim and extended the fingers of her hands, and
opened her mouth and baraḵ the Most High Ĕl, who
had created the shamayim, and the earth, and she
gave Him thanks and praise.
12 And she said, “Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim, and may His
qodesh Name be baruḵ forever and ever; who has
given me Ya’aqoḇ as a pure son and a qodesh seed;
for He is Yours, and his seed shall be Yours continually
and throughout all the generations forever.
13 “Barak him, O Aḏonai, and place in my mouth the
bireḵoth of righteousness, that I may baraḵ him.”
5

522

JUBILEES

And in that hour, when the spirit of righteousness
descended into her mouth, she placed both her hands
on the head of Ya’aqoḇ, and said,
15 “Baruḵ are You, Aḏon of righteousness and Elohim
of the ages! And may He baraḵ you beyond all the
generations of men. May He give you, my son, the path
of righteousness, and reveal righteousness to your
seed.
16 “And may He make your sons many during your life,
and may they arise according to the number of the
months of the year. And may their sons become many
and great beyond the stars of the shamayim, and their
numbers be more than the sand of the sea.
17 “And may He give them this good land as He said
He would give it to Aḇraham and to his seed after him
always, and may they hold it as an everlasting
possession.
18 “And may I see to you, my son, baruḵ children
during my life, and a baruḵ and qodesh seed may all
your seed be.
19 “And as you have refreshed your mother’s spirit
during life, the womb of her that bore you baraḵ you,
and my breasts baraḵ you and my mouth and my
tongue praise you greatly.
20 “Increase and spread over the earth, and may your
seed be perfect in the joy of the shamayim and earth
forever; and may your seed rejoice, and on the great
Day of peace may it have peace.
21 “And may your name and your seed endure to all
the ages, and may the Most High Ĕl be their Elohim,
and may the Elohim of righteousness dwell with them,
and by them may His Miqdash be built unto all the
ages.
22 “Baruḵ is he that baraḵ you, and all flesh that curses
you falsely may it be cursed.”
23 And she kissed him, and said to him, “May hWhY of
the world love you as the heart of your mother and her
affection rejoice in you and baraḵ you.” And she
ceased from bireḵoth.
14

523

YOḆELIM

26 And in the seventh year of this week Yitsḥaq
called Ĕsaw, his elder son, and said to him, “I am old,
my son, and see, my eyes are dim in seeing, and I do
not know the day of my death.
2 “And now take your hunting weapons, your quiver
and your bow, and go out to the field, and hunt and
catch for me, my son, and make me a tasty dish, such
as my being loves, and bring it to me that I may eat,
and that my being may baraḵ you before I die.”
3 But Riḇqah heard Yitsḥaq speaking to Ĕsaw.
4 And Ĕsaw went out early to the field to hunt and
catch and bring home to his father.
5 And Riḇqah called Ya’aqoḇ, her son, and said to
him, “See, I heard Yitsḥaq, your father, speak to Ĕsaw,
your brother, saying, ‘Hunt for me, and make me a
tasty dish, and bring to me that I may eat and baraḵ
you before hWhY before I die.’
6 “And now, my son, obey my voice in that which I
command you. Go to your flock and fetch me two
choice young goats, and I shall make them a tasty dish
for your father, such as he loves, and you shall bring
to your father that he may eat and baraḵ you before
hWhY before he dies, and that you may be baruḵ.”
7 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Riḇqah his mother, “Mother, I
shall not withhold any matter which my father would
eat, and which would please him, only I fear, my
mother, that he shall recognise my voice and want to
touch me.
8 “And you know that I am smooth, and Ĕsaw, my
brother, is hairy, and I shall appear before his eyes as
an evildoer, and shall do a deed which he had not
commanded me, and he shall be wroth with me, and I
shall bring upon myself a curse, and not a beraḵah.”
9 And Riḇqah, his mother, said to him, “Your curse
be upon me, my son, only obey my voice.”
10 And Ya’aqoḇ obeyed the voice of Riḇqah, his
mother, and went and fetched two choice and fat
young goats, and brought them to his mother, and his
mother prepared them such as he loved.
524

JUBILEES

And Riḇqah took the best garments of Ĕsaw, her
elder son, which was with her in the house, and she
clothed Ya’aqoḇ, her younger son, and she put the
skins of the young goats upon his hands and on the
exposed parts of his neck.
12 And she gave the meat and the bread which she
had prepared into the hand of her son Ya’aqoḇ.
13 And Ya’aqoḇ went in to his father and said, “I am
your son. I have done accordingly as you asked me.
Arise and sit and eat of that which I have caught,
father, that your being may baraḵ me.”
14 And Yitsḥaq said to his son, “How have you found
so quickly, my son?”
15 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “Because your Elohim caused
me to find.”
16 And Yitsḥaq said to him, “Come near, that I may
feel you, my son, if you are my son Ĕsaw or not.”
17 And Ya’aqoḇ went near to Yitsḥaq, his father, and
he felt him and said,
18 “The voice is Ya’aqoḇ’s voice, but the hands are the
hands of Ĕsaw,” and he did not recognise him,
because it was caused from the shamayim to remove
his power of perception and Yitsḥaq did not recognise,
for his hands were hairy as Ĕsaw’s, so that he baraḵ
him.
19 And he said, “Are you my son Ĕsaw?” and he said,
“I am your son.” and he said, “Bring near to me that I
may eat of that which you have caught, my son, that
my being may baraḵ you.”
20 And he brought near to him, and he ate, and he
brought him wine and he drank.
21 And Yitsḥaq, his father, said to him, “Come near
and kiss me, my son.” And he came near and kissed
him.
22 And he smelled the smell of his garment, and he
baraḵ him and said, “See, the smell of my son is as the
smell of a field which hWhY has baraḵ.
23 And may hWhY give you of the dew of the
shamayim and of the dew of the earth, and plenty of
11

525

YOḆELIM

grain and oil. Let nations serve you, and peoples bow
down to you.
24 “Be master over your brothers, and let your
mother’s sons bow down to you; and may all the
bireḵoth with which hWhY has baraḵ me and baraḵ
Aḇraham, my father, be given to you and to your seed
forever. Cursed be he that curses you, and baruḵ be
he that baraḵ you.”
25 And it came to be as soon as Yitsḥaq had made an
end to baraḵ his son Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ had gone
out from Yitsḥaq his father, Ĕsaw, his brother, came in
from his hunting.
26 And he also made a tasty dish, and brought to his
father, and said to his father, “Let my father arise, and
eat of my wild game that your being may baraḵ me.”
27 And Yitsḥaq, his father, said to him, “Who are you?”
And he said to him, “I am your first-born, your son
Ĕsaw. I have done as you have commanded me.”
28 And Yitsḥaq was greatly astonished, and said,
“Who is he that has hunted and caught and brought to
me, and I have eaten of all before you came, and have
baraḵ him? He shall be baruḵ, and all his seed forever.”
29 And it came to be when Ĕsaw heard the words of
his father Yitsḥaq that he cried with an exceedingly
great and bitter cry, and said to his father, “Baraḵ me,
me too, father!”
30 And he said to him, “Your brother came with deceit,
and has taken away your beraḵah.” And he said, “Now
I know why his name is called Ya’aqoḇ. See, he has
caught me by the heel these two times. He took away
my birth-right, and now he has taken away my
beraḵah.”
31 And he said, “Have you not reserved a beraḵah for
me, father?” And Yitsḥaq answered and said to Ĕsaw,
“See, I have made him your master, and all his
brothers I have given to him for servants, and with
plenty of grain and wine and oil I have strengthened
him. And what now shall I do for you, my son?”
526

JUBILEES

And Ĕsaw said to Yitsḥaq, his father, “Have you but
one beraḵah, O father? Baraḵ me, me too, father!” And
Ĕsaw lifted up his voice and wept.
33 And Yitsḥaq answered and said to him, “See, far
from the dew of the earth shall be your dwelling, and
far from the dew of the shamayim from above.
34 “And by your sword you shall live, and you shall
serve your brother. And it shall come to be when you
become great, and shake his yoke from off your neck,
you shall sin a complete sin unto death, and your seed
shall be rooted out from under the shamayim.”
35 And Ĕsaw kept threatening Ya’aqoḇ because of the
beraḵah with which his father baraḵ him, and he said
in his heart, “May the days of mourning for my father
now come, so that I may slay my brother Ya’aqoḇ.”
32

27 And the words of Ĕsaw, her elder son, were told
to Riḇqah in a dream, and Riḇqah sent and called
Ya’aqoḇ her younger son, and said to him,
2 “See Ĕsaw your brother shall take vengeance on
you so as to kill you.
3 “Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice, and arise
and flee to Laḇan, my brother, to Ḥaran, and stay with
him a few days until your brother’s wrath turns away,
and he removes his wrath from you, and forgets all that
you have done; then I shall send and bring you from
there.”
4 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “I am not afraid; if he wants to
kill me, I shall kill him.”
5 But she said to him, “Let me not be bereaved of
both my sons on one day.”
6 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Riḇqah his mother, “See, you
know that my father has become old, and does not see
because his eyes are dim, and if I leave him it shall be
evil in his eyes, because I leave him and go away from
you, and my father shall be wroth, and shall curse me.
I shall not go. When he sends me, then only shall I go.”
7 And Riḇqah said to Ya’aqoḇ, “I shall go in and
speak to him, and he shall send you away.”
527

YOḆELIM

And Riḇqah went in and said to Yitsḥaq, “I loathe
my life because of the two daughters of Ḥeth, whom
Ĕsaw has taken as wives; and if Ya’aqoḇ takes a wife
from among the daughters of the land such as these,
for what purpose do I further live? For the daughters of
Kena’an are evil.”
9 And Yitsḥaq called Ya’aqoḇ and baraḵ him, and
warned him and said to him,
10 “Do not take a wife of any of the daughters of
Kena’an; arise and go to Aram-Naharayim, to the
house of Bethu’ĕl, your mother’s father, and take a wife
from there of the daughters of Laḇan, your mother’s
brother.
11 “And Ĕl Shaddai baraḵ you and increase and
multiply you that you may become a company of
nations, and give you the bireḵoth of my father
Aḇraham, to you and to your seed after you, that you
may inherit the land of your sojournings and all the land
which Elohim gave to Aḇraham. Go in peace my son.”
12 And Yitsḥaq sent Ya’aqoḇ away, and he went to
Aram-Naharayim, to Laḇan the son of Bethu’ĕl the
Aramean, the brother of Riḇqah, Ya’aqoḇ’s mother.
13 And it came to be after Ya’aqoḇ had arisen to go to
Aram-Naharayim that the spirit of Riḇqah was grieved
after her son, and she wept.
14 And Yitsḥaq said to Riḇqah, “My sister, do not weep
on account of Ya’aqoḇ, my son; for he goes in peace,
and in peace he shall return.
15 “The Most High Ĕl shall preserve him from all evil,
and shall be with him, for He shall not forsake him all
his days.
16 “For I know that his ways shall be prospered in all
matters wherever he goes, until he returns to us in
peace, and we see him in peace.
17 “Do not fear on his account my sister, for he is on
the upright path and he is a perfect man: and he is
trustworthy and shall not perish. Do not weep.”
18 And Yitsḥaq comforted Riḇqah on account of her
son Ya’aqoḇ, and baraḵ him.
8

528

JUBILEES

And Ya’aqoḇ went from Be’ĕrsheḇa to go to Ḥaran
on the first year of the second week in the forty-fourth
Yoḇĕl. And he came to Luz on the mountains, that is,
Bĕyth Ĕl, on the new moon of the first month of this
week, and he came to the place in the evening and
turned from the way to the west of the road that night,
and he slept there; for the sun had gone down.
20 And he took one of the stones of that place and laid
it under the tree, and he was journeying alone, and he
slept.
21 And he dreamt that night, and see, a ladder put up
on the earth, and the top of it reached to the shamayim,
and see, the messengers of hWhY ascended and
descended on it. And see, hWhY stood upon it,
22 and He spoke to Ya’aqoḇ and said, “I am hWhY,
Elohim of Aḇraham, your father, and the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq. The land on which you are sleeping, to you I
shall give it, and to your seed after you.
23 “And your seed shall be as the dust of the earth,
and you shall increase to the west and to the east, to
the north and the south, and in you and in your seed,
all the families of the nations shall be baruḵ.
24 “And see, I shall be with you, and shall keep you
wherever you go, and I shall bring you again into this
land in peace; for I shall not leave you until I do all that
I told you of.”
25 And Ya’aqoḇ awoke from his sleep, and said, “Truly
this place is the house of hWhY, and I did not know it!”
And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this
place, which is none other than the house of Elohim,
and this is the gate of the shamayim!”
26 And Ya’aqoḇ arose early in the morning, and took
the stone which he had put under his head and put it
up as a standing column for a sign, and he poured oil
on the top of it. And he called the name of that place
Bĕyth Ĕl; but the name of the place was Luz at the first.
27 And Ya’aqoḇ vowed a vow to hWhY, saying, “If
hWhY shall be with me, and shall keep me in this way
that I go, and give me bread to eat and garments to put
19

529

YOḆELIM

on, so that I come again to my father’s house in peace,
then hWhY shall be my Elohim, and this stone which I
have put up as a standing column for a sign in this
place, shall be the house of hWhY, and of all that You
give me, I shall give the tenth to You, my Elohim.”

28 And he went on his journey, and came to the land
of the East, to Laḇan, the brother of Riḇqah, and he
was with him, and served him for Raḥĕl his daughter
one week.
2 And in the first year of the third week he said to him,
“Give me my wife, for whom I have served you seven
years.” And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “I shall give you
your wife.”
3 And Laḇan made a feast, and took Lĕ’ah his elder
daughter, and gave her to Ya’aqoḇ as a wife, and gave
her Zilpah his female servant for a female servant. But
Ya’aqoḇ did not know, for he thought that she was
Raḥĕl,
4 and he went in to her, but see, she was Lĕ’ah! And
Ya’aqoḇ was wroth with Laḇan, and said to him, “Why
have you done this to me? Did not I serve you for
Raḥĕl and not for Lĕ’ah? Why have you wronged me?
Take your daughter and I shall go, for you have done
evil to me.”
5 For Ya’aqoḇ loved Raḥĕl more than Lĕ’ah; for
Lĕ’ah’s eyes were weak, and was very lovely of form,
but Raḥĕl had lovely eyes and very lovely of form and
appearance.
6 And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “It is not done so in our
country, to give the younger before the elder.” And it is
not right to do this; for so it is ordained and written in
the tablets of the shamayim, that no one should give
his younger daughter before the elder - but the elder
one is given first and after her, the younger - and the
man who does so, they lay guilt against him in the
shamayim, and none is righteous that does this matter,
for this deed is evil before hWhY.
7 And command the children of Yisra’ĕl that they do
not this matter. Let them neither take, nor give the
530

JUBILEES

younger before they have given the elder, for it is very
wicked.
8 And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Let the seven days of
the feast of this one pass by, and I shall give you
Raḥĕl, that you may serve me another seven years,
that you may pasture my sheep as you did in the
former week.”
9 And on the day when the seven days of the feast of
Lĕ’ah had passed, Laḇan gave Raḥĕl to Ya’aqoḇ, that
he might serve him another seven years, and he gave
to Raḥĕl Bilhah, the sister of Zilpah as a female
servant.
10 And he served yet another seven years for Raḥĕl,
for Lĕ’ah had been given to him for naught.
11 And hWhY opened the womb of Lĕ’ah, and she
conceived and bore Ya’aqoḇ a son, and he called his
name Re’uḇĕn, on the fourteenth day of the ninth
month, in the first year of the third week.
12 But the womb of Raḥĕl was closed, for hWhY saw
that Lĕ’ah was hated, but Raḥĕl loved.
13 And again Ya’aqoḇ went in to Lĕ’ah, and she
conceived, and bore Ya’aqoḇ a second son, and he
called his name Shim’on, on the twenty-first of the
tenth month, and in the third year of this week.
14 And again Ya’aqoḇ went in to Lĕ’ah, and she
conceived, and bore him a third son, and he called his
name Lĕwi, in the new moon of the first month in the
sixth year of this week.
15 And again Ya’aqoḇ went in to her, and she
conceived, and bore him a fourth son, and he called
his name Yahuḏah, on the fifteenth of the third month,
in the first year of the fourth week.
16 And on account of all this Raḥĕl envied Lĕ’ah, for
she did not bear, and she said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Give me
children!” And Ya’aqoḇ said, “Have I withheld from you
the fruits of your womb? Have I forsaken you?”
17 And when Raḥĕl saw that Lĕ’ah had borne four
sons to Ya’aqoḇ, Re’uḇĕn and Shim’on and Lĕwi and
Yahuḏah, she said to him, “Go in to Bilhah my female
531

YOḆELIM

servant, and she shall conceive, and bear a son to
me.”
18 And he went in to her, and she conceived, and bore
him a son, and he called his name Dan, on the ninth of
the sixth month, in the sixth year of the third week.
19 And Ya’aqoḇ went in again to Bilhah a second time,
and she conceived, and bore Ya’aqoḇ another son,
and Raḥĕl called his name Naphtali, on the fifth of the
seventh month, in the second year of the fourth week.
20 And when Lĕ’ah saw that she had become barren
and ceased bearing, she was jealous, and she also
gave her female servant Zilpah to Ya’aqoḇ as wife.
And she conceived, and bore a son, and Lĕ’ah called
his name Gaḏ, on the twelfth of the eighth month, in
the third year of the fourth week.
21 And he went in to her again, and she conceived,
and bore him a second son, and Lĕ’ah called his name
Ashĕr, on the second of the eleventh month, in the fifth
year of the fourth week.
22 And Ya’aqoḇ went in to Lĕ’ah, and she conceived,
and bore a son, and she called his name Yissasḵar, on
the fourth of the fifth month, in the fourth year of the
fourth week, and she gave him to a nurse.
23 And Ya’aqoḇ went in to her again, and she
conceived, and bore two, a son and a daughter, and
she called the name of the son Zeḇulun, and the name
of the daughter Dinah, in the seventh of the seventh
month, in the sixth year of the fourth week.
24 And hWhY showed favour to Raḥĕl, and opened her
womb, and she conceived, and bore a son, and she
called his name Yosĕph, on the new moon of the fourth
month, in the sixth year in this fourth week.
25 And in the days when Yosĕph was born, Ya’aqoḇ
said to Laḇan, “Give me my wives and sons, and let
me go to my father Yitsḥaq, and let me make myself a
house, for I have completed the years in which I have
served you for your two daughters, and I shall go to the
house of my father.”
532

JUBILEES

And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Stay with me for your
wages, and pasture my flock for me again, and take
your wages.”
27 And they agreed with one another that he should
give him as his wages - those of the lambs and young
goats which were born black and spotted and white
were to be his wages.
28 And all the sheep brought forth spotted and
speckled and black, variously marked, and they again
brought forth lambs like themselves, and all that were
spotted were Ya’aqoḇ’s and those which were not
were Laḇan’s.
29 And Ya’aqoḇ’s possessions multiplied exceedingly,
and he possessed oxen and sheep and donkeys and
camels, and male and female servants.
30 And Laḇan and his sons envied Ya’aqoḇ, and
Laḇan took back his sheep from him, and he watched
him with evil intent.
26

29 And it came to be when Raḥĕl had borne Yosĕph,
that Laḇan went to shear his sheep, for they were
distant from him three days’ journey.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ saw that Laḇan was going to shear
his sheep, and Ya’aqoḇ called Lĕ’ah and Raḥĕl, and
spoke kindly to them that they should come with him
to the land of Kena’an.
3 For he told them how he had seen it all in a dream,
even all that He had spoken to him that he should
return to his father’s house. And they said, “To every
place where you go, we shall go with you.”
4 And Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ the Elohim of Yitsḥaq his father,
and the Elohim of Aḇraham his father’s father. And he
arose and mounted his wives and his children, and
took all his possessions and crossed the river, and
came to the land of Gil’aḏ, but Ya’aqoḇ hid his intention
from Laḇan and did not tell him.
5 And in the seventh year of the fourth week Ya’aqoḇ
turned toward Gil’aḏ in the first month, on the twentyfirst. And Laḇan pursued after him and overtook
533

YOḆELIM

Ya’aqoḇ in the mountain of Gil’aḏ in the third month,
on the thirteenth.
6 But hWhY did not allow him to injure Ya’aqoḇ, for
He appeared to him in a dream by night. And Laḇan
spoke to Ya’aqoḇ.
7 And on the fifteenth of those days Ya’aqoḇ made a
feast for Laḇan, and for all who came with him, and
Ya’aqoḇ swore to Laḇan that day, and Laḇan also to
Ya’aqoḇ, that neither should cross the mountain of
Gil’aḏ to the other with evil purpose.
8 And he made there a heap for a witness; therefore
the name of that place is called Yeḡar Sahaḏutha, after
this heap.
9 But before they used to call the land of Gil’aḏ the
land of the Repha’im; for it was the land of the
Repha’im, and the Repha’im were born giants whose
height was ten, nine, eight down to seven ammah.
10 And their dwelling was from the land of the children
of Ammon to Mount Ḥermon, and the seats of their
reign were Qarnayim and Ashtaroth, and Eḏre’i, and
Mits’ar, and Be’on.
11 And hWhY destroyed them because of the evil of
their deeds; for they were very evil, and the Amorites
dwelt in their place - wicked and sinful - and there is no
people today which has filled all their sins, and they
have no longer length of life on the earth.
12 And Ya’aqoḇ sent Laḇan away, and he departed to
Aram-Naharayim, the land of the East, and Ya’aqoḇ
returned to the land of Gil’aḏ.
13 And he passed over the Yabboq in the ninth month,
on the eleventh. And on that day Ĕsaw, his brother,
came to him, and he was reconciled to him, and
departed from him to the land of Sĕ’ir, but Ya’aqoḇ
dwelt in tents.
14 And in the first year of the fifth week in this Yoḇĕl
he crossed the Yardĕn, and dwelt beyond the Yardĕn,
and he pastured his flocks from the Sea of Ayath to
Bĕyth She’an, and to Dothan and to the Ascent of
Aqrabbim.
534

JUBILEES

And he sent to his father Yitsḥaq of all his
substance, garments, and food, and meat, and drink,
and milk, and butter, and cheese, and some dates of
the wadi.
16 And to his mother Riḇqah also four times a year,
between the times of the months, between ploughing
and reaping, and between fall and the rain and
between winter and spring, to the tower of Aḇraham.
17 For Yitsḥaq had returned from Be’ĕrsheḇa and
gone up to the tower of his father Aḇraham, and he
dwelt there apart from his son Ĕsaw.
18 For in the days when Ya’aqoḇ went to AramNaharayim, Ĕsaw took a wife, Maḥalath, the daughter
of Yishma’ĕl, and he gathered together all the flocks of
his father and his wives, and went up and dwelt on
Mount Sĕ’ir, and left Yitsḥaq his father at Be’ĕrsheḇa
alone.
19 And Yitsḥaq went up from Be’ĕrsheḇa and dwelt in
the tower of Aḇraham his father on the mountains of
Ḥeḇron,
20 And there Ya’aqoḇ sent all that he sent to his father
and his mother from time to time - all they needed and they baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ with all their heart and with all
their being.
15

30 And in the first year of the sixth week he went up
to Salem, to the east of Sheḵem, in peace, in the fourth
month.
2 And there they carried off Dinah, the daughter of
Ya’aqoḇ, into the house of Sheḵem, the son of Ḥamor,
the Ḥiwwite, the prince of the land, and he lay with her
and defiled her, and she was a little girl, a child of
twelve years.
3 And he pleaded with his father and her brothers that
she might be given to him as wife, but Ya’aqoḇ and his
sons were wroth because of the men of Sheḵem, for
they had defiled Dinah, their sister, and they spoke to
them with evil intent and dealt deceitfully with them and
deceived them.
535

YOḆELIM

And Shim’on and Lĕwi came unexpectedly to
Sheḵem and executed judgment on all the men of
Sheḵem, and slew all the men whom they found in it,
and left not a single one remaining in it. They slew all
in anguish because they had dishonoured their sister
Dinah.
5 And thus let it not be done again from this time on,
that a daughter of Yisra’ĕl be defiled; for judgment is
ordained in the shamayim against them that they
should destroy with the sword all the men of the
Sheḵemites because they had acted shamefully in
Yisra’ĕl.
6 And hWhY delivered them into the hands of the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ that they might wipe them out with the
sword and execute judgment upon them, and that it
might not be done so again in Yisra’ĕl, that a maiden
of Yisra’ĕl should be defiled.
7 And if there is any man in Yisra’ĕl who desires to
give his daughter or his sister to any man who is of the
seed of the gentiles, he shall certainly die, and they
shall stone him with stones; for he has acted
shamefully in Yisra’ĕl. And they shall burn the woman
with fire, because she has dishonoured the name of
the house of her father, and she shall be rooted out of
Yisra’ĕl.
8 And do not let an adulteress and no uncleanness
be found in Yisra’ĕl unto forever of the generations of
the earth; for Yisra’ĕl is qodesh unto hWhY, and every
man who defiles it shall certainly die: they shall stone
him with stones.
9 For so it has been ordained and written in the
tablets of the shamayim regarding all the seed of
Yisra’ĕl: he who defiles it shall certainly die, and he
shall be stoned with stones.
10 And to this Law there is no limit of days, and no
remission, nor any atonement; but the man who has
defiled his daughter shall be rooted out of the midst of
all Yisra’ĕl, because he has given of his seed to Moleḵ,
and acted wickedly so as to defile it.
4

536

JUBILEES

And you, Mosheh, shall command the children of
Yisra’ĕl and charge them not to give their daughters to
the gentiles, and not to take for their sons any of the
daughters of the gentiles, for this is an abomination
before hWhY.
12 For this reason I have written for you in the words
of the Law all the deeds of the Sheḵemites, which they
did against Dinah, and how the sons of Ya’aqoḇ spoke,
saying, “We shall not give our daughter to a man who
is uncircumcised; for that is a reproach to us.”
13 And it is a reproach to Yisra’ĕl, to those who give,
and to those who take the daughters of the gentiles;
for this is unclean and an abomination to Yisra’ĕl.
14 And Yisra’ĕl shall not be free from this uncleanness
if it has a wife of the daughters of the gentiles, or has
given any of its daughters to a man who is of any of
the gentiles.
15 For there shall be plague upon plague, and curse
upon curse, and every judgment and plague and curse
shall come if he does this matter, or hides his eyes
from those who commit uncleanness, or those who
defile the Miqdash of hWhY, or those who profane His
qodesh name. The whole nation together shall be
judged for all the uncleanness and wickedness of this.
16 And there shall be no respect of faces, and no
receiving at his hands of first-fruits and offerings and
burnt-offerings and fat, nor the fragrance of sweet
incense, so as to accept it: and so it is for every man
or woman in Yisra’ĕl who defiles the Miqdash.
17 For this reason I have commanded you, saying,
“Witness this witness to Yisra’ĕl: see what became of
the Sheḵemites and their sons - how they were
delivered into the hands of two sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and
they slew them under agony, and it was unto them for
righteousness, and it is written down to them for
righteousness.
18 And the seed of Lĕwi was chosen for the kehunnah,
and to be Lĕwites, that they might serve before hWhY,
as we, continually, and that Lĕwi and his sons may be
11

537

YOḆELIM

baruḵ forever; for he was ardent to execute
righteousness and judgment and vengeance on all
those who rose up against Yisra’ĕl.
19 And so they inscribe as a witness in his favour on
the tablets of the shamayim beraḵah and
righteousness before the Elohim of all:
20 And we remember the righteousness which the
man fulfilled during his life, at all periods of the year;
until a thousand generations they shall record it, and it
shall come to him and to his descendants after him,
and he has been recorded on the tablets of the
shamayim as a friend and a righteous man.
21 All this account I have written for you, and have
commanded you to say to the children of Yisra’ĕl, that
they should not commit sin nor transgress the Laws
nor break the Covenant which has been ordained for
them - that they should complete it and be recorded as
friends.
22 But if they transgress and work uncleanness in
every way, they shall be recorded on the tablets of the
shamayim as adversaries, and they shall be destroyed
out of the Book of Ḥai, and they shall be recorded in
the Book of those who shall be destroyed and with
those who shall be rooted out of the earth.
23 And on the day when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slew
Sheḵem, a writing was recorded in their favour in the
shamayim that they had executed righteousness and
uprightness and vengeance on the sinners, and it was
written for a beraḵah.
24 And they brought Dinah, their sister, out of the
house of Sheḵem, and they took captive all that was in
Sheḵem, their sheep and their cattle and their
donkeys, and all their wealth, and all their flocks, and
brought them all to Ya’aqoḇ their father.
25 And he reproached them because they had put the
city to the sword; for he feared those who dwelt in the
land; the Kena’anites and the Perizzites.
26 And the dread of hWhY was upon all the cities which
are around about Sheḵem, and they did not rise to
538

JUBILEES

pursue after the sons of Ya’aqoḇ; for terror had fallen
upon them.

31 And on the new moon of the month, Ya’aqoḇ
spoke to all the people of his house, saying, “Purify
yourselves and change your garments, and let us arise
and go up to Bĕyth Ĕl, where I vowed a vow to Him on
the day when I fled from the face of Ĕsaw my brother,
because He has been with me and brought me into this
land in peace, and put you away the strange mighty
ones that are among you.”
2 And they gave up the strange mighty ones and that
which was in their ears and which was on their necks,
and the idols which Raḥĕl stole from Laḇan her father
and she gave all to Ya’aqoḇ. And he burned and broke
them to pieces and destroyed them, and hid them
under a terebinth which is in the land of Sheḵem.
3 And he went up on the new moon of the seventh
month to Bĕyth Ĕl, and he built an altar at the place
where he had slept, and he put up a standing column
there, and he sent word to his father Yitsḥaq to come
to him to his offering, and to his mother Riḇqah.
4 And Yitsḥaq said, “Let my son Ya’aqoḇ come, and
let me see him before I die.”
5 And Ya’aqoḇ went to his father Yitsḥaq and to his
mother Riḇqah, to the house of his father Aḇraham,
and he took two of his sons with him, Lĕwi and
Yahuḏah, and he came to his father Yitsḥaq and to his
mother Riḇqah.
6 And Riḇqah came out from the tower to the front of
it to kiss Ya’aqoḇ and embrace him, for her spirit had
revived when she heard, “See Ya’aqoḇ your son has
come!” And she kissed him.
7 And she saw his two sons, and she recognised
them, and said to him, “Are these your sons, my son?”
and she embraced them and kissed them, and baraḵ
them, saying, “In you shall the seed of Aḇraham
become great, and you shall prove a beraḵah on the
earth.”
539

YOḆELIM

And Ya’aqoḇ went in to Yitsḥaq his father, to the
chamber where he lay, and his two sons were with him,
and he took the hand of his father, and stooping down
he kissed him, and Yitsḥaq clung to the neck of
Ya’aqoḇ his son, and wept upon his neck.
9 And the darkness left the eyes of Yitsḥaq, and he
saw the two sons of Ya’aqoḇ, Lĕwi and Yahuḏah, and
he said, “Are these your sons, my son? For they are
like you.”
10 And he said to him that they were truly his sons,
“And you have indeed seen that they are truly my
sons.”
11 And they came near to him, and he turned and
kissed them and embraced them both together.
12 And the spirit of neḇuah came down into his mouth,
and he took Lĕwi by his right hand and Yahuḏah by his
left.
13 And he turned to Lĕwi first, and began to baraḵ him
first, and said to him, “May the Elohim of all; the very
Aḏon of all the ages, baraḵ you and your children
throughout all the ages.
14 “And may hWhY give to you and to your seed
greatness and great esteem, and cause you and your
seed, from among all flesh, to approach Him to serve
in His Miqdash as the messengers of the presence and
as the qodeshim, as they, shall the seed of your sons
be for esteem and greatness and qodeshah, and may
He make them great unto all generations.
15 “And they shall be princes and judges, and chiefs
of all the seed of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ. They shall speak
the Word of hWhY in righteousness, and they shall
rightly-rule all His Right-Rulings in righteousness. And
they shall declare my Ways to Ya’aqoḇ and my paths
to Yisra’ĕl. The beraḵah of hWhY shall be given in their
mouths to baraḵ all the seed of the beloved.
16 “Your mother has called your name Lĕwi, and
rightly has she called your name. You shall be joined
to hWhY and be the companion of all the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ. Let His table be yours, and you and your
8

540

JUBILEES

sons shall eat of it. And may your table be full unto all
generations, and your food not fail unto all
generations.
17 “And let all who hate you fall down before you, and
let all your adversaries be rooted out and perish. And
baruḵ is he that baraḵ you, and cursed is every nation
that curses you.”
18 And to Yahuḏah he said, “May hWhY give you
strength and power to tread down all that hate you. A
prince you shall be, you and one of your sons, over the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ. May your name and the name of your
sons go forth and cover every land and region. Then
shall the gentiles fear before your face, and all the
nations shall quake.
19 “In you shall be the Help of Ya’aqoḇ, and in you be
found the Deliverance of Yisra’ĕl.
20 “And when you sit on the throne of the honour of
your righteousness, there shall be great peace for all
the seed of the sons of the beloved. And baruḵ shall
he be that baraḵ you, and all that hate you and afflict
you and curse you shall be rooted out and destroyed
from the earth and accursed.”
21 And turning he kissed him again and embraced
him, and rejoiced greatly; for he had seen the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ his son in great truth.
22 And went forth from between his feet and fell down
and worshipped him. And he baraḵ them, and rested
there with Yitsḥaq his father that night, and they ate
and drank with joy.
23 And he made the two sons of Ya’aqoḇ sleep, the
one on his right hand and the other on his left and it
was counted to him for righteousness.
24 And Ya’aqoḇ told his father all during the night, how
hWhY had shown him great kindness, and how He had
prospered all his ways, and protected him from all evil.
25 And Yitsḥaq baraḵ the Elohim of his father
Aḇraham, who had not withdrawn His kindness and
His righteousness from the sons of His servant
Yitsḥaq.
541

YOḆELIM

And in the morning Ya’aqoḇ told his father Yitsḥaq
the vow which he had vowed to hWhY, and the vision
which he had seen, and that he had built an altar, and
that all was ready for the offering to be made before
hWhY as he had vowed, and that he had come to place
him on a donkey.
27 And Yitsḥaq said to Ya’aqoḇ his son, “I am not able
to go with you, for I am old, and not able to bear the
way. Go in peace my son, for I am one hundred and
sixty-five years this day; I am no longer able to journey.
Appoint your mother and let her go with you.
28 “And I know, my son, that you have come on my
account, and may this day be baruḵ on which you have
seen me alive, and I also have seen you, my son.
29 “May you prosper and complete the vow which you
have vowed, and not put off your vow; for you shall be
called to account concerning the vow. Now therefore
make haste to perform it, and may He be pleased who
has made all matters, to whom you have vowed the
vow.”
30 And he said to Riḇqah, “Go with Ya’aqoḇ your son.”
And Riḇqah went with Ya’aqoḇ her son, and Deḇorah
with her, and they came to Bĕyth Ĕl.
31 And Ya’aqoḇ remembered the prayer with which
his father had baraḵ him and his two sons, Lĕwi and
Yahuḏah, and he rejoiced and baraḵ the Elohim of his
fathers, Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq.
32 And he said, “Now I know that I have an everlasting
hope, and my sons also, before the Elohim of all.” And
thus is it ordained concerning the two; and they record
it as an everlasting witness to them on the tablets of
the shamayim how Yitsḥaq baraḵ them.
26

32 And he stayed that night at Bĕyth Ĕl, and Lĕwi
dreamed that they had ordained and made him the
kohĕn of the Most High Ĕl, he and his sons forever.
And he awoke from his sleep and baraḵ HWHY.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ rose early in the morning, on the
fourteenth of this month, and he gave a tithe of all that
came with him, both of men and cattle, both of gold
542

JUBILEES

and every vessel and garment, he even gave tithes of
all.
3 And in those days Raḥĕl became pregnant with her
son Binyamin. And Ya’aqoḇ counted his sons from him
upwards and Lĕwi fell to the portion of hWhY and his
father clothed him in the garments of the kehunnah
and filled his hands.
4 And on the fifteenth of this month, he brought to the
altar fourteen bulls from among the cattle, and twentyeight rams, and forty-nine sheep, and seven lambs,
and twenty-one young goats as a burnt offering on the
altar of offering, well pleasing as a sweet fragrance
before Elohim.
5 This was his offering, because of the vow which he
had vowed that he would give a tenth, with their grain
offerings and their drink offerings.
6 And when the fire had consumed it, he burned
incense on the fire over the fire, and for a slaughtering
of thanksgiving: two bulls and four rams and four
sheep, four goats, and two sheep of a year old, and
two young goats; and thus he did daily for seven days.
7 And he and all his sons and his men were eating
with joy there during seven days and beraḵah and
thanking hWhY, who had delivered him out of all his
tribulation and had given him his vow.
8 And he tithed all the clean beasts, and made a
burnt offering, but the unclean beasts he did not give
to Lĕwi his son, and he gave him all the beings of the
men.
9 And Lĕwi served as kohĕn at Bĕyth Ĕl before
Ya’aqoḇ his father in preference to his ten brothers,
and he was a kohĕn there, and Ya’aqoḇ gave his vow.
Thus he tithed again the tithe to hWhY and qadosh it,
and it became qodesh unto Him.
10 And for this reason it is ordained on the tablets of
the shamayim as a Law for the tithe. Furthermore, to
eat the tithe before hWhY from year to year, in the place
where it is chosen that His Name should dwell, and to
this Law there is no limit of days forever.
543

YOḆELIM

This Law is written that it may be fulfilled from year
to year in eating the second tithe before hWhY in the
place where it has been chosen, and none shall
remain over from it from this year to the year following.
12 For in its year the seed shall be eaten till the days
of the gathering of the seed of the year; and the wine
till the days of the wine; and the oil till the days of its
season.
13 And all that is left of it and becomes old, let it be
regarded as polluted: let it be burned with fire, for it is
unclean.
14 And so let them eat it together in the Miqdash, and
let them not allow it to become old.
15 And all the tithes of the bulls and sheep shall be
qodesh unto hWhY, and shall belong to His kohenim,
which they shall eat before Him from year to year; for
so it is ordained and engraved regarding the tithe on
the tablets of the shamayim.
16 And on the following night, on the twenty-second
day of this month, Ya’aqoḇ resolved to build that place,
and to surround the courtyard with a wall, and to
qadosh it and make it qodesh forever, for himself and
his children after him.
17 And hWhY appeared to him by night and baraḵ him
and said to him, “Your name shall not be called
Ya’aqoḇ, but they shall name your name Yisra’ĕl.”
18 And He said to him further, “I am hWhY who created
the shamayim and the earth, and I shall increase you
and multiply you exceedingly, and sovereigns shall
come forth from you, and they shall rightly rule
everywhere; wherever the foot of the sons of men has
trodden.
19 “And I shall give to your seed all the earth which is
under the shamayim, and they shall rightly rule all the
nations according to their desires, and after that they
shall gain possession of the whole earth and inherit it
forever.”
11

544

JUBILEES

And He finished speaking with him, and He went up
from him, and Ya’aqoḇ looked till He had ascended
into the shamayim.
21 And he saw in a vision of the night, and see, a
Messenger descended from the shamayim with seven
tablets in his hands, and He gave them to Ya’aqoḇ,
and he read them and knew all that was written therein
which would come upon him and his sons throughout
all the ages.
22 And He showed him all that was written on the
tablets, and said to him, “Do not build this place, and
do not make it an everlasting Miqdash, and do not
dwell here; for this is not the place. Go to the house of
Aḇraham your father and dwell with Yitsḥaq your father
until the day of the death of your father.
23 “For in Mitsrayim you shall die in peace, and in this
land you shall be buried with honour in the grave of
your fathers; with Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq.
24 “Do not fear, for as you have seen and read, so it
shall all be. And you shall write down all as you have
seen and read.”
25 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “Aḏonai, how can I remember all
that I have read and seen?” And He said to him, “I shall
bring all matters to your remembrance.”
26 And He went up from him, and he awoke from his
sleep, and he remembered all which he had read and
seen, and he wrote down all the words which he had
read and seen.
27 And he celebrated there yet another day, and on it
he slaughtered according to all that he slaughtered on
the former days, and called its name, Addition, for this
day was added, and the former days he called The
Feast.
28 And so it was revealed that it should be, and it is
written on the tablets of the shamayim, therefore it was
revealed to him that he should celebrate it, and add it
to the seven days of the feast.
20

545

YOḆELIM

And its name was called Addition, because it was
recorded among the days of the Feast days, according
to the number of the days of the year.
30 And in the night, on the twenty-third of this month,
Deḇorah, Riḇqah’s nurse died, and they buried her
beneath the city under the terebinth of the river, and
he called the name of this place, The River of Deḇorah,
and the terebinth, The Terebinth of the Mourning of
Deḇorah.
31 And Riḇqah went and returned to her house to his
father Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ sent by her hand rams
and sheep and goats that she should prepare a meal
for his father such as he desired.
32 And he went after his mother till he came to the land
of Qaḇratan, and he dwelt there.
33 And Raḥĕl bore a son in the night, and called his
name Ben-Oni, for she suffered in giving him birth. But
his father called his name Binyamin, on the eleventh
of the eighth month in the first of the sixth week of this
Yoḇĕl.
34 And Raḥĕl died there and she was buried in the
land of Ephrath, the same is Bĕyth Leḥem, and
Ya’aqoḇ built a standing column on the grave of Raḥĕl,
on the road above her grave.
29

33 And Ya’aqoḇ went and dwelt to the south of
Maḡdaladra’ĕph. And he went to his father Yitsḥaq, he
and Lĕ’ah his wife, on the new moon of the tenth
month.
2 And Re’uḇĕn saw Bilhah, Raḥĕl’s female servant,
the concubine of his father, washing in water in a
secret place, and he loved her.
3 And he hid himself at night, and he entered the
house of Bilhah, and he found her sleeping alone on a
bed in her house.
4 And he lay with her, and she awoke and looked,
and see, Re’uḇĕn was lying with her in the bed, and
she uncovered the border of her covering and seized
him, and cried out, and discovered that it was Re’uḇĕn.
546

JUBILEES

And she was ashamed because of him, and
released her hand from him, and he fled.
6 And she lamented because of this matter
exceedingly, and did not tell it to anyone.
7 And when Ya’aqoḇ returned and sought her, she
said to him, “I am unclean for you, for I have been
defiled in regard to you; for Re’uḇĕn has defiled me,
and has lain with me in the night, and I was asleep,
and did not discover until he uncovered my skirt and
slept with me.”
8 And Ya’aqoḇ was exceedingly wroth with Re’uḇĕn
because he had lain with Bilhah, because he had
uncovered his father’s skirt.
9 And Ya’aqoḇ did not approach her again because
Re’uḇĕn had defiled her. And as for any man who
uncovers his father’s skirt, his deed is exceedingly
wicked, for he is abominable before hWhY.
10 For this reason it is written and ordained on the
tablets of the shamayim that a man should not lie with
his father’s wife, and should not uncover his father’s
skirt, for this is unclean. They shall certainly die
together, the man who lies with his father’s wife and
the woman also, for they have wrought uncleanness
on the earth.
11 And there shall be none unclean before our Elohim
in the nation which He has chosen for Himself as a
possession.
12 And again, it is written a second time, “Cursed is he
who lies with the wife of his father, for he has
uncovered his father’s shame.” And all the qodeshim
of hWhY said, “So be it, so be it.”
13 And you, Mosheh, shall command the children of
Yisra’ĕl that they observe this word: a punishment of
death is for it, and it is unclean, and there is no
atonement forever to atone for the man who has
committed this, but he is to be put to death and slain,
and stoned with stones, and rooted out from the midst
of the people of our Elohim.
5

547

YOḆELIM

For to no man who does so in Yisra’ĕl is it permitted
to remain alive a single day on the earth, for he is
abominable and unclean.
15 And let them not say, “To Re’uḇĕn was granted life
and forgiveness after he had lain with his father’s
concubine.” And to her also though she had a
husband, and her husband Ya’aqoḇ, his father, was
still alive.
16 For until that time there had not been revealed the
Law and Right-Ruling and Torah in its completeness
for all, but in your days, as a Law of seasons and of
days, and an everlasting Law for the generations
forever.
17 And for this Law there is no end of days, and no
atonement for it, but they must both be rooted out in
the midst of the nation, on the day on which they
committed it, they shall slay them.
18 And you, Mosheh, shall write down for Yisra’ĕl that
they may observe it, and do according to these words,
and not commit a sin unto death. For HWHY our Elohim
is Judge, who does not respect faces and accepts no
bribes.
19 And tell them these words of the Covenant, that
they may hear and observe, and be on their guard in
regard to them, and not be destroyed and rooted out
of the land. For all they who do so are an uncleanness,
and an abomination, and a contamination, and a
pollution on the earth before our Elohim.
20 And there is no greater sin than the whoring which
they commit on earth. For Yisra’ĕl is a qodesh nation
unto hWhY its Elohim, and a nation of inheritance, and
a kehunnah and royal nation and for a possession.
And no such uncleanness shall appear in the midst of
the qodesh nation.
21 And in the third year of this sixth week Ya’aqoḇ and
all his sons went and dwelt in the house of Aḇraham,
near Yitsḥaq his father and Riḇqah his mother.
22 And these were the names of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ:
the first-born Re’uḇĕn, Shim’on, Lĕwi, Yahuḏah,
14

548

JUBILEES

Yissasḵar, Zeḇulun, the sons of Lĕ’ah; and the sons of
Raḥĕl, Yosĕph and Binyamin; and the sons of Bilhah,
Dan and Naphtali, and the sons of Zilpah, Gaḏ and
Ashĕr; and Dinah, the daughter of Lĕ’ah, the only
daughter of Ya’aqoḇ.
23 And they came and bowed themselves to Yitsḥaq
and Riḇqah. And when they saw them they baraḵ
Ya’aqoḇ and all his sons, and Yitsḥaq rejoiced
exceedingly, for he saw the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, his
younger son, and he baraḵ them.

34 And in the sixth year of this week of this fortyfourth Yoḇĕl Ya’aqoḇ sent his sons to pasture their
sheep, and his servants with them, to the pastures of
Sheḵem.
2 And the seven sovereigns of the Amorites
assembled themselves together against them, to slay
them, hiding themselves under the trees, and to take
their cattle as plunder.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ and Lĕwi and Yahuḏah and Yosĕph
were in the house with Yitsḥaq their father; for his spirit
was sorrowful, and they could not leave him. And
Binyamin was the youngest, and for this reason
remained with his father.
4 And there came the sovereign of Tappuaḥ, and the
sovereign of Ḥatsor, and the sovereign of Sarĕgan,
and the sovereign of Shiloh, and the sovereign of
Ga’ash, and the sovereign of Bĕyth Ḥoron, and the
sovereign of Shaqir-Ma’ani, and all those who dwell in
these mountains, who dwell in the woods, in the land
of Kena’an.
5 And they announced this to Ya’aqoḇ saying, “See,
the sovereigns of the Amorites have surrounded your
sons, and plundered their herds.”
6 And he arose from his house, he and his three sons
and all the servants of his father, and his own servants,
and he went against them with six thousand men, who
carried swords.
7 And he slew them in the pastures of Sheḵem, and
pursued those who fled, and he slew them with the
549

YOḆELIM

edge of the sword. And he slew Arĕsa and Taphu and
Sarĕgan and Shilo and Amanisaḵir and Ga’ash, and
he recovered his herds.
8 And he prevailed over them, and imposed tribute
on them that they should pay him tribute: five fruit
products of their land, and he built Roḇĕl and
Tamnatarĕs.
9 And he returned in peace, and made peace with
them, and they became his servants until the day that
he and his sons went down into Mitsrayim.
10 And in the seventh year of this week he sent
Yosĕph to the land of Sheḵem to learn about the
welfare of his brothers from his house, and he found
them in the land of Dothan.
11 And they dealt treacherously with him, and formed
a plot against him to slay him. But changing their
minds, they sold him to Yishma’ĕlite merchants, and
they brought him down into Mitsrayim. And they sold
him to Potiphar, the eunuch of Pharaoh, the chief of
the guard, priest of the city of Ĕlew.
12 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slaughtered a young goat,
and dipped the coat of Yosĕph in the blood, and sent
to Ya’aqoḇ their father on the tenth of the seventh
month.
13 And he mourned all that night, for they had brought
it to him in the evening. And he became feverish with
mourning for his death, and he said, “An evil beast has
devoured Yosĕph!” And all the members of his house
were grieving and mourning with him all that day.
14 And his sons and his daughter rose up to comfort
him, but he refused to be comforted for his son.
15 And on that day, Bilhah heard that Yosĕph had
perished, and she died mourning him, and she was
living in Qaphratĕph. And Dinah his daughter also died
after Yosĕph had perished, and there came these
three mournings upon Yisra’ĕl in one month.
16 And they buried Bilhah opposite the tomb of Raḥĕl,
and Dinah his daughter, they also buried there.
550

JUBILEES

And he mourned for Yosĕph one year, and did not
cease, for he said “Let me go down to the grave
mourning for my son.”
18 For this reason it is ordained for the children of
Yisra’ĕl that they should afflict themselves on the tenth
of the seventh month - on the day that the news which
made him weep for Yosĕph came to Ya’aqoḇ his father
- that on it they should make atonement for themselves
with a young goat on the tenth of the seventh month,
once a year, for their sins; for they had grieved the
affection of their father regarding Yosĕph his son.
19 And this day has been ordained that they should
grieve thereon for their sins, and for all their
transgressions and for all their strayings, so that they
might cleanse themselves on that day once a year.
20 And after Yosĕph perished, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
took unto themselves wives. The name of Re’uḇĕn’s
wife is Aḏah and the name of Shim’on’s wife is
Aḏiba’ah, a Kena’anite; and the name of Lĕwi’s wife is
Milkah, of the daughters of Aram, of the seed of the
sons of Teraḥ; and the name of Yahuḏah’s wife,
Bĕtsu’ĕl, a Kena’anite; and the name of Yissasḵar’s
wife, Ḥĕzaqah; and the name of Zeḇulun’s wife,
Ni’iman; and the name of Dan’s wife, Eḡlah; and the
name of Naphtali’s wife, Rasu’u, of Aram-Naharayim;
and the name of Gaḏ’s wife, Ma’aḵah; and the name
of Ashĕr’s wife, Yonah; and the name of Yosĕph’s wife,
Asenath, the Mitsrite; and the name of Binyamin’s wife,
Yasaqah.
21 And Shim’on repented, and took a second wife
from Aram-Naharayim as his brothers.
17

35 And in the first year of the first week of the fortyfifth Yoḇĕl Riḇqah called Ya’aqoḇ, her son, and
commanded him regarding his father and regarding his
brother, that he should honour them all the days of his
life.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “I shall do all as you have
commanded me; for this matter shall be honour and
551

YOḆELIM

greatness to me, and righteousness before hWhY, that
I should honour them.
3 “And you too, mother, know from the time I was
born until this day, all my deeds and all that is in my
heart, that I always think good concerning all.
4 “And how should I not do this matter which you
have commanded me, that I should honour my father
and my brother!
5 “Tell me, mother, what perversity have you seen in
me and I shall turn away from it, and kindness shall be
upon me.”
6 And she said to him, “My son, I have not seen in
you all my days any perversity, but upright deeds. And
yet I shall tell you the truth, my son: I shall die this year,
and I shall not survive this year in my life; for I have
seen in a dream the day of my death, that I should not
live beyond a hundred and fifty-five years. And see, I
have completed all the days of my life which I am to
live.”
7 And Ya’aqoḇ laughed at the words of his mother,
because his mother had said to him that she should
die. But she was sitting opposite to him in possession
of her strength, and she was not weak in her strength;
for she went in and out and saw, and her teeth were
strong, and no sickness had touched her all the days
of her life.
8 And Ya’aqoḇ said to her, “Baruḵ am I, mother, if my
days approach the days of your life, and my strength
remain with me such as your strength! But you shall
not die, for you are joking idly with me regarding your
death.”
9 And she went in to Yitsḥaq and said to him, “One
petition I make unto you: make Ĕsaw swear that he
shall not injure Ya’aqoḇ, nor pursue him with enmity;
for you know Ĕsaw’s thoughts that they are perverse
from his youth, and there is no goodness in him; for he
desires after your death to kill him.
10 “And you know all that he has done since the day
Ya’aqoḇ his brother went to Ḥaran until this day; how
552

JUBILEES

he has forsaken us with his whole heart, and has done
evil to us. He has taken your flocks to himself, and
carried off all your possessions from before your face.
11 “And when we implored and pleaded with him for
what was our own, he did as a man who was taking
pity on us.
12 “And he is bitter against you because you baraḵ
Ya’aqoḇ your perfect and upright son; for there is no
evil but only goodness in him, and since he came from
Ḥaran unto this day he has not robbed us of any
matter, for he brings us all in its season always, and
rejoices with all his heart when we take at his hands.
And he baraḵ us, and has not parted from us since he
came from Ḥaran until this day, and he remains with
us continually at home honouring us.”
13 And Yitsḥaq said to her, “I, too, know and see the
deeds of Ya’aqoḇ who is with us, how that with all his
heart he honours us, and I loved Ĕsaw formerly more
than Ya’aqoḇ, because he was the first-born. But now
I love Ya’aqoḇ more than Ĕsaw, for he has done many
evil deeds, and there is no righteousness in him, for all
his ways are unrighteousness and violence.
14 “And now my heart is troubled because of all his
deeds, and neither he nor his seed is to be saved, for
they are those who shall be destroyed from the earth,
and who shall be rooted out from under the shamayim,
for he has forsaken the Elohim of Aḇraham and gone
after his wives and after their uncleanness and after
their straying; he and his children.
15 “And you command me, make him swear that he
shall not slay Ya’aqoḇ, his brother? Even if he swears
he shall not keep his oath, and he shall do no good,
but only evil.
16 “But if he desires to slay Ya’aqoḇ, his brother; into
Ya’aqoḇ’s hands he shall be given, and he shall not
escape from his hands.
17 “And do not fear on account of Ya’aqoḇ; for the
Guardian of Ya’aqoḇ is great and powerful and
553

YOḆELIM

honoured, and praised more than the guardian of
Ĕsaw.”
18 And Riḇqah sent and called Ĕsaw, and he came to
her, and she said to him, “I have a petition, my son, to
make unto you, and you shall promise to do it, my son.”
19 And he said, “I shall do all that you say to me, and
I shall not refuse your petition.”
20 And she said to him, “I ask you that the day I die,
you shall take me in and bury me near Sarah, your
father’s mother, and that you and Ya’aqoḇ shall love
each other, and that neither shall desire evil against
the other, but mutual love only. And you shall prosper,
my sons, and be honoured in the midst of the land, and
no enemy shall rejoice over you, and you shall be a
beraḵah and a kindness in the eyes of all those that
love you.”
21 And he said, “I shall do all that you have told me,
and I shall bury you on the day you die near Sarah, my
father’s mother, as you have desired, that her bones
may be near your bones.
22 “And Ya’aqoḇ, my brother, also, I shall love above
all flesh; for I have no brother in all the earth, but him
only. And this is no great merit for me if I love him; for
he is my brother, and we were knit together in your
body, and together we came forth from your womb,
and if I do not love my brother, whom shall I love?
23 “And I, myself, beg you to urge Ya’aqoḇ concerning
me and concerning my sons, for I know that he shall
surely be sovereign over my sons and I. For on the day
my father baraḵ him, he made him the higher, and I the
lower.
24 “And I swear to you that I shall love him, and not
desire evil against him all the days of my life, but only
good.” And he swore to her regarding all this matter.
25 And she called Ya’aqoḇ before the eyes of Ĕsaw,
and gave him command according to the words which
she had spoken to Ĕsaw.

554

JUBILEES

And he said, “I shall do your desire; believe me that
no evil shall proceed from me or from my sons against
Ĕsaw, and I shall be first in none except in love only.”
27 And they ate and drank, she and her sons that
night, and she died, three Yoḇelim and one week and
one year old, on that night. And her two sons, Ĕsaw
and Ya’aqoḇ, buried her in the cave of Maḵpĕlah near
Sarah, their father’s mother.
26

36 And in the sixth year of this week, Yitsḥaq called
his two sons, Ĕsaw and Ya’aqoḇ, and they came to
him, and he said to them, “My sons, I am going the way
of my fathers, to the everlasting dwelling where my
fathers are.
2 “Therefore bury me near Aḇraham my father, in the
cave of Maḵpĕlah in the field of Ephron the Ḥittite,
where Aḇraham purchased a grave to bury in; in the
grave which I dug for myself, bury me there.
3 “And this I command you, my sons: that you do
righteousness and uprightness on the earth, so that
hWhY may bring upon you all that hWhY said that he
would do to Aḇraham and to his seed.
4 “And love one another, my sons, your brothers as
a man who loves his own being, and let each seek how
he may benefit his brother, and work together on the
earth; and let them love each other as their own
beings.
5 “And concerning the question of idols, I command
and admonish you to reject them and hate them, and
love them not; for they are full of deception for those
that worship them, and for those that bow down to
them.
6 “Remember my sons, hWhY Elohim of Aḇraham
your father, and how I too worshipped Him and served
Him in righteousness and in joy, that He might multiply
you and increase your seed as the stars of the
shamayim in multitude, and establish you on the earth
as the plant of righteousness which shall not be rooted
out unto all the generations forever.
555

YOḆELIM

“And now I shall make you swear a great oath - for
there is no oath which is greater than it; by the Name
esteemed and honoured and great and splendid and
wonderful and mighty, which created the shamayim
and the earth and all matters together - that you shall
fear Him and worship Him.
8 “And that each shall love his brother with affection
and righteousness, and that neither shall desire evil
against his brother from this time and forever all the
days of your life, so that you may prosper in all your
deeds and not be destroyed.
9 “And if either of you plans evil against his brother;
know that from this time on, every one that plans evil
against his brother shall fall into his hand, and shall be
rooted out of the land of the living, and his seed shall
be destroyed from under the shamayim.
10 “But on the day of tribulation and abhorrence and
displeasure and wrath, with flaming devouring fire as
He burned Seḏom, so likewise shall He burn his land
and his city and all that is his, and he shall be blotted
out of the Book of the Instruction of the children of men,
and not be recorded in the Book of Ḥai, but in that
which is appointed to destruction. And he shall depart
into everlasting abhorrence; so that their
condemnation may be always renewed in abomination
and in abhorrence and in wrath and in torment and in
displeasure and in plagues and in disease forever.
11 “I say and witness to you, my sons, according to the
judgment which shall come upon the man who wishes
to injure his brother.”
12 And he divided all his possessions between the two
on that day, and he gave the larger portion to him that
was the first-born, and the tower and all that was about
it, and all that Aḇraham possessed at Be’ĕrsheḇa.
13 And he said, “This larger portion I shall give to the
first-born.”
14 And Ĕsaw said, “I have sold to Ya’aqoḇ and given
my birthright to Ya’aqoḇ. Let it be given to him, and I
have not a single word to say regarding it, for it is his.”
7

556

JUBILEES

And Yitsḥaq said, “May a beraḵah rest upon you,
my sons, and upon your seed this day, for you have
given me rest, and my heart is not pained concerning
the birthright, lest you should do wickedness on
account of it.
16 “May the Most High Ĕl baraḵ the man that works
righteousness; he and his seed forever.”
17 And he ended commanding them and to baraḵ
them, and they ate and drank together before him, and
he rejoiced because there was one mind between
them, and they went out from him and rested that day
and slept.
18 And Yitsḥaq slept on his bed that day rejoicing; and
he slept the everlasting sleep, and died one hundred
and eighty years old. He completed twenty-five weeks
and five years; and his two sons Ĕsaw and Ya’aqoḇ
buried him.
19 And Ĕsaw went to the land of Eḏom, to the
mountains of Sĕ’ir, and dwelt there.
20 And Ya’aqoḇ dwelt in the mountains of Ḥeḇron, in
the tower of the land of the sojournings of his father
Aḇraham, and he worshipped hWhY with all his heart
and according to the visible commands accordingly as
He had divided the days of his generations.
21 And Lĕ’ah his wife died in the fourth year of the
second week of the forty-fifth Yoḇĕl, and he buried her
in the cave of Maḵpĕlah near Riḇqah his mother, to the
left of the grave of Sarah, his father’s mother.
22 And all her sons and his sons came to mourn over
Lĕ’ah his wife with him, and to comfort him regarding
her, for he was lamenting her.
23 For he loved her exceedingly after Raḥĕl her sister
died; for she was perfect and upright in all her ways
and honoured Ya’aqoḇ, and all the days that she lived
with him he did not hear from her mouth a harsh word,
for she was gentle and peaceable and upright and
honourable.
15

557

YOḆELIM

And he remembered all her deeds which she had
done during her life, and he lamented her exceedingly;
for he loved her with all his heart and with all his being.
24

37 And on the day that Yitsḥaq the father of Ya’aqoḇ
and Ĕsaw died, the sons of Ĕsaw heard that Yitsḥaq
had given the portion of the elder to his younger son
Ya’aqoḇ and they were very wroth.
2 And they strove with their father, saying, “Why has
your father given Ya’aqoḇ the portion of the elder and
passed over you, although you are the elder and
Ya’aqoḇ the younger?”
3 And he said to them, “Because I sold my birthright
to Ya’aqoḇ for a small bowl of lentils. And on the day
my father sent me to hunt and catch and bring him
some that he should eat and baraḵ me, he came with
deceit and brought my father food and drink, and my
father baraḵ him and put me under his hand.
4 “And now our father has caused us to swear, he
and I, that we shall not mutually devise evil, either
against his brother, and that we shall continue in love
and in peace each with his brother and not make our
ways corrupt.”
5 And they said to him, “We shall not listen to you to
make peace with him; for our strength is greater than
his strength, and we are more powerful than he! We
shall go against him and slay him, and destroy him and
his sons. And if you shall not go with us, we shall do
evil to you also.
6 “And now listen to us: let us send to Aram and
Pelesheth and Mo’aḇ and Ammon, and let us choose
for ourselves chosen men who are ardent for battle,
and let us go against him and do battle with him, and
let us destroy him from the earth before he grows
strong.”
7 And their father said to them, “Do not go, and do
not make battle with him lest you fall before him.”
8 And they said to him, “This too, is exactly your
manner of doing from your youth until this day, and you
558

JUBILEES

are putting your neck under his yoke. We shall not
listen to these words!”
9 And they sent to Aram, and to Aḏuram, to the friend
of their father, and they hired along with them, one
thousand fighting men, chosen men of battle.
10 And there came to them from Mo’aḇ and from the
children of Ammon, those who were hired, one
thousand chosen men; and from Pelesheth, one
thousand chosen men of battle; and from Eḏom and
from the Ḥorites one thousand chosen fighting men,
and from the Kittim mighty men of battle.
11 And they said to their father, “Go out with them and
lead them, or else we shall slay you.”
12 And he was filled with wrath and displeasure on
seeing that his sons were forcing him to go before, to
lead them against Ya’aqoḇ his brother.
13 But afterward he remembered all the evil which lay
hidden in his heart against Ya’aqoḇ his brother; and he
remembered not the oath which he had sworn to his
father and to his mother that he would plan no evil all
his days against Ya’aqoḇ his brother.
14 And notwithstanding all this, Ya’aqoḇ did not know
that they were coming against him to battle, but he was
mourning for Lĕ’ah, his wife, until they approached
very near to the tower with four thousand warriors and
chosen men of battle.
15 And the men of Ḥeḇron sent to him saying, “See
your brother has come against you, to fight you, with
four thousand girded with the swords, and they carry
shields and weapons!” For they loved Ya’aqoḇ more
than Ĕsaw, so they told him; for Ya’aqoḇ was a more
generous and kind man than Ĕsaw.
16 But Ya’aqoḇ would not believe until they came very
near to the tower.
17 And he closed the gates of the tower; and he stood
on the rampart and spoke to his brother Ĕsaw and
said, “Noble is the comfort with which you have come
to comfort me for my wife who has died. Is this the oath
that you swore to your father, and again to your mother
559

YOḆELIM

before they died? You have broken the oath, and on
the moment that you swore to your father you were
condemned.”
18 And then Ĕsaw answered and said to him, “Neither
the children of men nor the beasts of the earth have
any oath of righteousness which in swearing they have
sworn forever. But every day they plan evil, one
against another, and how each may slay his adversary
and foe.
19 “And you hate me, my children and I forever. And
there is no observing the tie of brotherhood with you!
20 “Hear these words which I declare to you: If the
boar can change its skin and make its bristles as soft
as wool, or if it can cause horns to sprout forth on its
head like the horns of a stag or of a sheep, then shall
I observe the tie of brotherhood with you.
21 “And if the wolves make peace with the lambs so
as not to devour or do them violence, and if their hearts
are towards them for good, then there shall be peace
in my heart towards you.
22 “And if the lion becomes the friend of the ox and
makes peace with him, and if he is bound under one
yoke with him and ploughs with him, then shall I make
peace with you.
23 “And when the raven becomes white as the stork,
then know that I have loved you and shall make peace
with you. You shall be rooted out, and your sons shall
be rooted out, and there shall be no peace for you!”
24 And when Ya’aqoḇ saw that he was evilly disposed
towards him with his heart, and with all his being so as
to slay him, and that he had come leaping like the wild
boar which comes upon the spear that pierces and kills
it, and does not recoil from it;
25 then he spoke to his own and to his servants that
they should attack him and all his companions.

38 And after that Yahuḏah spoke to Ya’aqoḇ, his
father, and said to him, “Bend your bow, father, and
shoot your arrows and bring down the adversary and
slay the enemy; and may you have the strength, for we
560

JUBILEES

shall not slay your brother, for he is such as you, and
he is like you. Let us give him respect.”
2 Then Ya’aqoḇ bent his bow and shot the arrow and
struck Ĕsaw, his brother, and slew him.
3 And again he shot out an arrow and struck Aḏoram
the Aramean, on the left breast, and drove him
backward and slew him.
4 And then the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went forth, they and
their servants, dividing themselves into companies on
the four sides of the tower.
5 And Yahuḏah went out in front, and Naphtali and
Gaḏ with him and fifty servants with him on the south
side of the tower, and they slew all they found before
them, and not one of them escaped.
6 And Lĕwi and Dan and Ashĕr went out on the east
side of the tower, and fifty with them, and they slew the
fighting men of Mo’aḇ and Ammon.
7 And Re’uḇĕn and Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun went out
on the north side of the tower, and fifty men with them,
and they slew the fighting men of the Pelishtites.
8 And Shim’on and Binyamin and Ḥanoḵ, Re’uḇĕn’s
son, went forth on the west side of the tower, and fifty
with them, and they slew of Eḏom and of the Ḥorites four hundred men, mighty warriors; and six hundred
fled. And four of the sons of Ĕsaw fled with them, and
left their father lying slain, as he had fallen on the hill
which is in Aḏuram,
9 and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ pursued after them to the
mountains of Sĕ’ir. And Ya’aqoḇ buried his brother on
the hill which is in Aḏuram, and he returned to his
house.
10 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ pressed hard upon the
sons of Ĕsaw in the mountains of Sĕ’ir, and bowed
their necks so that they became servants of the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ.
11 And they sent to their father whether they should
make peace with them or slay them.
12 And Ya’aqoḇ sent word to his sons that they should
make peace, and they made peace with them, and
561

YOḆELIM

placed the yoke of servitude upon them, so that they
paid tribute to Ya’aqoḇ and to his sons always.
13 And they continued to pay tribute to Ya’aqoḇ until
the day that he went down into Mitsrayim.
14 And the sons of Eḏom have not released from the
yoke of servitude which the twelve sons of Ya’aqoḇ
had imposed on them until this day.
15 And these are the sovereigns that reigned in Eḏom
before any sovereign reigned over the children of
Yisra’ĕl in the land of Eḏom.
16 And Balaq, the son of Be’or, reigned in Eḏom, and
the name of his city was Dinhaḇah.
17 And Balaq died, and Yoḇaḇ, the son of Zeraḥ of
Botsrah, reigned in his place.
18 And Yoḇaḇ died, and Ḥusham, of the land of
Tĕman, reigned in his place.
19 And Husham died, and Haḏaḏ, the son of Beḏaḏ,
who slew Miḏyan in the field of Mo’aḇ, reigned in his
place, and the name of his city was Awith.
20 And Haḏaḏ died, and Samlah, from Masrĕqah,
reigned in his stead.
21 And Samlah died, and Sha’ul of Reḥoḇoth
ha’Nahar, reigned in his place.
22 And Sha’ul died, and Ba’al-Ḥanan, the son of
Aḵbor, reigned in his place.
23 And Ba’al-Hanan, the son of Aḵbor, died, and
Haḏar reigned in his place, and the name of his wife
was Mehĕtab’ĕl, the daughter of Matrĕḏ, the daughter
of Mĕy-Zahab.
24 These are the sovereigns who reigned in the land
of Eḏom.

39 And Ya’aqoḇ dwelt in the land of his father’s
sojournings in the land of Kena’an.
2 These are the generations of Ya’aqoḇ. And Yosĕph
was seventeen years old when they took him down into
the land of Mitsrayim, and Potiphar, a eunuch of
Pharaoh, the chief of the guard bought him.
3 And he appointed Yosĕph over all his house, and
the beraḵah of hWhY came upon the house of the
562

JUBILEES

Mitsrite on account of Yosĕph, and hWhY prospered
him in all that he did.
4 And the Mitsrite committed all into the hands of
Yosĕph; for he saw that hWhY was with him, and that
hWhY prospered him in all that he did.
5 And Yosĕph’s appearance was handsome and his
appearance was good-looking, and his master’s wife
lifted up her eyes and saw Yosĕph, and she loved him,
and pleaded with him to lie with her.
6 But he did not surrender his being, and he
remembered hWhY and the words which Ya’aqoḇ, his
father, used to read from among the words of
Aḇraham; that no man should commit whoring with a
woman who has a husband; that for him the
punishment of death has been ordained in the
shamayim before the Most High Ĕl, and the sin shall
be recorded against him in the everlasting Books
continually before hWhY.
7 And Yosĕph remembered these words and refused
to lie with her.
8 And she pleaded with him for a year, but he refused
and would not listen.
9 But she embraced him and held him fast in the
house in order to force him to lie with her, and closed
the doors of the house and held him fast. But he left
his garment in her hands and broke through the door
and fled outside from her presence.
10 And the woman saw that he would not lie with her,
and she accused him in the presence of his master,
saying, “Your Iḇri servant, whom you love, sought to
force me so that he might lie with me; and it came to
be when I lifted up my voice that he fled and left his
garment in my hands when I held him, and he broke
through the door!”
11 And the Mitsrite saw the garment of Yosĕph and
the broken door, and heard the words of his wife, and
threw Yosĕph into prison into the place where the
prisoners were kept whom the sovereign imprisoned.
563

YOḆELIM

And he was there in the prison, but hWhY gave
Yosĕph favour in the sight of the chief of the prison
guards and compassion before him, for he saw that
hWhY was with him, and that hWhY made all that he did
to prosper.
13 And he gave all matters into his hands, and the
chief of the prison guards knew of naught that was with
him, for Yosĕph did all, and hWhY perfected it.
14 And he remained there two years. And in those
days Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim, was wroth
against his two eunuchs, against the chief cupbearer
and against the chief baker, and he put them in
confinement in the house of the captain of the guard,
in the prison where Yosĕph was kept.
15 And the captain of the prison guards appointed
Yosĕph to serve them; and he served before them.
16 And they both dreamed a dream, the chief
cupbearer and the chief baker, and they told it to
Yosĕph.
17 And as he interpreted to them, so it befell them, and
Pharaoh restored the chief cupbearer to his office, and
the baker he slew, as Yosĕph had interpreted to them.
18 But the chief cupbearer forgot Yosĕph in the prison,
although he had informed him what would befall him,
and did not remember to inform Pharaoh how Yosĕph
had told him, for he forgot.
12

40 And in those days Pharaoh dreamed two dreams
in one night concerning a scarcity of food which was to
be in all the land. And he awoke from his sleep and
called all the interpreters of dreams that were in
Mitsrayim, and magicians, and told them his two
dreams, but they were not able to declare.
2 And then the chief cupbearer remembered Yosĕph
and spoke of him to the sovereign, and he brought him
out from the prison, and he told his two dreams before
him.
3 And he said before Pharaoh that his two dreams
were one, and he said to him, “Seven years of plenty
shall come over all the land of Mitsrayim, and after that
564

JUBILEES

seven years of scarcity of food; such a scarcity of food
as has not been in all the land.
4 “And now let Pharaoh appoint overseers in all the
land of Mitsrayim, and let them store up food in every
city throughout the days of the years of plenty, and
there shall be food for the seven years of scarcity of
food, and the land shall not perish through scarcity of
food, for it will be very severe.”
5 And hWhY gave Yosĕph favour and kindness in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh said to his servants,
“We shall not find such a wise and discerning man as
this man, for the spirit of hWhY is with him.”
6 And he appointed him the second in all his reign
and gave him authority over all Mitsrayim, and caused
him to ride in the second chariot of Pharaoh.
7 And he clothed him in fine linen garments, and he
put a gold chain upon his neck, and proclaimed before
him, “Ĕl Ĕl wa’Abirĕr.” And he placed a ring on his hand
and made him ruler over all his house, and magnified
him, and said to him, “Only on the throne shall I be
greater than you.”
8 And Yosĕph ruled over all the land of Mitsrayim,
and all the princes of Pharaoh, and all his servants,
and all who did the sovereign’s business loved him, for
he walked in uprightness, for he was without pride and
arrogance, and he had no respect of faces, and did not
accept bribes, but he judged all the people of the land
in uprightness.
9 And the land of Mitsrayim was at peace before
Pharaoh because of Yosĕph, for hWhY was with him,
and gave him favour and kindness for all his
generations before all those who knew him and those
who heard concerning him. And Pharaoh’s reign was
well ordered, and there was no adversary and no evil
one.
10 And
the sovereign called Yosĕph’s name
Tsaphnath Pa’nĕaḥ, and gave Yosĕph as wife the
daughter of Potiphar, the daughter of the priest of On,
the captain of the guard.
565

YOḆELIM

And on the day that Yosĕph stood before Pharaoh
he was thirty years old.
12 And in that year Yitsḥaq died. And it came to be as
Yosĕph had said in the interpretation of his two dreams
- accordingly as he had said it - there were seven years
of plenty over all the land of Mitsrayim, and the land of
Mitsrayim produced abundantly, one measure to
eighteen hundred measures.
13 And Yosĕph gathered food into every city until they
were full of grain until they could no longer count and
measure it for its multitude.
11

41 And in the forty-fifth Yoḇĕl, in the second week, in
the second year, Yahuḏah took for his first-born Ĕr, a
wife from the daughters of Aram, named Tamar.
2 But he hated, and did not lie with her, because his
mother was of the daughters of Kena’an, and he
wished to take a wife of the clan of his mother, but
Yahuḏah, his father, would not permit him.
3 And this Ĕr, the first-born of Yahuḏah, was wicked,
and hWhY slew him.
4 And Yahuḏah said to Onan, his brother, “Go in to
your brother’s wife and perform the duty of a husband’s
brother to her, and raise up seed for your brother.”
5 And Onan knew that the seed would not be his, his
brother’s only, and he went into the house of his
brother’s wife, and spilled the seed on the ground, and
he was wicked in the eyes of hWhY, and He slew him.
6 And Yahuḏah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law,
“Remain in your father’s house as a widow till Shĕlah
my son is grown, and I shall give you to him as a wife.”
7 And he grew up, but Bedsu’ĕl, the wife of Yahuḏah,
did not permit her son Shĕlah to marry. And Bedsu’ĕl,
the wife of Yahuḏah, died in the fifth year of this week.
8 And in the sixth year Yahuḏah went up to shear his
sheep at Timnah. And they told Tamar, “See your
father-in-law goes up to Timnah to shear his sheep.”
9 And she put off her widow’s clothes, and put on a
veil, and adorned herself, and sat in the gate bordering
the way to Timnah.
566

JUBILEES

And as Yahuḏah was going along, he found her,
and thought her to be a whore, and he said to her, “Let
me come in unto you.” And she said to him, “Come in.”
And he went in.
11 And she said to him, “Give me my hire.” And he said
to her, “I have naught in my hand except my seal that
is on my finger, and my cord, and my staff which is in
my hand.”
12 And she said to him, “Give them to me until you
send me my hire.” And he said to her, “I shall send to
you a young goat.” And he gave them to her, and she
conceived by him.
13 And Yahuḏah went to his sheep, and she went to
her father’s house.
14 And Yahuḏah sent a young goat by the hand of his
shepherd, an Aḏullamite, but he did not find her, and
he asked the people of the place saying, “Where is the
whore who was here?” And they said to him, “There is
no whore here with us.”
15 And he returned and informed him, and said to him
that he had not found her. “I asked the people of the
place, and they said to me, ‘There is no whore here.’ ”
And he said, “Let her keep them lest we become a
cause of mockery.”
16 And when she had completed three months, it was
revealed that she was with child, and they told
Yahuḏah, saying, “See Tamar, your daughter-in-law,
is with child by whoring.”
17 And Yahuḏah went to the house of her father, and
said to her father and her brothers, “Bring her out, and
let them burn her, for she has wrought uncleanness in
Yisra’ĕl!”
18 And it came to be when they brought her out to burn
her that she sent to her father-in-law the seal and the
cord, and the staff, saying, “Examine whose are these,
for by him I am with child.”
19 And Yahuḏah acknowledged, and said, “Tamar is
more righteous than I am. And therefore let them not
burn her.”
10

567

YOḆELIM

And for that reason she was not given to Shĕlah,
and he did not approach her again.
21 And after that she bore two sons, Perets and Zeraḥ,
in the seventh year of this second week.
22 And after that the seven years of fruitfulness were
accomplished, of which Yosĕph spoke to Pharaoh.
23 And Yahuḏah acknowledged that the deed which
he had done was evil, for he had lain with his daughterin-law, and he reckoned it hateful in his eyes, and he
acknowledged that he had transgressed and gone
astray; for he had uncovered the skirt of his son. And
he began to lament and to plead before hWhY because
of his transgression.
24 And we told him in a dream that it was forgiven him
because he pleaded earnestly, and lamented, and did
not commit it again.
25 And he received forgiveness because he turned
from his sin and from his ignorance, for he
transgressed greatly before our Elohim; and every one
that does so; every one who lies with his mother-inlaw, let them burn him with fire that he may burn
therein, for there is uncleanness and pollution upon
them; with fire let them burn them.
26 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl that
there be no uncleanness among them, for everyone
who lies with his daughter-in law or with his mother-inlaw has wrought uncleanness. Let them burn the man
who has lain with her with fire, and also the woman,
and He shall turn away wrath and punishment from
Yisra’ĕl.
27 And to Yahuḏah we said that his two sons had not
lain with her, and for this reason his seed was
established for a second generation, and would not be
rooted out.
28 For in singleness of eye he had gone and sought
for punishment, namely, according to the right-ruling of
Aḇraham, which he had commanded his sons,
Yahuḏah had sought to burn her with fire.
20

568

JUBILEES

42 And in the first year of the third week of the fortyfifth Yoḇĕl, scarcity of food began to come into the
land, and the rain refused to be given to the earth, for
none whatsoever fell.
2 And the earth grew barren, but in the land of
Mitsrayim there was food, for Yosĕph had gathered the
seed of the land in the seven years of plenty and had
preserved it.
3 And the Mitsrites came to Yosĕph that he might
give them food, and he opened the storehouses where
the grain of the first year was, and he sold it to the
people of the land for gold.
4 And Ya’aqoḇ heard that there was food in
Mitsrayim, and he sent his ten sons that they should
obtain food for him in Mitsrayim, but he did not send
Binyamin. And they arrived among those that went.
5 And Yosĕph recognised them, but they did not
recognise him, and he spoke to them and questioned
them, and he said to them, “Are you not spies, and
have you not come to search out the nakedness of the
land?” And he put them in prison.
6 And after that he released them again, and
detained Shim’on alone and sent off his nine brothers.
7 And he filled their sacks with grain, and he put their
silver in their sacks, and they did not know.
8 And he commanded them to bring their younger
brother, for they had told him their father and their
younger brother were living.
9 And they went up from the land of Mitsrayim and
they came to the land of Kena’an; and they told their
father all that had befallen them, and how the master
of the country had spoken roughly to them, and had
seized Shim’on till they should bring Binyamin.
10 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “You have bereaved me of my
children! Yosĕph is no more and Shim’on also is no
more, and you shall take Binyamin away? Your
wickedness has come upon me!”
11 And he said, “My son shall not go down with you
lest it be he falls sick; for their mother gave birth to two
569

YOḆELIM

sons, and one has perished, and this one also you
shall take from me. If it came to be he took a fever on
the road, you would bring down my old age with sorrow
to the grave.”
12 For he saw that their silver had been returned to
every man in his sack, and for this reason he feared to
send him.
13 And scarcity of food increased and became severe
in the land of Kena’an, and in all lands except in the
land of Mitsrayim, for many of the children of the
Mitsrites had stored up their seed for food from the
time when they saw Yosĕph gathering seed together
and putting it in storehouses and preserving it for the
years of scarcity of food.
14 And on this the people of Mitsrayim fed themselves
during the first year of their scarcity of food.
15 But when Yisra’ĕl saw that scarcity of food was very
severe in the land, and there was no deliverance, he
said to his sons, “Go again, and obtain food for us so
that we do not die.”
16 And they said, “We shall not go. Unless our
youngest brother goes with us, we shall not go.”
17 And Yisra’ĕl saw that if he did not send him with
them, they should all perish by reason of scarcity of
food.
18 And Re’uḇĕn said, “Give him into my hand, and if I
do not bring him back to you, slay my two sons instead
of his being.” But he said to him, “He shall not go with
you.”
19 And Yahuḏah came near and said, “Send him with
me, and if I do not bring him back to you, let me bear
the blame before you all the days of my life.”
20 And he sent him with them in the second year of
this week on the first day of the month. And they came
to the land of Mitsrayim with all those who went, and
presents in their hands: fragrant gum and almonds and
pine nuts and pure honey.
21 And they went and stood before Yosĕph, and he
saw Binyamin his brother, and he recognised him, and
570

JUBILEES

said to them, “Is this your youngest brother?” And they
said to him, “It is he.” And he said, “hWhY show favour
to you, my son!”
22 And he sent him into his house and he brought out
Shim’on to them and he made a feast for them, and
they presented to him the gift which they had brought
in their hands.
23 And they ate before him and he gave them all a
portion, but the portion of Binyamin was seven times
larger than that of any of theirs.
24 And they ate and drank and arose and remained
with their donkeys.
25 And Yosĕph devised a plan whereby he might learn
their thoughts as to whether thoughts of peace
prevailed among them. And he said to the one who
was over his house, “Fill all their sacks with food, and
return their silver to them into their sacks, and my cup,
the silver cup out of which I drink, put it in the sack of
the youngest, and send them away.”

43 And he did as Yosĕph had told him, and filled all
their sacks for them with food and put their silver in
their sacks, and put the cup in Binyamin’s sack.
2 And early in the morning they departed, and it came
to be, that when they had gone from there, Yosĕph
said to the one over his house, “Pursue them, run and
seize them, saying, ‘You have repaid me evil for good!
You have stolen from me the silver cup out of which
my master drinks.’ And bring back to me their youngest
brother, and fetch him quickly before I go out to my
seat of judgment.”
3 And he ran after them and said to them according
to these words.
4 And they said to him, “Elohim forbid that your
servants should do this matter, and steal from the
house of your master any utensil, and also the silver
which we found in our sacks the first time, we, your
servants brought back from the land of Kena’an!
5 “Why then should we steal any utensil? See here
we are and our sacks; search, and wherever you find
571

YOḆELIM

the cup, in the sack of any man amongst us, let him be
slain, and we and our donkeys shall serve your
master.”
6 But he said to them, “Not so, the man with whom I
find, him only shall I take as a servant, and you shall
return in peace to your house.”
7 And as he was searching in their sacks, beginning
with the eldest and ending with the youngest, it was
found in Binyamin’s sack.
8 And they tore their garments, and loaded their
donkeys, and returned to the city and came to the
house of Yosĕph, and they all bowed themselves on
their faces to the ground before him.
9 And Yosĕph said to them, “You have done evil.”
And they said, “What shall we say and how shall we
defend ourselves? Our master has discovered the
transgression of his servants. See, we are the servants
of our master, and our donkeys also.”
10 And Yosĕph said to them, “I too fear HWHY. As for
you, go to your homes and let your brother be my
servant, for you have done evil. Do you not know that
a man delights in his cup as I with this cup? And yet
you have stolen it from me!”
11 And Yahuḏah said, “O my master, let your servant
please speak a word in my master’s ear. Your
servant’s mother bore two brothers to our father; one
went away and was lost, and has not been found, and
he alone is left of his mother, and your servant, our
father loves him, and his life also is bound up with the
life of his.
12 “And it shall come to be, when we go to your
servant our father, and the lad is not with us, that he
shall die, and we shall bring down our father with
sorrow to the grave.
13 “Now rather let me, your servant, remain instead of
the boy as a servant to my master, and let the lad go
with his brothers, for I became surety for him at the
hand of your servant our father, and if I do not bring
572

JUBILEES

him back, your servant shall bear the blame to our
father forever.”
14 And Yosĕph saw that they were all in good accord,
one with another, and he could not refrain himself, and
he told them that he was Yosĕph.
15 And he spoke with them in the Iḇri tongue and fell
on their neck and wept. And they did not know him but
they began to weep.
16 And he said to them, “Do not weep over me, but
hurry and bring my father to me; and you see that it is
my mouth that speaks and the eyes of my brother
Binyamin see.
17 “For look, this is the second year of scarcity of food,
and there are still five years without harvest or fruit of
trees or ploughing.
18 “Come down quickly you and your households, so
that you do not perish through scarcity of food, and do
not be grieved for your possessions, for hWhY sent me
before you to put matters in order that many people
might live.
19 “And tell my father that I am still alive, and you, look,
you see that hWhY has made me as a father to
Pharaoh, and ruler over his house and over all the land
of Mitsrayim.
20 And tell my father of all my esteem, and all the
riches and esteem that hWhY has given Me.”
21 And by the command of the mouth of Pharaoh he
gave them chariots and provisions for the way, and he
gave them all long coats and silver.
22 And to their father he sent garments and silver and
ten donkeys which carried grain, and he sent them
away.
23 And they went up and told their father that Yosĕph
was alive, and was measuring out grain to all the
nations of the earth, and that he was ruler over all the
land of Mitsrayim.
24 And their father did not believe it, for he was beside
himself in his mind. But when he saw the wagons
which Yosĕph had sent, the life of his spirit revived,
573

YOḆELIM

and he said, “It is enough for me if Yosĕph lives! I shall
go down and see him before I die.”

44 And Yisra’ĕl took his journey from Ḥaran from his
house on the new moon of the third month, and he
went on the way of Be’ĕrsheḇa, and he offered an
offering to the Elohim of his father Yitsḥaq on the
seventh of this month.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ remembered the dream that he had
seen at Bĕyth Ĕl, and he feared to go down into
Mitsrayim.
3 And while he was thinking of sending word to
Yosĕph to come to him, and that he would not go
down, he remained there seven days, if it came to be
he should see a vision as to whether he should remain
or go down.
4 And he celebrated the harvest Festival of the FirstFruits with old grain, for in all the land of Kena’an there
was not a handful of seed, for scarcity of food was over
all the beasts and cattle and birds, and also over man.
5 And on the sixteenth hWhY appeared to him, and
said to him, “Ya’aqoḇ, Ya’aqoḇ.” And he said, “Here I
am.” And He said to him, “I am the Elohim of your
fathers, the Elohim of Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq. Do not
fear to go down into Mitsrayim, for there I shall make
you a great nation.
6 “I shall go down with you, and I shall bring you up,
and in this land you shall be buried, and Yosĕph shall
put his hands upon your eyes. Do not fear; go down
into Mitsrayim.”
7 And his sons rose up, and his sons’ sons, and they
placed their father and their possessions upon
wagons.
8 And Yisra’ĕl rose up from Be’ĕrsheḇa on the
sixteenth of this third month, and he went to the land
of Mitsrayim.
9 And Yisra’ĕl sent Yahuḏah before him to his son
Yosĕph to search out the Land of Goshen, for Yosĕph
had told his brothers that they should come and dwell
there that they might be near him.
574

JUBILEES

And this was the choicest in the land of Mitsrayim,
and near to him, for all and also for the cattle.
11 And these are the names of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
who went into Mitsrayim with Ya’aqoḇ their father:
12 Re’uḇĕn, the first-born of Yisra’ĕl; and these are the
names of his sons: Ḥanoḵ, and Pallu, and Ḥetsron and
Karmi - five.
13 Shim’on and his sons; and these are the names of
his sons: Yemu’ĕl, and Yamin, and Ohaḏ, and Yaḵin,
and Tsoḥar, and Sha’ul, the son of the Tsephathite
woman - seven.
14 Lĕwi and his sons; and these are the names of his
sons: Gĕreshon, and Qehath, and Merari - four.
15 Yahuḏah and his sons; and these are the names of
his sons: Shĕlah, and Perets, and Zeraḥ - four.
16 Yissasḵar and his sons; and these are the names
of his sons: Tola, and Puw’ah, and Yashuḇ, and
Shimron - five.
17 Zeḇulun and his sons; and these are the names of
his sons: Sereḏ, and Ĕlon, and Yaḥle’ĕl - four.
18 And these are the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and their sons,
whom Lĕ’ah bore to Ya’aqoḇ in Aram-Naharayim, six,
and their one sister, Dinah. And all the beings of the
sons of Lĕ’ah, and their sons, who went with Ya’aqoḇ
their father into Mitsrayim, were twenty-nine, and
Ya’aqoḇ their father being with them, they were thirty.
19 And the sons of Zilpah, Lĕ’ah’s female servant, the
wife of Ya’aqoḇ, whom she bore unto Ya’aqoḇ, Gaḏ
and Ashĕr.
20 And these are the names of their sons who went
with him into Mitsrayim: the sons of Gaḏ: Tsiphyon,
and Ḥaggi, and Shuni, and Etsbon, and Ĕri and Arĕli,
and Aroḏi - eight.
21 And the sons of Ashĕr: Yimnah, and Yishwah, and
Yishwi, and Beri’ah, and Seraḥ, their one sister - six.
22 All the beings were fourteen, and all those of Lĕ’ah
were forty-four.
23 And the sons of Raḥĕl, the wife of Ya’aqoḇ: Yosĕph
and Binyamin.
10

575

YOḆELIM

And there were born to Yosĕph in Mitsrayim before
his father came into Mitsrayim, those whom Asenath,
daughter of Potiphar priest of On bore to him:
Menashsheh, and Ephrayim - three.
25 And the sons of Binyamin: Bela and Beḵer, and
Ashbĕl, Gera, and Na’aman, and Ĕḥi, and Rosh, and
Muppim, and Ḥuppim, and Ard - eleven.
26 And all the beings of Raḥĕl were fourteen.
27 And the sons of Bilhah, the female servant of
Raḥĕl, the wife of Ya’aqoḇ, whom she bore to Ya’aqoḇ,
were Dan and Naphtali.
28 And these are the names of their sons who went
with them into Mitsrayim. And the sons of Dan were
Ḥushim, and Samon, and Asuḏi, and lyakah, and
Salomon - six.
29 And they died the year in which they entered into
Mitsrayim, and there was left to Dan, Ḥushim alone.
30 And these are the names of the sons of Naphtali:
Yaḥtsi’ĕl, and Guni, and Yĕtser, and Shallum, and Iw.
31 And Iw, who was born after the years of scarcity of
food, died in Mitsrayim.
32 And all the beings of Raḥĕl were twenty-six.
33 And all the beings of Ya’aqoḇ which went into
Mitsrayim were seventy beings. These are his children
and his children’s children, in all seventy; but five died
in Mitsrayim before Yosĕph, and had no children.
34 And in the land of Kena’an two sons of Yahuḏah
died, Ĕr and Onan, and they had no children, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl buried those who perished, and
they were reckoned among the seventy gentile
nations.
24

45 And Yisra’ĕl went into the country of Mitsrayim,
into the land of Goshen, on the new moon of the fourth
month, in the second year of the third week of the fortyfifth Yoḇĕl.
2 And Yosĕph went to meet his father Ya’aqoḇ, to the
land of Goshen, and he fell on his father’s neck and
wept.
576

JUBILEES

And Yisra’ĕl said to Yosĕph, “Now let me die since
I have seen you, and now may hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
be baruḵ, the Elohim of Aḇraham and the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq who has not withheld His kindness and His
favour from His servant Ya’aqoḇ.
4 “It is enough for me that I have seen your face while
I am still alive. Also, the vision is true which I saw at
Bĕyth Ĕl. Baruḵ be hWhY my Elohim forever and ever,
and baruḵ be His Name!”
5 And Yosĕph and his brothers ate bread before their
father and drank wine, and Ya’aqoḇ rejoiced with
exceedingly great joy because he saw Yosĕph eating
with his brothers and drinking before him, and he baraḵ
the Creator of all matters who had preserved him, and
had preserved for him his twelve sons.
6 And Yosĕph had given as a gift to his father and to
his brothers, the right of dwelling in the land of Goshen
and in Ra’amses and all the region round about, which
he ruled over before Pharaoh. And Yisra’ĕl and his
sons dwelt in the land of Goshen, the best part of the
land of Mitsrayim. And Yisra’ĕl was one hundred and
thirty years old when he came into Mitsrayim.
7 And Yosĕph provided his father and his brothers
and also their possessions with bread; as much as
they required for the seven years of scarcity of food.
8 And the land of Mitsrayim suffered by reason of
scarcity of food, and Yosĕph acquired all the land of
Mitsrayim for Pharaoh in return for food, and he got
possession of the people and their cattle and all for
Pharaoh.
9 And the years of scarcity
of food were
accomplished, and Yosĕph gave to the people in the
land seed and food that they might sow in the eighth
year, for the river had overflowed all the land of
Mitsrayim.
10 For in the seven years of scarcity of food it had not
overflowed and had watered only a few places on the
banks of the river, but now it overflowed and the
3

577

YOḆELIM

Mitsrites sowed the land, and it bore much grain that
year.
11 And this was the first year of the fourth week of the
forty-fifth Yoḇĕl.
12 And Yosĕph took of the grain of the harvest the fifth
part for the sovereign and left four parts for them for
food and for seed, and Yosĕph made it a law for the
land of Mitsrayim until this day.
13 And Yisra’ĕl lived in the land of Mitsrayim
seventeen years, and all the days which he lived were
three Yoḇelim, one hundred and forty-seven years,
and he died in the fourth year of the fifth week of the
forty-fifth Yoḇĕl.
14 And Yisra’ĕl baraḵ his sons before he died and told
them all that would befall them in the land of Mitsrayim;
and he made known to them what would come upon
them in the last days, and baraḵ them and gave to
Yosĕph two portions in the land.
15 And he slept with his fathers, and he was buried in
the cave of Maḵpĕlah in the land of Kena’an, near
Aḇraham his father in the grave which he dug for
himself in the cave of Maḵpĕlah in the land of Ḥeḇron.
16 And he gave all his books and the books of his
fathers to Lĕwi his son that he might preserve them
and renew them for his children until this day.

46 And it came to be that after Ya’aqoḇ died, the
children of Yisra’ĕl multiplied in the land of Mitsrayim,
and they became a great nation, and they were of one
accord in heart, so that brother loved brother and every
man helped his brother, and they increased
abundantly and multiplied exceedingly, ten weeks of
years, all the days of the life of Yosĕph.
2 And there was no adversary nor any evil all the
days of the life of Yosĕph which he lived after his father
Ya’aqoḇ, for all the Mitsrites honoured the children of
Yisra’ĕl all the days of the life of Yosĕph.
3 And Yosĕph died, being a hundred and ten years
old. He lived seventeen years in the land of Kena’an,
and ten years he was a servant, and three years in
578

JUBILEES

prison, and eighty years he was under the sovereign,
ruling all the land of Mitsrayim.
4 And he died and all his brothers and all that
generation.
5 And he commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl before
he died, that they should carry his bones with them
when they went out from the land of Mitsrayim.
6 And he made them swear regarding his bones, for
he knew that the Mitsrites would not again take and
bury him in the land of Kena’an, for Maḵamaran,
sovereign of Kena’an, while dwelling in the land of
Ashshur, fought in the valley with the sovereign of
Mitsrayim and slew him there, and pursued after the
Mitsrites to the gates of Ĕrmon.
7 But he was not able to enter, for another, a new
sovereign, had become sovereign of Mitsrayim, and he
was stronger than he, and he returned to the land of
Kena’an, and the gates of Mitsrayim were closed, and
none went out and none came into Mitsrayim.
8 And Yosĕph died in the forty-sixth Yoḇĕl, in the
sixth week, in the second year, and they buried him in
the land of Mitsrayim, and his brothers died after him.
9 And the sovereign of Mitsrayim went out to battle
with the sovereign of Kena’an in the forty-seventh
Yoḇĕl, in the second week in the second year, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl brought out all the bones of the
children of Ya’aqoḇ except the bones of Yosĕph, and
they buried them in the field in the cave of Maḵpĕlah in
the mountain.
10 And the majority returned to Mitsrayim, but a few of
them remained in the mountains of Ḥeḇron, and
Amram your father remained with them.
11 And the sovereign of Kena’an was victorious over
the sovereign of Mitsrayim, and he closed the gates of
Mitsrayim.
12 And he devised an evil plan against the children of
Yisra’ĕl of afflicting them; and he said to the people of
Mitsrayim,
579

YOḆELIM

“See the people of the children of Yisra’ĕl have
increased and multiplied more than we. Come and let
us deal wisely with them before they become too
many, and let us afflict them with slavery before battle
comes upon us and before they also fight against us.
Maybe they shall join themselves with our enemies
and go up out of our land, for their hearts and faces
are towards the land of Kena’an.”
14 And he appointed over them slave-masters to afflict
them with slavery; and they built strong cities for
Pharaoh - Pithom and Ra’amses, and they built all the
walls and all the fortifications which had fallen in the
cities of Mitsrayim.
15 And they made them serve with harshness, and the
more they dealt evilly with them, the more they
increased and multiplied.
16 And the people of Mitsrayim loathed the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
13

47 And in the seventh week, in the seventh year, in
the forty-seventh Yoḇĕl, your father went out from the
land of Kena’an, and you were born in the fourth week,
in the sixth year, in the forty-eighth Yoḇĕl; this was the
time of tribulation on the children of Yisra’ĕl.
2 And Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim, issued a
command regarding them that they should throw all
their male children which were born into the river.
3 And for seven months they threw them in until the
day that you were born. And your mother hid you for
three months, and they informed regarding her.
4 But she made an ark for you, and covered it with
pitch and asphalt, and placed it in the reeds on the
bank of the river, and she placed you in it seven days.
And your mother came by night and nursed you, and
by day Miryam, your sister, guarded you from the birds.
5 And in those days Tharmuth, the daughter of
Pharaoh, came to bathe in the river, and she heard
your voice crying, and she told her female servants to
bring you out, and they brought you to her.
580

JUBILEES

And she took you out of the ark, and she had
compassion on you.
7 And your sister said to her, “Shall I go and call to
you one of the Iḇri women to nurse and suckle this
infant for you?” And she said, “Go.”
8 And she went and called your mother Yoḵeḇeḏ,
and she gave her wages, and she nursed you.
9 And afterwards, when you were grown up, they
brought you to the daughter of Pharaoh, and you
became her son. And Amram your father taught you
writing, and after you had completed three weeks they
brought you into the royal court,
10 and you were three weeks of years at court until the
time when you went out from the royal court and saw
a Mitsrite smiting your friend who was of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and you slew him and hid him in the sand.
11 And on the second day you found two of the
children of Yisra’ĕl striving together, and you said to
him who was doing the wrong, “Why do you smite your
brother?”
12 And he was wroth and displeased, and said, “Who
made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you think
to kill me as you killed the Mitsrite yesterday?” And you
feared and fled on account of these words.
6

48 And in the sixth year of the third week of the fortyninth Yoḇĕl you departed and dwelt in the land of
Miḏyan five weeks and one year. And you returned to
Mitsrayim in the second week in the second year in the
fiftieth Yoḇĕl.
2 And you, yourself know what He spoke to you on
Mount Sinai, and what prince Mastĕma desired to do
with you when you were returning into Mitsrayim on the
way when you met him at the lodging-place.
3 Did he not with all his power seek to slay you and
deliver the Mitsrites out of your hand when he saw that
you were sent to execute right-ruling and vengeance
on the Mitsrites?
4 And I delivered you out of his hand, and you
performed the signs and wonders which you were sent
581

YOḆELIM

to perform in Mitsrayim against Pharaoh, and against
all his house, and against his servants and his people.
5 And hWhY executed a vengeance on them for
Yisra’ĕl’s sake, and smote them through blood and
frogs, gnats and dog-flies, and evil boils breaking out
in sores; and their cattle by death; and by hail-stones.
By these He destroyed all that grew for them; and by
locusts which devoured the remnant which had been
left by the hail, and by darkness; and of the first-born
of men and beasts, and on all their idols hWhY took
vengeance and burned them with fire.
6 And all was sent through your hand, that you should
declare these words before they were done, and you
spoke with the sovereign of Mitsrayim before all his
servants and before his people.
7 And all took place according to your words; ten
great and terrible judgments came on the land of
Mitsrayim that you might execute vengeance on it for
Yisra’ĕl.
8 And hWhY did all for Yisra’ĕl’s sake, and according
to His Covenant, which He had ordained with Aḇraham
that He would take vengeance on them as they had
brought them by force into bondage.
9 And the prince of Mastĕma stood up against you,
and sought to cast you into the hands of Pharaoh, and
he helped the Mitsrite magicians, and they stood up
and wrought before you.
10 The evils indeed we permitted them to work, but the
remedies we did not allow to be wrought by their
hands.
11 And hWhY smote them with evil sores, and they
were not able to stand for we destroyed them so that
they could not perform a single sign.
12 But despite all signs and wonders, the prince of
Mastĕma was not put to shame, because he
strengthened himself and cried to the Mitsrites to
pursue after you with all the powers of the Mitsrites,
with their chariots, and with their horses, and with all
the hosts of the peoples of Mitsrayim.
582

JUBILEES

And I stood between the Mitsrites and Yisra’ĕl, and
we delivered Yisra’ĕl out of his hand, and out of the
hand of his people, and hWhY brought them through
the midst of the sea as if it were dry land.
14 And all the peoples whom he brought to pursue
after Yisra’ĕl, hWhY our Elohim threw them into the
midst of the sea, into the depths of the abyss beneath
the children of Yisra’ĕl, even as the people of
Mitsrayim had thrown their children into the river. He
took vengeance on one million of them, and one
thousand strong and energetic men were destroyed on
account of one nursing child of the children of your
people which they had thrown into the river.
15 And on the fourteenth day and on the fifteenth and
on the sixteenth and on the seventeenth and on the
eighteenth, the prince of Mastĕma was bound and
imprisoned behind the children of Yisra’ĕl that he might
not accuse them.
16 And on the nineteenth we let them loose that they
might help the Mitsrites and pursue the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
17 And He hardened their hearts and made them
stubborn, and the plan was devised by hWhY our
Elohim that He might smite the Mitsrites and cast them
into the sea.
18 And on the fourteenth we bound him that he might
not accuse the children of Yisra’ĕl on the day when
they asked the Mitsrites for goods and garments;
objects of silver, and objects of gold, and objects of
bronze, in order to plunder the Mitsrites in return for
the bondage in which they had forced them to serve.
19 And we did not lead out the children of Yisra’ĕl from
Mitsrayim empty-handed.
13

49

Remember the Command which hWhY
commanded you concerning the Pesaḥ, that you
should celebrate it in its season on the fourteenth of
the first month, that you should kill it before it is
evening, and that they should eat it by night in the
evening, from the time of the setting of the sun.
583

YOḆELIM

For on this night - the beginning of the Festival and
the beginning of the joy - you were eating the Pesaḥ in
Mitsrayim, when all the powers of Mastĕma had been
let loose to slay all the first-born in the land of
Mitsrayim - from the first-born of Pharaoh to the firstborn of the captive female servant in the mill, and to
the cattle.
3 And this is the sign which hWhY gave them: Into
every house on the lintels of which they saw the blood
of a lamb of the first year, they should not enter into
that house to slay, but should pass by, that all those
should be saved that were in the house because the
sign of the blood was on its lintels.
4 And the powers of hWhY did all accordingly as hWhY
commanded them, and they passed over all the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and the plague did not come upon
them to destroy from among them any being, either
cattle, or man, or dog.
5 And the plague was very grievous in Mitsrayim, and
there was no house in Mitsrayim where there was not
one dead, and weeping and lamentation.
6 And all Yisra’ĕl were eating the flesh of the Pesaḥ
lamb, and drinking the wine, and were praising and
beraḵah, and giving thanks to hWhY Elohim of their
fathers, and were ready to go out from under the yoke
of Mitsrayim; and from the evil bondage.
7 And remember this day all the days of your life, and
observe it from year to year all the days of your life,
once a year, on its day, according to all the Law
thereof, and do not turn away from day to day, or from
month to month.
8 For it is an everlasting Law, and engraved on the
tablets of the shamayim regarding all the children of
Yisra’ĕl that they should observe it every year on its
day once a year, throughout all their generations; and
there is no limit of days, for this is ordained forever.
9 And the man who is free from uncleanness, and
does not come to observe it on occasion of its day, so
as to bring an acceptable offering before hWhY, and to
2

584

JUBILEES

eat and to drink before hWhY on the day of its Festival,
that man who is clean and close at hand shall be cut
off; because he did not offer the offering of hWhY in its
appointed time, his guilt is upon him.
10 Let the children of Yisra’ĕl come and observe the
Pesaḥ on the day of its appointed time, on the
fourteenth day of the first month, between the
evenings, from the third part of the day to the third part
of the night, for two portions of the day are given to the
light, and a third part to the evening.
11 This is that which hWhY commanded you that you
should observe it between the evenings.
12 And it is not permissible to slay it during any period
of the light, but during the period bordering on the
evening, and let them eat it at the time of the evening
until the third part of the night, and whatever is left over
of all its flesh from the third part of the night and
onwards, let them burn it with fire.
13 And they shall not boil it with water, nor shall they
eat it raw, but roasted on the fire: they shall eat it with
diligence, its head with its inward parts and its legs
they shall roast with fire, and not break any of its
bones; for of the children of Yisra’ĕl no bone shall be
crushed.
14 For this reason hWhY commanded the children of
Yisra’ĕl to observe the Pesaḥ on the day of its fixed
time, and they shall not break its bone; for it is a
Festival day, and a day commanded, and there may
be no passing over from day to day, and month to
month, but on the day of its Festival let it be observed.
15 And you shall command the children of Yisra’ĕl to
observe the Pesaḥ throughout their days, every year,
once a year on the day of its fixed time, and it shall
become a memorial well pleasing before hWhY, and no
plague shall come upon them to slay or to smite in that
year in which they celebrate the Pesaḥ in its season in
every respect according to His command.
16 And they shall not eat it outside the Miqdash of
hWhY, but before the Miqdash of hWhY, and all the
585

YOḆELIM

people of the congregation of Yisra’ĕl shall celebrate it
in its appointed season.
17 And every man who has come upon its day shall
eat it in the Miqdash of your Elohim, before hWhY; from
twenty years old and upward; for so is it written and
ordained that they should eat it in the Miqdash of
hWhY.
18 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl come into the land
which they are to possess, into the land of Kena’an,
and put up the Mishkan of hWhY in the midst of the land
in one of their tribes until the Miqdash of hWhY has
been built in the land, let them come and celebrate the
Pesaḥ in the midst of the Mishkan of hWhY, and let
them slaughter it before hWhY from year to year.
19 And in the days when the House has been built in
the Name of hWhY in the land of their inheritance, they
shall go there and slaughter the Pesaḥ in the evening,
at sunset, at the third part of the day.
20 And they shall offer its blood on the threshold of the
altar, and shall place its fat on the fire which is upon
the altar, and they shall eat its flesh roasted with fire in
the court of the House which has been qadosh in the
Name of hWhY.
21 And they may not celebrate the Pesaḥ in their
cities, nor in any place except before the Mishkan of
hWhY, or before His House where His Name has dwelt;
and they shall not go astray from hWhY.
22 And you, Mosheh, shall command the children of
Yisra’ĕl to observe the Laws of the Pesaḥ, as it was
commanded to you. You declare to them every year
the Festival of Matstsoth, that they should eat
unleavened bread seven days, and that they should
observe its Festival, and that they bring an offering
every day during those seven days of joy before hWhY
on the altar of your Elohim.
23 For you celebrated this Festival with haste when
you went out from Mitsrayim till you entered into the
wilderness of Shur; for on the shore of the sea you
completed it.
586

JUBILEES

50 And after this Law I made known to you the days
of the Shabbathoth in the wilderness of Sin, which is
between Ĕlim and Sinai.
2 And I told you of the Shabbathoth of the land on
Mount Sinai, and I told you of the Yoḇĕl years in the
Shabbathoth of years: but the year thereof I have not
told you till you enter the land which you are to
possess.
3 And the land also shall keep its Shabbathoth while
they dwell upon it, and they shall know the Yoḇĕl year.
4 Therefore I have ordained for you the yearly
Shabbathoth and the years and the Yoḇelim: there are
forty-nine Yoḇelim from the days of Aḏam until this
day, and one week and two years, and there are still
forty years to come for learning the Commands of
hWhY, until they pass over into the land of Kena’an,
crossing the Yardĕn to the west.
5 And the Yoḇelim shall pass by, until Yisra’ĕl is
cleansed from all guilt of whoring, and uncleanness,
and defilement, and sin, and straying, and dwell with
confidence in all the land. And there shall no longer be
an adversary or any evil one, and the land shall be
clean from that time, forever.
6 And
see, the Command regarding the
Shabbathoth, I have written down for you and all the
Right-Rulings of its Laws.
7 Six days you shall labour, but on the seventh day is
the Shabbath of hWhY your Elohim. In it you shall do
no manner of work, you and your sons, and your male
servants and your female servants, and all your cattle
and the sojourner also who is with you.
8 And the man that does any work on it shall die.
Whoever profanes that day, whoever lies with his wife
or whoever says he shall do whatever on it - that he
shall depart on a journey thereon in regard to any
buying or selling - and whoever draws water thereon
which he had not prepared for himself on the sixth day,
and whoever takes up any burden to carry it out of his
tent or out of his house shall die.
587

YOḆELIM

You shall do no work whatever on the Shabbath
day except what you have prepared for yourselves on
the sixth day, so as to eat, and drink, and rest, and
guard the Shabbath from all work on that day, and to
baraḵ hWhY your Elohim, who has given you a day of
Festival, and a qodesh day, and a day of the qodesh
reign for all Yisra’ĕl is this day among their days
forever.
10 For great is the honour which hWhY has given to
Yisra’ĕl that they should eat and drink and be satisfied
on this Festival day, and rest thereon from all labour
which belongs to the labour of the children of men,
except burning frankincense and bringing offerings
and slaughterings before hWhY for days and for
Shabbathoth.
11 This work alone shall be done on the Shabbathdays in the Miqdash of hWhY your Elohim; that they
may atone for Yisra’ĕl with offering continually from
day to day for a memorial well-pleasing before hWhY,
and that He may receive them always from day to day
accordingly as you have been commanded.
12 And every man who does any work thereon, or
goes a journey, or tills his field, whether in his house
or any other place, and whoever lights a fire, or rides
on any beast, or travels by ship on the sea, and
whoever smites or kills whatever, or slaughters a beast
or a bird, or whoever catches an animal or a bird or a
fish, or whoever fasts or goes to battle on the
Shabbathoth:
13 The man who does any of these matters on the
Shabbath shall die, so that the children of Yisra’ĕl shall
observe the Shabbathoth according to the Commands
regarding the Shabbathoth of the land, as it is written
in the tablets, which He gave into my hands that I
should write out for you the laws of the seasons, and
the seasons according to the division of their days.
Thus is completed the account of the division of the
days.
9

588

JASHER

YASHAR
‫ ישר‬RvY

1 And Elohim said, “Let Us make man in Our image,
after Our likeness.” And Elohim created man in His
Own image.
2 And Elohim formed man from the ground, and He
blew into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living being endowed with speech.
3 And HWHY said, “It is not good for man to be alone;
I will make a helper for him.”
4 And HWHY caused a deep sleep to fall upon Aḏam,
and he slept, and He took away one of his ribs, and He
built flesh upon it, and formed it and brought it to Aḏam,
and Aḏam awoke from his sleep, and see, a woman
was standing before him.
5 And he said, “This is a bone of my bones and it shall
be called woman, for this has been taken from man.”
And Aḏam called her name Ḥawwah, for she was the
mother of all living.
6 And Elohim baraḵ them and called their names
Aḏam and Ḥawwah in the day that He created them,
and HWHY Elohim said, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill
the earth.”
7 And HWHY Elohim took Aḏam and his wife, and He
placed them in the garden of Ĕḏen to tend it and to
keep it; and He commanded them and said to them,
“From every tree of the garden you may eat, but from
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall
not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall
certainly die.”
8 And when Elohim had baraḵ and commanded
them, He went from them, and Aḏam and his wife dwelt
in the garden according to the Command which HWHY
commanded them.
589

YASHAR

And the serpent, which Elohim had created with
them in the earth, came to them to incite them to
transgress the Command of Elohim which he had
commanded them.
10 And the serpent enticed and persuaded the woman
to eat from the tree of knowledge, and the woman
listened to the voice of the serpent, and she
transgressed the Word of Elohim, and took from the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and she ate,
and she took from it and also gave to her husband and
he ate.
11 And Aḏam and his wife transgressed the Command
of Elohim which He commanded them, and Elohim
knew it, and His wrath was kindled against them and
He cursed them.
12 And HWHY Elohim drove them that day from the
garden of Ĕḏen, to till the ground from which they were
taken, and they went and dwelt to the east of the
garden of Ĕḏen. And Aḏam knew his wife Ḥawwah and
she bore two sons and three daughters.
13 And she called the name of the first-born Qayin,
saying, “I have gotten a man from HWHY.” And the
name of the other she called Heḇel, for she said, “In
worthlessness we came into the earth, and in
worthlessness we shall be taken from it.”
14 And the boys grew up and their father gave them a
possession in the land; and Qayin was a tiller of the
ground, and Heḇel a keeper of sheep.
15 And it came to be at the passing of a few years, that
they brought an approximating offering to HWHY, and
Qayin brought from the fruit of the ground, and Heḇel
brought from the firstlings of his flock, from the fat of it,
and Elohim turned and inclined to Heḇel and his
offering, and a fire came down from HWHY from the
shamayim and consumed it.
16 And HWHY did not turn to Qayin and his offering,
and He did not incline to it, for he had brought from the
9

590

JASHER

inferior fruit of the ground before HWHY, and Qayin was
jealous against his brother Heḇel because of this, and
he sought a pretense to slay him.
17 And in some time after, Qayin and Heḇel his
brother, went one day into the field to do their work;
and they were both in the field, Qayin tilling and
ploughing his ground, and Heḇel feeding his flock. And
the flock passed over that part which Qayin had
ploughed in the ground, and for this it bitterly grieved
Qayin.
18 And Qayin approached his brother Heḇel in wrath,
and he said to him, “What is there between you and I,
that you come to dwell and bring your flock to feed in
my land?”
19 And Heḇel answered his brother Qayin and said to
him, “What is there between you and I, that you should
eat the flesh of my flock and clothe yourself with their
wool?
20 “And now therefore, put off the wool of my sheep
with which you have clothed yourself, and recompense
me for their increase and flesh which you have eaten,
and when you shall have done this, I will then go from
your land as you have said.”
21 And Qayin said to his brother Heḇel, “Indeed if I
slay you this day, who will require your blood from
me?”
22 And Heḇel answered Qayin, saying, “Indeed
Elohim who has made us in the earth, He will avenge
my cause, and He will require my blood from you
should you slay me, for HWHY is the Judge and
Authority, and it is He who will repay man according to
his evil, and the wicked man according to the
wickedness that he may do upon earth.
23 “And now, if you should slay me here, indeed
Elohim knows your secret thoughts, and will judge you
for the evil which you declared to do to me this day.”
591

YASHAR

And when Qayin heard the words which Heḇel his
brother had spoken, see, the wrath of Qayin was
kindled against his brother Heḇel for declaring this
word.
25 And Qayin hastened and rose up, and took the iron
part of his ploughing instrument, with which he
suddenly smote his brother and he slew him, and
Qayin spilled the blood of his brother Heḇel upon the
earth, and the blood of Heḇel streamed upon the earth
before the flock.
26 And after this Qayin repented having slain his
brother, and he was sadly grieved, and he wept over
him and it troubled him exceedingly.
27 And Qayin rose up and dug a hole in the field,
wherein he put his brother’s body, and he turned the
dust over it.
28 And HWHY knew what Qayin had done to his
brother, and HWHY appeared to Qayin and said to him,
“Where is Heḇel your brother that was with you?”
29 And Qayin pretended, and said, “I do not know, am
I my brother’s keeper?” And HWHY said to him, “What
have you done? The voice of your brother’s blood cries
to Me from the ground where you have slain him.
30 “For you have slain your brother and have
pretended before Me, and thought in your heart that I
did not see you, nor knew all your actions.
31 “But you did this matter and slew your brother for
naught but because he spoke rightly to you. And now,
therefore, cursed are you from the ground which
opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from
your hand, and wherein you buried him.
32 “And it shall be when you shall till it, it shall no more
give you its strength as in the beginning, for the ground
shall produce thorns and thistles, and you shall be
moving and wandering in the earth until the day of your
death.”
24

592

JASHER

And at that time Qayin went out from the presence
of HWHY, from the place where he was, and he went
moving and wandering in the land toward the east of
Ĕḏen, he and all belonging to him.
34 And Qayin knew his wife in those days, and she
conceived and bore a son, and he called his name
Ḥanoḵ, saying, “In that time HWHY began to give him
rest and quiet in the earth.”
35 And at that time Qayin also began to build a city:
and he built the city and he called the name of the city
Ḥanoḵ, according to the name of his son; for in those
days HWHY had given him rest upon the earth, and he
did not move about and wander as in the beginning.
36 And Iraḏ was born to Ḥanoḵ, and Iraḏ brought forth
Meḥuya’ĕl and Meḥuya’ĕl brought forth Methusa’ĕl.
33

2 And it came to be in the hundred and thirtieth year
of the life of Aḏam upon the earth, that he again knew
Ḥawwah his wife, and she conceived and bore a son
in his likeness and in his image, and she called his
name Shĕth, saying, “Because Elohim has appointed
me another seed in the place of Heḇel, for Qayin has
slain him.”
2 And Shĕth lived one hundred and five years, and
he brought forth a son; and Shĕth called the name of
his son Enosh, saying, “Because in that time the sons
of men began to multiply, and to afflict their beings and
hearts by transgressing and rebelling against Elohim.”
3 And it came to be in the days of Enosh that the sons
of men continued to rebel and transgress against
Elohim, to increase the wrath of HWHY against the sons
of men.
4 And the sons of men went and they served other
mighty ones, and they forgot HWHY who had created
them in the earth. And in those days the sons of men
made images of brass and iron, wood and stone, and
they bowed down and served them.
593

YASHAR

And every man made his mighty one and they
bowed down to them, and the sons of men forsook
HWHY all the days of Enosh and his children; and the
wrath of HWHY was kindled because of their works and
abominations which they did in the earth.
6 And HWHY caused the waters of the river Giḥon to
overwhelm them, and He destroyed and consumed
them, and He destroyed the third part of the earth,
however, the sons of men did not turn from their evil
ways, and their hands were yet extended to do evil in
the sight of HWHY.
7 And in those days there was neither sowing nor
reaping in the earth; and there was no food for the sons
of men and the scarcity of food was very great in those
days.
8 And the seed which they sowed in those days in the
ground became thorns, thistles and briers; for from the
days of Aḏam was this declaration concerning the
earth, of the curse of Elohim, which He cursed the
earth, because of the sin which Aḏam sinned before
HWHY.
9 And it came to be when men continued to rebel and
transgress against Elohim, and to corrupt their ways,
that the earth also became corrupt.
10 And Enosh lived ninety years and he brought forth
Qĕynan;
11 And Qĕynan grew up and he was forty years old,
and he became wise and had knowledge and skill in
all wisdom, and he reigned over all the sons of men,
and he led the sons of men to wisdom and knowledge;
for Qĕynan was a very wise man and had
understanding in all wisdom, and with his wisdom he
ruled over spirits and demons.
12 And Qĕynan knew by his wisdom that Elohim would
destroy the sons of men for having sinned upon earth,
and that HWHY would in the latter days, bring the waters
of the flood upon them.
5

594

JASHER

And in those days Qĕynan wrote on tablets of
stone, what was to take place in time to come, and he
put them in his treasures.
14 And Qĕynan reigned over the whole earth, and he
turned some of the sons of men to the service of
Elohim.
15 And when Qĕynan was seventy years old, he
brought forth three sons and two daughters.
16 And these are the names of the children of Qĕynan;
the name of the first-born Mahalal’ĕl, the second
Ĕynan, and the third Mereḏ, and their sisters were
Aḏah and Tsillah; these are the five children of Qĕynan
that were born to him.
17 And Lemeḵ, son of Methusa’ĕl, became related to
Qĕynan by marriage, and he took his two daughters
for his wives, and Aḏah conceived and bore a son to
Lemeḵ, and she called his name Yaḇal.
18 And she again conceived and bore a son, and
called his name Yuḇal; and Tsillah, her sister, was
barren in those days and had no offspring.
19 For in those days the sons of men began to
trespass against Elohim, and to transgress the
Commandments which he had commanded to Aḏam,
to be fruitful and multiply in the earth.
20 And some of the sons of men caused their wives to
drink a potion that would render them barren, in order
that they might retain their figures and whereby their
good-looking appearance might not fade.
21 And when the sons of men caused some of their
wives to drink, Tsillah drank with them.
22 And
the
child-bearing
women
appeared
abominable in the sight of their husbands as widows,
while their husbands lived, for to the barren ones only
they were attached.
23 And in the end of days and years, when Tsillah
became old, HWHY opened her womb.
13

595

YASHAR

And she conceived and bore a son and she called
his name Tuḇal-Qayin, saying, “After I had withered
away have I obtained him from the Almighty Elohim.”
25 And she conceived again and bore a daughter, and
she called her name Na’amah, for she said, “After I had
withered away have I obtained pleasure and delight.”
26 And Lemeḵ was old and advanced in years, and his
eyes were dim that he could not see, and Tuḇal-Qayin,
his son, was leading him. And it came to be one day
that Lemeḵ went into the field and Tuḇal-Qayin his son
was with him. And while they were walking in the field,
Qayin son of Aḏam advanced towards them; for
Lemeḵ was very old and could not see much, and
Tuḇal-Qayin his son was very young.
27 And Tuḇal-Qayin told his father to draw his bow,
and with the arrows he smote Qayin, who was yet far
off, and he slew him, for he appeared to them to be a
beast.
28 And the arrows entered Qayin’s body although he
was distant from them, and he fell to the ground and
died.
29 And HWHY repaid Qayin’s evil according to his
wickedness, which he had done to his brother Heḇel,
according to the word of HWHY which He had spoken.
30 And it came to be when Qayin had died, that Lemeḵ
and Tuḇal went to see the beast which they had slain,
and they looked, and see, Qayin their grandfather was
fallen dead upon the earth.
31 And Lemeḵ was very much grieved at having done
this, and in clapping his hands together he struck his
son and caused his death.
32 And the wives of Lemeḵ heard what Lemeḵ had
done, and they sought to kill him.
33 And the wives of Lemeḵ hated him from that day,
because he slew Qayin and Tuḇal-Qayin, and the
wives of Lemeḵ separated from him, and would not
listen to him in those days.
24

596

JASHER

And Lemeḵ came to his wives, and he pressed
them to listen to him about this matter.
35 And he said to his wives Aḏah and Tsillah, “Hear
my voice O wives of Lemeḵ, attend to my words, for
now you have thought and said that I slew a man with
my wounds, and a child with my stripes for their having
done no violence, but know that I am indeed old and
grey-headed, and that my eyes are heavy through age,
and I did this matter unknowingly.”
36 And the wives of Lemeḵ listened to him in this
matter, and they returned to him with the advice of their
father Aḏam, but they bore no children to him from that
time, knowing that Elohim’s wrath was increasing in
those days against the sons of men, to destroy them
with the waters of the flood for their evil-doings.
37 And Mahalal’ĕl son of Qĕynan lived sixty-five years
and he brought forth Yereḏ; and Yereḏ lived sixty-two
years and he brought forth Ḥanoḵ.
34

3 And Ḥanoḵ lived sixty-five years and he brought
forth Methushelaḥ; and Ḥanoḵ walked with Elohim
after having brought forth Methushelaḥ, and he served
HWHY, and despised the evil ways of men.
2 And the being of Ḥanoḵ was bound up in the
instruction of HWHY, in knowledge and in
understanding; and he wisely retired from the sons of
men, and hid himself from them for many days.
3 And it came to be at the passing of many years,
while he was serving HWHY, and praying before Him in
his house, that a messenger of HWHY called to him
from the shamayim, and he said, “Here I am.”
4 And he said, “Rise, go out from your house and
from the place where you hide yourself, and appear to
the sons of men, in order that you may teach them the
Way in which they should go and the work which they
must accomplish to enter in the Ways of Elohim.”
597

YASHAR

And Ḥanoḵ rose up according to the word of HWHY,
and went out from his house, from his place and from
the chamber in which he was concealed; and he went
to the sons of men and taught them the Ways of HWHY,
and at that time assembled the sons of men and made
known to them the Instruction of HWHY.
6 And he ordered it to be proclaimed in all places
where the sons of men dwelt, saying, “Where is the
man who wishes to know the Ways of HWHY and good
works? Let him come to Ḥanoḵ.”
7 And all the sons of men then assembled to him, for
all who desired the Word went to Ḥanoḵ, and Ḥanoḵ
ruled over the sons of men according to the Word of
HWHY, and they came and bowed to him and they
heard his word.
8 And the Ruaḥ of Elohim was upon Ḥanoḵ, and he
taught all his men the wisdom of Elohim and His Ways,
and the sons of men served HWHY all the days of
Ḥanoḵ, and they came to hear his wisdom.
9 And all the sovereigns of the sons of men, both first
and last, together with their princes and judges, came
to Ḥanoḵ when they heard of his wisdom, and they
bowed down to him, and they also required of Ḥanoḵ
to rule over them, to which he consented.
10 And they assembled, one hundred and thirty
sovereigns and princes in all, and they made Ḥanoḵ
sovereign over them and they were all under his power
and command.
11 And Ḥanoḵ taught them wisdom, knowledge, and
the Ways of HWHY; and he made peace among them,
and peace was throughout the earth during the life of
Ḥanoḵ.
12 And Ḥanoḵ ruled over the sons of men two hundred
and forty-three years, and he did right-ruling and
righteousness with all his people, and he led them in
the Ways of HWHY.
5

598

JASHER

And these are the generations of Ḥanoḵ:
Methushelaḥ, Elisha, and Elimeleḵ, three sons; and
their sisters were Milkah and Na’amah. And
Methushelaḥ lived eighty-seven years and he brought
forth Lemeḵ.
14 And it came to be in the fifty-sixth year of the life of
Lemeḵ when Aḏam died; he was nine hundred and
thirty years old at his death. And his two sons, with
Ḥanoḵ and Methushelaḥ his son, buried him with great
ceremony, as at the burial of sovereigns, in the cave
which Elohim had told him.
15 And in that place all the sons of men made a great
mourning and weeping for the sake of Aḏam; it has
therefore become a custom among the sons of men to
this day.
16 And Aḏam died because he ate of the tree of
knowledge; he and his children after him, as HWHY
Elohim had spoken.
17 And it came to be in the year of Aḏam’s death which
was the two hundred and forty-third year of the reign
of Ḥanoḵ, at that time Ḥanoḵ resolved to separate
himself from the sons of men and to hide himself as at
first in order to serve HWHY.
18 And Ḥanoḵ did so, but did not entirely hide himself
from them, but kept away from the sons of men three
days and then went to them for one day.
19 And during the three days that he was in his room,
he prayed to, and praised HWHY his Elohim, and the
day on which he went and appeared to his subjects he
taught them the Ways of HWHY, and all they asked him
about HWHY he told them.
20 And he did in this manner for many years, and
afterward he concealed himself for six days, and
appeared to his people one day in seven; and after that
once in a month, and then once in a year, until all the
sovereigns, princes and sons of men sought for him,
and desired again to see the face of Ḥanoḵ, and to
13

599

YASHAR

hear his word; but they could not, as all the sons of
men were greatly afraid of Ḥanoḵ, and they feared to
approach him because of the reverent awe that
remained on his appearance; therefore no man could
look at him, fearing he might be punished and die.
21 And all the sovereigns and princes resolved to
assemble the sons of men, and to come to Ḥanoḵ,
thinking that they might all speak to him at the time
when he should come out among them, and they did
so.
22 And the day came when Ḥanoḵ went out and they
all assembled and came to him, and Ḥanoḵ spoke to
them the Words of HWHY and he taught them wisdom
and knowledge, and they bowed down before him and
they said, “May the sovereign live! May the sovereign
live!”
23 And some time after, when the sovereigns and
princes and the sons of men were speaking to Ḥanoḵ,
and Ḥanoḵ was teaching them the Ways of Elohim,
see, a messenger of HWHY then called to Ḥanoḵ from
the shamayim, and wanted to bring him up to the
shamayim to make him reign there over the sons of
Elohim, as he had reigned over the sons of men on
earth.
24 When at that time Ḥanoḵ heard this he went and
assembled all the inhabitants of the earth, and taught
them wisdom and knowledge and gave them righteous
instruction, and he said to them, “I have been required
to go up into the shamayim, I therefore do not know
the day of my going.
25 “And now therefore, I will teach you wisdom and
knowledge and will give you instruction before I leave
you, how to act on earth whereby you may live.” And
he did so.
26 And he taught them wisdom and knowledge, and
gave them instruction, and he reproved them, and he
placed before them Laws and Right-Rulings to do on
600

JASHER

earth. And he made peace among them, and he taught
them everlasting ḥai, and dwelt with them some time
teaching them all these matters.
27 And at that time the sons of men were with Ḥanoḵ,
and Ḥanoḵ was speaking to them, and they lifted up
their eyes and the likeness of a great horse descended
from the shamayim, and the horse paced in the air;
28 And they told Ḥanoḵ what they had seen, and
Ḥanoḵ said to them, “For my sake this horse has
descended on earth; the time is come when I must go
from you and I shall no more be seen by you.”
29 And the horse descended at that time and stood
before Ḥanoḵ, and all the sons of men that were with
Ḥanoḵ saw him.
30 And Ḥanoḵ then again ordered a voice to be
proclaimed, saying, “Where is the man who delights to
know the Ways of HWHY his Elohim, let him come this
day to Ḥanoḵ before he is taken from us.”
31 And all the sons of men assembled and came to
Ḥanoḵ that day; and all the sovereigns of the earth with
their princes and counsellors remained with him that
day. And Ḥanoḵ then taught the sons of men wisdom
and knowledge, and gave them divine instruction; and
he instructed them to serve HWHY and walk in His
Ways all the days of their lives, and he continued to
make peace among them.
32 And it came to be after this that he rose up and rode
on the horse; and he went out and all the sons of men
went after him, about eight hundred thousand men;
and they went with him one day’s journey.
33 And the second day he said to them, “Return home
to your tents, why should you go? Maybe you may die.”
And some of them went from him, and those that
remained went with him six day’s journey. And Ḥanoḵ
said to them every day, “Return to your tents, lest you
may die.” But they were not willing to return, and they
went with him.
601

YASHAR

And on the sixth day some of the men remained
and clung to him, and they said to him, “We will go with
you to the place where you go; as HWHY lives, only
death shall separate us.”
35 And they urged so much to go with him, that he
ceased speaking to them; and they went after him and
would not return;
36 And when the sovereigns returned they caused a
census to be taken, in order to know the number of
remaining men that went with Ḥanoḵ; And it came to
be upon the seventh day that Ḥanoḵ went up into the
shamayim in a whirlwind, with horses and chariots of
fire.
37 And on the eighth day all the sovereigns that had
been with Ḥanoḵ sent to bring back the number of men
that were with Ḥanoḵ, in that place from which he went
up into the shamayim.
38 And all those sovereigns went to the place and they
found the earth there filled with snow, and on the snow
were large stones of snow, and one said to the other,
“Come, let us break through the snow and see, maybe
the men that remained with Ḥanoḵ are dead, and are
now under the stones of snow.” And they searched but
could not find him, for he had gone up into the
shamayim.
34

4 And all the days that Ḥanoḵ lived upon earth, were
three hundred and sixty-five years.
2 And when Ḥanoḵ had gone up into the shamayim,
all the sovereigns of the earth rose and took
Methushelaḥ his son and anointed him, and they
caused him to reign over them in the place of his
father.
3 And Methushelaḥ acted uprightly in the sight of
Elohim, as his father Ḥanoḵ had taught him, and he
likewise, during the whole of his life, taught the sons of
men wisdom, knowledge and the reverence of Elohim,
602

JASHER

and he did not turn from the good Way either to the
right or to the left.
4 But in the latter days of Methushelaḥ, the sons of
men turned from HWHY, they corrupted the earth, they
robbed and plundered each other, and they rebelled
against Elohim and they transgressed, and they
corrupted their ways, and would not listen to the voice
of Methushelaḥ, but rebelled against him.
5 And HWHY was exceedingly wroth against them,
and HWHY continued to destroy the seed in those days,
so that there was neither sowing nor reaping in the
earth.
6 For when they sowed the ground in order that they
might obtain food for their support, see, thorns and
thistles were produced which they did not sow.
7 And still the sons of men did not turn from their evil
ways, and their hands were still extended to do evil in
the sight of Elohim, and they provoked HWHY with their
evil ways, and HWHY was very wroth, and was sorry
that he had made man.
8 And he thought to destroy and annihilate them, and
he did so.
9 In those days when Lemeḵ son of Methushelaḥ
was one hundred and sixty years old, Shĕth son of
Aḏam died.
10 And all the days that Shĕth lived, were nine
hundred and twelve years, and he died.
11 And Lemeḵ was one hundred and eighty years old
when he took Ashmua, the daughter of Elishua son of
Ḥanoḵ his uncle, and she conceived.
12 And at that time the sons of men sowed the ground,
and a little food was produced, yet the sons of men did
not turn from their evil ways, and they trespassed and
rebelled against Elohim.
13 And the wife of Lemeḵ conceived and bore him a
son at that time, at the turn of the year.
603

YASHAR

And Methushelaḥ called his name Noaḥ, saying, “In
his days the earth was at rest and free from
corruption.” And Lemeḵ, his father called his name
Menaḥĕm, saying, “This one shall comfort us in our
works and miserable toil in the earth,” which Elohim
had cursed.
15 And the child grew up and was weaned, and he
went in the Ways of his father Methushelaḥ, perfect
and upright with Elohim.
16 And all the sons of men departed from the Ways of
HWHY in those days as they multiplied upon the face of
the earth with sons and daughters, and they taught
one another their evil practices and they continued
sinning against HWHY.
17 And every man made for himself a mighty one, and
they robbed and plundered every man, his neighbour
as well as his relative, and they corrupted the earth,
and the earth was filled with violence.
18 And their judges and rulers went to the daughters
of men and took their wives by force from their
husbands according to their choice, and the sons of
men in those days took from the cattle of the earth, the
beasts of the field and the birds of the air, and taught
the mixture of animals of one species with the other, in
order to provoke HWHY by it. And Elohim saw the whole
earth and it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its
ways on earth, all men and all animals.
19 And HWHY said, “I will blot out man that I created
from the face of the earth, from man to the birds of the
air, together with cattle and beasts that are in the field
for I am sorry that I made them.”
20 And all men who walked in the Ways of HWHY died
in those days, before HWHY brought the evil upon man
which He had declared, for this was from HWHY, that
they should not see the evil which HWHY spoke of
concerning the sons of men.
14

604

JASHER

And Noaḥ found favour in the sight of HWHY, and
HWHY chose him and his children to raise up seed from
them upon the face of the whole earth.
21

5 And it came to be in the eighty-fourth year of the life
of Noaḥ, that Enosh son of Shĕth died - He was nine
hundred and five years old at his death.
2 And in the one hundred and seventy-ninth year of
the life of Noaḥ, Qĕynan son of Enosh died, and all the
days of Qĕynan were nine hundred and ten years, and
he died.
3 And in the two hundred and thirty-fourth year of the
life of Noaḥ, Mahalal’ĕl son of Qĕynan died, and the
days of Mahalal’ĕl were eight hundred and ninety-five
years, and he died.
4 And Yereḏ son of Mahalal’ĕl died in those days, in
the three hundred and thirty-sixth year of the life of
Noaḥ; and all the days of Yereḏ were nine hundred and
sixty-two years, and he died.
5 And all who followed HWHY died in those days,
before they saw the evil which Elohim declared to do
on earth.
6 And after the passing of many years, in the four
hundred and eightieth year of the life of Noaḥ, when all
those men, who followed HWHY had died away from
among the sons of men, and only Methushelaḥ was
then left, Elohim spoke to Noaḥ and Methushelaḥ,
saying,
7 “Speak, and proclaim to the sons of men, saying,
‘Thus said HWHY, “Return from your evil ways and
forsake your works, and HWHY will repent of the evil
that He declared to do to you, so that it shall not come
to pass.”
8 ‘For thus said HWHY, “See I give you a period of one
hundred and twenty years; if you will turn to Me and
forsake your evil ways, then I will also turn away from
605

YASHAR

the evil which I told you, and it shall not exist,” said
HWHY.’ ”
9 And Noaḥ and Methushelaḥ spoke all the words of
HWHY to the sons of men, day after day, constantly
speaking to them.
10 But the sons of men would not listen to them, nor
incline their ears to their words, and they were stiffnecked.
11 And HWHY granted them a period of one hundred
and twenty years, saying, “If they will return, then
Elohim will repent of the evil, so as not to destroy the
earth.”
12 Noaḥ son of Lemeḵ refrained from taking a wife in
those days, to bring forth children, for he said, “Indeed
now Elohim will destroy the earth, why then shall I
bring forth children?”
13 And Noaḥ was a righteous man, he was perfect in
his generation, and HWHY chose him to raise up seed
from his seed upon the face of the earth.
14 And HWHY said to Noaḥ, “Take for yourself a wife,
and bring forth children, for I have seen you righteous
before me in this generation.
15 “And you shall raise up seed, and your children with
you, in the midst of the earth.” And Noaḥ went and took
a wife, and he chose Na’amah, the daughter of Ḥanoḵ,
and she was five hundred and eighty years old.
16 And Noaḥ was four hundred and ninety-eight years
old, when he took Na’amah for a wife.
17 And Na’amah conceived and bore a son, and he
called his name Yepheth, saying, “Elohim has
enlarged me in the earth.” And she conceived again
and bore a son, and he called his name Shĕm, saying,
“Elohim has made me a remnant, to raise up seed in
the midst of the earth.”
18 And Noaḥ was five hundred and two years old
when Na’amah bore Shĕm, and the boys grew up and
606

JASHER

went in the Ways of HWHY, in all that Methushelaḥ and
Noaḥ their father taught them.
19 And Lemeḵ the father of Noaḥ, died in those days;
yet even so he did not go with all his heart in the Ways
of his father, and he died in the hundred and ninetyfifth year of the life of Noaḥ.
20 And all the days of Lemeḵ were seven hundred and
seventy years, and he died.
21 And all the sons of men who knew HWHY, died in
that year before HWHY brought evil upon them; for
HWHY willed them to die, so as not to see the evil that
Elohim would bring upon their brothers and relatives,
as He had so declared to do.
22 In that time, HWHY said to Noaḥ and Methushelaḥ,
“Stand up and proclaim to the sons of men all the
words that I spoke to you in those days. Maybe they
will turn from their evil ways, and I will then repent of
the evil and will not bring it.”
23 And Noaḥ and Methushelaḥ stood, and spoke in
the hearing of the sons of men, all that Elohim had
spoken concerning them.
24 But the sons of men would not listen, neither would
they incline their ears to all their words.
25 And it came to be after this that HWHY said to Noaḥ,
“The end of all flesh is come before Me, because of
their evil deeds, and see, I will destroy the earth.
26 “And take for yourself gopher wood, and go to a
certain place and make a large ark, and place it in that
spot.
27 “And thus shall you make it; three hundred ammah
its length, fifty ammah wide and thirty ammah high.
28 “And you shall make for yourself a door, open at its
side, and to an ammah you shall finish above, and
cover it within and without with pitch.
29 “And see, I will bring the flood of waters upon the
earth, and all flesh be destroyed, from under the
shamayim all that is upon earth shall perish.
607

YASHAR

“And you and your household shall go and gather
two each of all living creatures, male and female, and
shall bring them to the ark, to raise up seed from them
upon earth.
31 “And gather unto you all food that is eaten by all the
animals, that there may be food for you and for them.
32 “And you shall choose for your sons three maidens,
from the daughters of men, and they shall be wives to
your sons.”
33 And Noaḥ rose up, and he made the ark, in the
place where Elohim had commanded him, and Noaḥ
did as Elohim had ordered him.
34 In his five hundred and ninety-fifth year, Noaḥ
began to make the ark, and he made the ark in five
years, as HWHY had commanded.
35 Then Noaḥ took the three daughters of Elyaqim,
son of Methushelaḥ, for wives for his sons, as HWHY
had commanded Noaḥ.
36 And it came to be at that time Methushelaḥ son of
Ḥanoḵ died, he was nine hundred and sixty years old
at his death.
30

6 At that time, after the death of Methushelaḥ, HWHY
said to Noaḥ, “Go with your household into the ark;
see, I will gather to you all the animals of the earth, the
beasts of the field and the birds of the air, and they
shall all come and surround the ark.
2 “And you shall go and seat yourself by the doors of
the ark, and all the beasts, the animals, and the birds,
shall assemble and place themselves before you, and
whichever of them shall come and crouch before you,
you shall take and give into the hands of your sons,
who shall bring them to the ark, and all that will stand
before you, you shall leave.”
3 And HWHY brought this about on the next day, and
animals, beasts and birds came in great multitudes
and surrounded the ark.
608

JASHER

And Noaḥ went and seated himself by the door of
the ark, and of all flesh that crouched before him, he
brought into the ark, and all that stood before him he
left upon earth.
5 And a lioness came, with her two whelps, male and
female, and the three crouched before Noaḥ, and the
two whelps rose up against the lioness and smote her,
and made her flee from her place, and she went away,
and they returned to their places, and crouched upon
the earth before Noaḥ.
6 And the lioness ran away, and stood in the place of
the lions.
7 And Noaḥ saw this, and wondered greatly, and he
rose and took the two whelps, and brought them into
the ark.
8 And Noaḥ brought into the ark from all living
creatures that were upon earth, so that there was none
left but which Noaḥ brought into the ark.
9 Two and two came to Noaḥ into the ark, but from
the clean animals, and clean birds, he brought seven
couples, as Elohim had commanded him.
10 And all the animals, and beasts, and birds, were still
there, and they surrounded the ark at every place, and
the rain had not fallen till seven days after.
11 And on that day, HWHY caused the whole earth to
shake, and the sun darkened, and the foundations of
the world roared, and the whole earth was moved
violently, and the lightning flashed, and the thunder
roared, and all the fountains in the earth were broken
up, such as was not known to the inhabitants before.
And Elohim did this mighty act, in order to frighten the
sons of men, that there might be no more evil upon
earth.
12 And still the sons of men would not return from their
evil ways, and they increased the wrath of HWHY at that
time, and did not even direct their hearts to all this.
4

609

YASHAR

And at the end of seven days, in the six hundredth
year of the life of Noaḥ, the waters of the flood were
upon the earth.
14 And all the fountains of the deep were broken up,
and the windows of the shamayim were opened, and
the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
15 And Noaḥ and his household, and all the living
creatures that were with him, came into the ark
because of the waters of the flood, and HWHY shut him
in.
16 And all the sons of men that were left upon the
earth, became exhausted through evil because of the
rain, for the waters were coming more violently upon
the earth, and the animals and beasts were still
surrounding the ark.
17 And the sons of men assembled together, about
seven hundred thousand men and women, and they
came unto Noaḥ to the ark.
18 And they called to Noaḥ, saying, “Open for us that
we may come to you in the ark, for why should we die?”
19 And Noaḥ, with a loud voice, answered them from
the ark, saying, “Have you not all rebelled against
HWHY, and said that He does not exist? And therefore
HWHY brought upon you this evil, to destroy and cut you
off from the face of the earth.
20 “Is this not the word that I spoke to you one hundred
and twenty years ago, and you would not listen to the
voice of HWHY, and now do you desire to live upon
earth?”
21 And they said to Noaḥ, “We are ready to return to
HWHY; only open for us that we may live and not die!”
22 And Noaḥ answered them, saying, “Look, now that
you see the trouble of your beings, you want to return
to HWHY. Why did you not return during these hundred
and twenty years, which HWHY granted you as the
determined period?
13

610

JASHER

“But now you come and tell me this because of the
troubles of your beings. Now also HWHY will not listen
to you, neither will He give ear to you on this day, so
that you will not now succeed in your desires.”
24 And the sons of men approached in order to break
into the ark, to come in because of the rain, for they
could not bear the rain upon them.
25 And HWHY sent all the beasts and animals that
stood around the ark, and the beasts overpowered
them and drove them from that place, and every man
went his way and they again scattered themselves
upon the face of the earth.
26 And the rain was still falling upon the earth, and it
fell forty days and forty nights, and the waters were
mighty on the earth; and all flesh that was on the earth
or in the waters died, whether men, animals, beasts,
creeping creatures or birds of the air, and only Noaḥ
remained and those that were with him in the ark.
27 And the waters were mighty and they greatly
increased upon the earth, and they lifted up the ark and
it was raised from the earth.
28 And the ark floated on the face of the waters, and it
was tossed upon the waters so that all the living
creatures within were turned about like stew in a pot.
29 And great anxiety seized all the living creatures that
were in the ark, and the ark was thought to be broken.
30 And all the living creatures that were in the ark were
afraid, and the lions roared, and the oxen lowed, and
the wolves howled, and every living creature in the ark
spoke and lamented in its own tongue, so that their
voices reached to a great distance, and Noaḥ and his
sons cried and wept in their troubles; they were greatly
afraid that they had reached the gates of death.
31 And Noaḥ prayed to HWHY, and cried to him
because of this, and he said, “O HWHY, help us! For we
have no strength to bear this evil that has come upon
us, for the waves of the waters have surrounded us,
23

611

YASHAR

rushing torrents have frightened us, the snares of
death have come before us. Answer us, O HWHY,
answer us, light up your face toward us and be
gracious to us, redeem us and deliver us!”
32 And HWHY listened to the voice of Noaḥ, and HWHY
remembered him.
33 And a wind passed over the earth, and the waters
were stilled and the ark rested.
34 And the fountains of the deep and the windows of
the shamayim were stopped, and the rain from the
shamayim was withheld.
35 And the waters decreased in those days, and the
ark rested upon the mountains of Ararat.
36 And Noaḥ then opened the windows of the ark, and
Noaḥ still called out to HWHY at that time and he said,
“O HWHY, who formed the earth and the shamayim and
all that are within, bring forth our beings from this
confinement, and from the prison wherein you have
placed us, for I am much wearied with sighing.”
37 And HWHY listened to the voice of Noaḥ, and said
to him, “When you have completed a full year, you
shall then go out.”
38 And at the turn of the year, when a full year was
completed to Noaḥ’s dwelling in the ark, the waters
were dried from off the earth, and Noaḥ took off the
covering of the ark.
39 At that time, on the twenty-seventh day of the
second month, the earth was dry, but Noaḥ and his
sons, and those that were with him, did not go out from
the ark until HWHY told them.
40 And the day came that HWHY told them to go out,
and they all went out from the ark.
41 And they went and returned every one to his way
and to his place, and Noaḥ and his sons dwelt in the
land that Elohim had told them, and they served HWHY
all their days, and HWHY baraḵ Noaḥ and his sons on
their going out from the ark.
612

JASHER

And He said to them, “Be fruitful and fill all the earth;
become strong and increase abundantly in the earth
and multiply.”
42

7 And these are the names of the sons of Noaḥ:
Yepheth, Ḥam and Shĕm; and children were born to
them after the flood, for they had taken wives before
the flood.
2 These are the sons of Yepheth; Gomer, Maḡoḡ,
Maḏai, Yawan, Tuḇal, Mesheḵ, and Tiras, seven sons.
3 And the sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz, Riphath
and Toḡarmah.
4 And the sons of Maḡoḡ were Eliḥanaph and Luḇal.
5 And the children of Maḏai were Aḥon, Zilo, Ḥatsoni
and Lot.
6 And the sons of Yawan were Elisha, Tarshish,
Shittim and Doḏanim.
7 And the sons of Tuḇal were Ariphi, Keseḏ and
Ta’ari.
8 And the sons of Mesheḵ were Dĕḏon, Zaron and
Sheḇashni.
9 And the sons of Tiras were Beniḇ, Gĕra, Lupiriyon
and Gilaq; these are the sons of Yepheth according to
their clans, and their numbers in those days were
about four hundred and sixty men.
10 And these are the sons of Ḥam; Kush, Mitsrayim,
Put and Kena’an, four sons; and the sons of Kush were
Seḇa, Ḥawilah, Saḇtah, Ra’mah and Saḇteḵa, and the
sons of Ra’mah were Sheḇa and Deḏan.
11 And the sons of Mitsrayim were Luḏim, Anamim
and Pathros, Kasloth and Kaphtor.
12 And the sons of Put were Geḇal, Haḏan, Benah and
Addan.
13 And the sons of Kena’an were Tsiḏon, Ḥĕth, Amori,
Girgashi, Ḥiwwi, Arki, Sini, Aroḏi, Zimoḏi and Ḥamothi.

613

YASHAR

These are the sons of Ḥam, according to their
clans, and their numbers in those days were about
seven hundred and thirty men.
15 And these are the sons of Shĕm; Ĕylam, Asshur,
Arpaḵshaḏ, Luḏim and Aram, five sons; and the sons
of Ĕylam were Shushan, Mahul and Ḥarmon.
16 And the sons of Ashar were Mirus and Moḵil, and
the sons of Arpaḵshaḏ were Shelaḥ, Anar and Eshkol.
17 And the sons of Luḏim were Pethor and Bizayon,
and the sons of Aram were Uts, Ḥul, Gether and Mash.
18 These are the sons of Shĕm, according to their
clans; and their numbers in those days were about
three hundred men.
19 These are the generations of Shĕm; Shĕm brought
forth Arpaḵshaḏ and Arpaḵshaḏ brought forth Shelaḥ,
and Shelaḥ brought forth Ĕḇer and to Ĕḇer were born
two children, the name of one was Peleḡ, for in his
days the sons of men were divided, and in the latter
days, the earth was divided.
20 And the name of the second was Yoqtan, meaning
that in his day the lives of the sons of men were
diminished and lessened.
21 These are the sons of Yoqtan; Almoḏaḏ, Sheleph,
Ḥatsarmaweth, Yeraḥ, Haḏoram, Uzal, Diqlah, Oḇal,
Aḇima’ĕl, Sheḇa, Ophir, Ḥawilah and Yoḇaḇ; all these
are the sons of Yoqtan.
22 And Peleḡ his brother brought forth Yĕn, and Yĕn
brought forth Seruḡ, and Seruḡ brought forth Naḥor
and Naḥor brought forth Teraḥ, and Teraḥ was thirtyeight years old, and he brought forth Haran and Naḥor.
23 And Kush son of Ḥam, son of Noaḥ, took a wife in
those days in his old age, and she bore a son, and they
called his name Nimroḏ, saying, “At that time the sons
of men again began to rebel and transgress against
Elohim.” And the child grew up, and his father loved
him exceedingly, for he was the son of his old age.
14

614

JASHER

And the garments of skin which Elohim made for
Aḏam and his wife, when they went out of the garden,
were given to Kush,
25 for after the death of Aḏam and his wife, the
garments were given to Ḥanoḵ, son of Yereḏ, and
when Ḥanoḵ was taken up to Elohim, he gave them to
Methushelaḥ, his son.
26 And at the death of Methushelaḥ, Noaḥ took them
and brought them into the ark, and they were with him
until he went out of the ark.
27 And at their going out, Ḥam stole those garments
from Noaḥ his father, and he took them and hid them
from his brothers.
28 And when Ḥam brought forth his first-born, Kush,
he gave him the garments in secret, and they were with
Kush many days.
29 And Kush also concealed them from his sons and
brothers, and when Kush had brought forth Nimroḏ, he
gave him those garments through his love for him, and
Nimroḏ grew up, and when he was twenty years old he
put on those garments.
30 And Nimroḏ became strong when he put on the
garments, and Elohim gave him might and strength,
and he was a mighty hunter on the earth, he was a
mighty hunter in the field, and he hunted the animals
and he built altars, and he offered the animals upon
them before HWHY.
31 And Nimroḏ strengthened himself, and he rose up
from among his brothers, and he fought the battles of
his brothers against all their enemies round about.
32 And HWHY delivered all the enemies of his brothers
into his hands, and Elohim prospered him from time to
time in his battles, and he reigned on earth.
33 Therefore it became common in those days, when
a man sent out those that he had trained up for battle,
he would say to them, “Like Elohim did to Nimroḏ, who
was a mighty hunter in the earth, and who succeeded
24

615

YASHAR

in the battles that prevailed against his brothers, that
He delivered them from the hands of their enemies, so
may Elohim strengthen us and deliver us this day.”
34 And when Nimroḏ was forty years old, at that time
there was a battle between his brothers and the
children of Yepheth, so that they were in the power of
their enemies.
35 And Nimroḏ went forth at that time, and he
assembled all the sons of Kush and their clans, about
four hundred and sixty men, and he also hired about
eighty men from some of his friends and
acquaintances, and he gave them their wage, and he
went with them to battle. And when he was on the way,
Nimroḏ strengthened the hearts of the people that
went with him,
36 and he said to them, “Do not fear, neither be
alarmed, for all our enemies will be delivered into our
hands, and you may do with them as you please.”
37 And all the men that went were about five hundred,
and they fought against their enemies, and they
destroyed them, and subdued them, and Nimroḏ
placed standing officers over them in their respective
places.
38 And he took some of their children as security, and
they were all servants to Nimroḏ and to his brothers,
and Nimroḏ and all the people that were with him
turned homeward.
39 And when Nimroḏ had joyfully returned from battle,
after having conquered his enemies, all his brothers,
together with those who knew him before, assembled
to make him sovereign over them, and they placed the
royal crown upon his head.
40 And he appointed over his subjects and people,
princes, judges, and rulers, as is the custom among
sovereigns.

616

JASHER

And he placed Teraḥ son of Naḥor the prince of his
army, and he honoured him and elevated him above
all his princes.
42 And while he was reigning according to his heart’s
desire, after having conquered all his enemies around,
he advised with his counsellors to build a city for his
palace, and they did so.
43 And they found a large valley opposite to the east,
and they built him a large and extensive city, and
Nimroḏ called the name of the city that he built Shin’ar,
for HWHY had fiercely shaken his enemies and
destroyed them.
44 And Nimroḏ dwelt in Shin’ar, and he reigned safely,
and he fought with his enemies and he subdued them,
and he prospered in all his battles, and his reign
became very great.
45 And all nations and tongues heard of his fame, and
they gathered themselves to him, and they bowed
down to the earth, and they brought him offerings, and
he became their master and sovereign, and they all
dwelt with him in the city at Shin’ar. And Nimroḏ
reigned in the earth over all the sons of Noaḥ, and they
were all under his power and counsel.
46 And all the earth was of one tongue and words of
union, but Nimroḏ did not go in the Ways of HWHY, and
he was more wicked than all the men that were before
him, from the days of the flood until those days.
47 And he made mighty ones of wood and stone, and
he bowed down to them, and he rebelled against
HWHY, and taught all his subjects and the people of the
earth his wicked ways; and Mardon his son was more
wicked than his father.
48 And every one that heard of the acts of Mardon son
of Nimroḏ would say, concerning him, “From the
wicked goes forth wickedness.” Therefore it became a
proverb in the whole earth, saying, “From the wicked
41

617

YASHAR

goes forth wickedness.” And it was common in the
words of men from that time to this.
49 And Teraḥ son of Naḥor, prince of Nimroḏ’s army,
was in those days very great in the sight of the
sovereign and his subjects, and the sovereign and
princes loved him, and they raised him very high.
50 And Teraḥ took a wife and her name was Amthelo
the daughter of Korneḇo; and the wife of Teraḥ
conceived and bore him a son in those days.
51 Teraḥ was seventy years old when he brought him
forth, and Teraḥ called the name of his son that was
born to him Aḇram, because the sovereign had raised
him in those days, and honoured him above all his
princes that were with him.

8 And it came to be in the night that Aḇram was born,
that all the servants of Teraḥ, and all the wisemen of
Nimroḏ, and his astrologers came and ate and drank
in the house of Teraḥ, and they rejoiced with him on
that night.
2 And when all the wise men and astrologers went
out from the house of Teraḥ, they lifted up their eyes
toward the shamayim that night to look at the stars,
and they looked, and see, one very large star came
from the east and ran in the shamayim, and it
swallowed up the four stars from the four sides of the
shamayim.
3 And all the wise men of the sovereign and his
astrologers were astonished at the sight, and the wise
men understood this matter, and they knew its
importance.
4 And they said to each other, “This only foretells the
child that has been born to Teraḥ this night, will grow
up and be fruitful, and multiply, and possess all the
earth, he and his children forever, and he and his seed
will slay great sovereigns, and inherit their lands.”
618

JASHER

And the wise men and astrologers went home that
night, and in the morning all these wise men and
astrologers rose early, and assembled in an appointed
house.
6 And they spoke and said to each other, “See, the
sight that we saw last night is hidden from the
sovereign, it has not been made known to him.
7 “And should this matter get known to the sovereign
in the latter days, he will say to us, ‘Why have you
concealed this matter from me?’ And then we shall all
suffer death! Therefore, now let us go and tell the
sovereign the sight which we saw, and the
interpretation of it, and we shall then remain clear.”
8 And they did so, and they all went to the sovereign
and bowed down to him to the ground, and they said,
“May the sovereign live! May the sovereign live!
9 “We heard that a son was born to Teraḥ son of
Naḥor, the prince of your army, and last night we came
to his house, and we ate and drank and rejoiced with
him that night.
10 “And when your servants went out from the house
of Teraḥ, to go to our respective homes to abide there
for the night, we lifted up our eyes to the shamayim,
and we saw a great star coming from the east, and the
same star ran with great speed, and swallowed up four
great stars, from the four sides of the shamayim.
11 “And your servants were astonished at the sight
which we saw, and were greatly afraid, and we made
our judgment upon the sight, and knew by our wisdom
the proper interpretation of it, that this matter applies
to the child that is born to Teraḥ, who will grow up and
multiply greatly, and become powerful, and kill all the
sovereigns of the earth, and inherit all their lands, he
and his seed forever.
12 “And now our master and sovereign, see, we have
truly made known to you what we have seen
concerning this child.
5

619

YASHAR

“If it seems good to the sovereign to give his father
value for this child, we will slay him before he shall
grow up and increase in the land, and his evil increase
against us, that we and our children perish through his
evil.”
14 And the sovereign heard their words and they
seemed good in his sight, and he sent and called for
Teraḥ, and Teraḥ came before the sovereign.
15 And the sovereign said to Teraḥ, “I have been told
that a son was born to you last night, and after this
manner was observed in the shamayim at his birth.
16 “And now therefore, give me the child, that we may
slay him before his evil rises up against us, and I will
give you for his value, your house full of silver and
gold.”
17 And Teraḥ answered the sovereign and said to him,
“My master and sovereign, I have heard your words,
and your servant shall do all that his sovereign desires.
18 “But my master and sovereign, I will tell you what
befell me last night, that I may see what advice the
sovereign will give his servant, and then I will answer
the sovereign on what he has just spoken.” And the
sovereign said, “Speak.”
19 And Teraḥ said to the sovereign, “Ayon, son of
Moreḏ, came to me last night, saying,
20 ‘Give to me the great and good-looking horse that
the sovereign gave you, and I will give you silver and
gold, and straw and food for its value.’ And I said to
him, ‘Wait till I see the sovereign concerning your
words, and see, whatever the sovereign says, that I
will do.’
21 “And now my master and sovereign, see, I have
made this matter known to you, and the advice which
my sovereign will give unto his servant, that will I
follow.”
13

620

JASHER

And the sovereign heard the words of Teraḥ, and
his wrath was kindled and he considered him in the
light of a fool.
23 And the sovereign answered Teraḥ, and he said to
him, “Are you so foolish, ignorant, or lacking in
understanding, to do this matter, to give your goodlooking horse for silver and gold or even for straw and
food?
24 “Are you so short of silver and gold, that you should
do this matter, because you cannot obtain straw and
food to feed your horse? And what is silver and gold to
you, or straw and food, that you should give away that
fine horse which I gave you, like which there is none to
be had on the whole earth?”
25 And the sovereign left off speaking, and Teraḥ
answered the sovereign, saying, “Like this has the
sovereign spoken to his servant;
26 “I beg you, my master and sovereign, what is this
which you said to me, saying, ‘Give your son that we
may slay him, and I will give you silver and gold for his
value.’ What shall I do with silver and gold after the
death of my son? Who shall inherit me? Only then at
my death, the silver and gold will return to my
sovereign who gave it.”
27 And when the sovereign heard the words of Teraḥ,
and the parable which he brought concerning the
sovereign, it grieved him greatly and he was troubled
at this word, and his wrath burned within him.
28 And Teraḥ saw that the wrath of the sovereign was
kindled against him, and he answered the sovereign,
saying, “All that I have is in the sovereign’s power;
whatever the sovereign desires to do to his servant,
that let him do. Even my son, he is in the sovereign’s
power, without value in exchange, he and his two
brothers that are older than he.”
29 And the sovereign said to Teraḥ, “No, but I will
purchase your younger son for a price.”
22

621

YASHAR

And Teraḥ answered the sovereign, saying, “I beg
you my master and sovereign to let your servant speak
a word before you, and let the sovereign hear the word
of his servant.” And Teraḥ said, “Let my sovereign give
me three days’ time till I consider this matter within
myself, and consult with my clan concerning the words
of my sovereign.” And he pressed the sovereign
greatly to agree to this.
31 And the sovereign listened to Teraḥ, and he did so
and he gave him three days’ time, and Teraḥ went out
from the sovereign’s presence, and he came home to
his clan and spoke to them all the words of the
sovereign; and the people were greatly afraid.
32 And it came to be in the third day that the sovereign
sent to Teraḥ, saying, “Send me your son for a price
as I spoke to you; and should you not do this, I will
send and slay all you have in your house, so that you
shall not even have a dog remaining.”
33 And Teraḥ hastened, as the matter was urgent from
the sovereign, and he took a child from one of his
servants, which his female servant had born to him that
day, and Teraḥ brought the child to the sovereign and
received value for him.
34 And HWHY was with Teraḥ in this matter, that
Nimroḏ might not cause Aḇram’s death, and the
sovereign took the child from Teraḥ and with all his
might dashed his head to the ground, for he thought it
had been Aḇram; and this was concealed from him
from that day. And it came to be forgotten by the
sovereign, as it was the matter of providence not to
allow Aḇram’s death.
35 And Teraḥ took Aḇram his son secretly, together
with his mother and nurse, and he concealed them in
a cave, and he brought them their provisions monthly.
36 And HWHY was with Aḇram in the cave, and he grew
up, and Aḇram was in the cave ten years, and the
30

622

JASHER

sovereign and his princes, diviners and wise men,
thought that the sovereign had killed Aḇram.

9 And Haran, son of Teraḥ, Aḇram’s oldest brother,
took a wife in those days.
2 Haran was thirty-nine years old when he took her;
and the wife of Haran conceived and bore a son, and
he called his name Lot.
3 And she conceived again and bore a daughter, and
she called her name Milkah; and she again conceived
and bore a daughter, and she called her name Sarai.
4 Haran was forty-two years old when he brought
forth Sarai, which was in the tenth year of the life of
Aḇram; and in those days Aḇram and his mother and
nurse went out from the cave, as the sovereign and his
subjects had forgotten the matter of Aḇram.
5 And when Aḇram came out from the cave, he went
to Noaḥ and his son Shĕm, and he remained with them
to learn the instruction of HWHY and His Ways, and no
man knew where Aḇram was, and Aḇram served Noaḥ
and Shĕm his son for a long time.
6 And Aḇram was in Noaḥ’s house thirty-nine years,
and Aḇram knew HWHY from three years old, and he
went in the Ways of HWHY until the day of his death, as
Noaḥ and his son Shĕm had taught him; and all the
sons of the earth in those days greatly transgressed
against HWHY, and they rebelled against Him and they
served other mighty ones, and they forgot HWHY who
had created them in the earth; and the inhabitants of
the earth at that time made for themselves, every man
his mighty one; mighty ones of wood and stone which
could neither speak, hear, nor deliver, and the sons of
men served them and they became their mighty ones.
7 And the sovereign and all his servants, and Teraḥ
with all his household were then the first of those that
served mighty ones of wood and stone.
623

YASHAR

And Teraḥ had twelve mighty ones of large size,
made of wood and stone, after the twelve months of
the year, and he served each one monthly. And every
month Teraḥ would bring his grain offering and drink
offering to his mighty ones; thus Teraḥ did all the days.
9 And all that generation were wicked in the sight of
HWHY, and they thus made every man his elohim, but
they forsook HWHY who had created them.
10 And there was not a man found in those days in the
whole earth, who knew HWHY - for they served each
man his own mighty one - except Noaḥ and his
household, and all those who were under his counsel
knew HWHY in those days.
11 And Aḇram son of Teraḥ was becoming great in
those days in the house of Noaḥ, and no man knew it,
and HWHY was with him.
12 And HWHY gave Aḇram an understanding heart,
and he knew all the works of that generation were
worthless, and that all their mighty ones were
worthless and were of no use.
13 And Aḇram saw the sun shining upon the earth, and
Aḇram said to himself, “Indeed now this sun that
shines upon the earth is the mighty one, and I will
serve him.”
14 And Aḇram served the sun in that day and he
prayed to it, and when evening came the sun went
down as usual, and Aḇram said within himself, “Indeed
this cannot be Elohim!”
15 And Aḇram still continued to speak within himself,
“Who is He who made the shamayim and the earth?
Who created upon earth? Where is He?”
16 And night darkened over him, and he lifted up his
eyes toward the west, north, south, and east, and he
saw that the sun had vanished from the earth, and the
day became dark.
17 And Aḇram saw the stars and moon before him,
and he said, “Indeed this is the mighty one who created
8

624

JASHER

the whole earth as well as man, and see, these, his
servants are mighty ones around him.” And Aḇram
served the moon and prayed to it all that night.
18 And in the morning when it was light and the sun
shone upon the earth as usual, Aḇram saw all the
matters that HWHY Elohim had made on earth.
19 And Aḇram said to himself, “Indeed these are not
mighty ones that made the earth and all mankind, but
these are the servants of Elohim.” And Aḇram
remained in the house of Noaḥ and there knew HWHY
and His Ways and he served HWHY all the days of his
life. And all that generation forgot HWHY, and served
other mighty ones of wood and stone, and rebelled all
their days.
20 And sovereign Nimroḏ reigned safely, and all the
earth was under his control, and all the earth was of
one tongue and words of union.
21 And all the princes of Nimroḏ and his great men
took counsel together; Put, Mitsrayim, Kush and
Kena’an with their clans, and they said to each other,
“Come let us build ourselves a city and in it a strong
tower, and its top reaching the shamayim, and we will
make ourselves renowned, so that we may reign over
the whole world, in order that the evil of our enemies
may cease from us, that we may reign mightily over
them, and that we may not become scattered over the
earth because of their wars.”
22 And they all went before the sovereign, and they
told the sovereign these words, and the sovereign
agreed with them in this matter, and he did so.
23 And all the clans assembled consisting of about six
hundred thousand men, and they went to seek a
spacious piece of ground to build the city and the
tower, and they sought in the whole earth and they
found none like one valley at the east of the land of
Shin’ar, about two days’ walk, and they journeyed
there and they dwelt there.
625

YASHAR

And they began to make bricks and burn fires to
build the city and the tower that they had planned to
complete.
25 And the building of the tower was a transgression
to them and a sin, and they began to build it, and while
they were building against HWHY Elohim of the
shamayim, they devised in their hearts to fight against
him and to go up into the shamayim.
26 And all these people and all the clans divided
themselves in three parts; the first said, “We will go up
into the shamayim and fight against Him!” The second
said, “We will go up to the shamayim and place our
own mighty ones there and serve them!” And the third
part said, “We will go up to the shamayim and smite
him with bows and spears!” And Elohim knew all their
works and all their evil thoughts, and He saw the city
and the tower which they were building.
27 And when they were building they built themselves
a great city and a very high and strong tower; and
because of its height the mortar and bricks did not
reach the builders in their ascent to it, until those who
went up had completed a full year, and after that, they
reached the builders and gave them the mortar and the
bricks; thus was it done daily.
28 And see, these went up and others came down the
whole day; and if a brick should fall from their hands
and get broken, they would all weep over it, and if a
man fell and died, none of them would look at him.
29 And HWHY knew their thoughts, and it came to be
when they were building they shot the arrows toward
the shamayim, and all the arrows fell upon them filled
with blood, and when they saw them they said to each
other, “Indeed we have slain all those that are in the
shamayim.”
30 For this was from HWHY in order to cause them to
stray, and in order to destroy them from off the face of
the earth.
24

626

JASHER

And they built the tower and the city, and they did
this matter daily until many days and years were
passed.
32 And Elohim said to the seventy messengers who
stood foremost before Him, to those who were near to
Him, saying, “Come let us go down and confuse their
tongues, that one man shall not understand the
language of his neighbour.” And they did so to them.
33 And from that day following, they forgot each man
his neighbour’s tongue, and they could not understand
to speak in one tongue, and when the builder took from
the hands of his neighbour lime or stone which he did
not order, the builder would cast it away and throw it
on his neighbour, that he would die.
34 And they did so many days, and they killed many of
them in this way.
35 And HWHY smote the three divisions that were
there, and He punished them according to their works
and designs; those who said, “We will go up to the
shamayim and serve our mighty ones,” became like
apes and elephants; and those who said, “We will
smite the shamayim with arrows,” HWHY killed them,
one man through the hand of his neighbour; and the
third division of those who said, “We will go up to the
shamayim and fight against Him,” HWHY scattered
them throughout the earth.
36 And those who were left among them, when they
knew and understood the evil which was coming upon
them, they forsook the building, and they also became
scattered upon the face of the whole earth.
37 And they ceased building the city and the tower;
therefore he called that place Baḇel, for there HWHY
confused the language of the whole earth; see, it was
in the east of the land of Shin’ar.
38 And as for the tower which the sons of men built,
the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up one third
part of it, and a fire also came down from the
31

627

YASHAR

shamayim and burned another third, and the other
third is left to this day, and it is of that part which was
raised, and its circumference is three day’s walk.
39 And many of the sons of men died in that tower, a
people without number.

10 And Peleḡ son of Ĕḇer died in those days, in the
forty-eighth year of the life of Aḇram son of Teraḥ, and
all the days of Peleḡ were two hundred and thirty-nine
years.
2 And when HWHY had scattered the sons of men
because of their sin at the tower, see, they spread out
into many divisions, and all the sons of men were
dispersed to the four corners of the earth.
3 And all the clans came to be, each according to its
language, its land, or its city.
4 And the sons of men built many cities according to
their clans, in all the places where they went, and
throughout the earth where HWHY had scattered them.
5 And afterward some of them built cities in places
from which they were destroyed, and they called these
cities after their own names, or the names of their
children, or after their particular occurrences.
6 And the sons of Yepheth son of Noaḥ went and built
themselves cities in the places where they were
scattered, and they called all their cities after their
names, and the sons of Yepheth were divided over the
face of the earth into many divisions and languages.
7 And these are the sons of Yepheth according to
their clans: Gomer, Maḡoḡ, Maḏai, Yawan, Tuḇal,
Mesheḵ and Tiras; these are the children of Yepheth
according to their generations.
8 And the children of Gomer, according to their cities,
were the Phranqum, who dwell in the land of Phranza,
by the river Phranza, by the river Senah.
9 And the children of Riphas are the Bartonites, who
dwell in the land of Bartonyah by the river Ledah, which
628

JASHER

empties its waters in the great sea Giḥon, that is,
Oceanus.
10 And the children of Toḡarmah are ten clans, and
these are their names: Buzar, Parzunaḵ, Balgar,
Eliḵanum, Ragḇiḇ, Tarki, Bid, Zeḇuḵ, Ongal and
Tilmaz; all these spread and settled in the north and
built themselves cities.
11 And they called their cities after their own names,
those are they who dwell by the rivers Hithlah and
Yithlah to this day.
12 But the clans of Angoli, Balgar and Parzunak, they
dwell by the great river Duḇni; and the names of their
cities are also according to their own names.
13 And the children of Yawan are the Yawanites who
dwell in the land of Makedonia, and the children of
Maḏayarĕh are the Orelum that dwell in the land of
Kurson, and the children of Tuḇal are those that dwell
in the land of Tuskanah by the river Pashiyah.
14 And the children of Mesheḵ are the Shiḇashnites
and the children of Tiras are Rushash, Kushni, and
Ongolis; all these went and built themselves cities;
those are the cities that are situated by the sea Yaḇus
by the river Kura, which empties itself in the river
Tragan.
15 And the children of Elishah are the Almanites, and
they also went and built themselves cities; those are
the cities situated between the mountains of lyoḇ and
Shiḇathmo. And they were the people of Lumbardi who
dwell opposite the mountains of lyoḇ and Shiḇathmo,
and they conquered the land of Italiyah and remain
there to this day.
16 And the children of Shittim are the Romites who
dwell in the valley of Kanophyah by the river Tiḇre’u.
17 And the children of Doḏanim are those who dwell
in the cities of the sea Giḥon, in the land of Bordna.
18 These are the clans of the children of Yepheth
according to their cities and languages, when they
629

YASHAR

were scattered after the tower, and they called their
cities after their names and occurrences. And these
are the names of all their cities according to their clans,
which they built in those days after the tower.
19 And the children of Ḥam were Kush, Mitsrayim, Put
and Kena’an according to their generation and cities.
20 All these went and built themselves cities as they
found fit places for them, and they called their cities
after the names of their fathers Kush, Mitsrayim, Put
and Kena’an.
21 And the children of Mitsrayim are the Luḏim,
Anamim, Lehaḇim, Naphtuḥim, Pathrusim, Kasluḥim
and Kaphtorim, seven clans.
22 All these dwell by the river Shiḥor, that is the wadi
of Mitsrayim, and they built themselves cities and
called them after their own names.
23 And
the children of Pathros and Kasloḥ
intermarried together, and from them went forth the
Pelishtites, the Azathites, and the Gerarites, the
Gittites and the Eqronites, in all five clans; these also
built themselves cities, and they called their cities after
the names of their fathers to this day.
24 And the children of Kena’an also built themselves
cities, and they called their cities after their names eleven cities and others without number.
25 And four men from the clan of Ḥam went to the land
of the plain; these are the names of the four men:
Seḏom, Amorah, Aḏmah and Tseḇoyim.
26 And these men built themselves four cities in the
land of the plain, and they called the names of their
cities after their own names.
27 And they and their children and all belonging to
them dwelt in those cities, and they were fruitful and
multiplied greatly and dwelt peaceably.
28 And Sĕ’ir son of Ḥur, son of Ḥiwi, son of Kena’an,
went and found a valley opposite to Mount Paran, and
he built a city there, and he and his seven sons and his
630

JASHER

household dwelt there. And he called the city which he
built Sĕ’ir, according to his name; that is the land of
Sĕ’ir to this day.
29 These are the clans of the children of Ḥam,
according to their languages and cities, when they
were scattered to their countries after the tower.
30 And some of the children of Shĕm son of Noaḥ,
father of all the children of Ĕḇer, also went and built
themselves cities in the places wherein they were
scattered, and they called their cities after their names.
31 And the sons of Shĕm were Ĕylam, Asshur,
Arpaḵshaḏ, Luḏim and Aram, and they built
themselves cities and called the names of all their
cities after their names.
32 And Asshur son of Shĕm and his children and
household went out at that time, a very large body of
them, and they went to a distant land that they found,
and they came upon a very extensive valley in the land
that they went to, and they built themselves four cities,
and they called them after their own names and
occurrences.
33 And these are the names of the cities which the
children of Asshur built: Ninewĕh, Resen, Kelaḥ and
Reḥoḇoth Ir; and the children of Asshur dwell there to
this day.
34 And the children of Aram also went and built
themselves a city, and they called the name of the city
Uts after their eldest brother, and they dwell there; that
is the land of Uts to this day.
35 And in the second year after the tower a man from
the house of Asshur, whose name was Bela, went from
the land of Ninewĕh to sojourn with his household
wherever he could find a place; and they came until
opposite the cities of the plain against Seḏom, and
they dwelt there.

631

YASHAR

And the man rose up and built there a small city,
and called its name Bela, after his name; that is the
land of Tso’ar to this day.
37 And these are the clans of the children of Shĕm
according to their language and cities, after they were
scattered over the earth after the tower.
38 And every reign, city, and clan of the clans of the
children of Noaḥ built themselves many cities after
this.
39 And they established governments in all their cities,
in order to be regulated by their orders; so did all the
clans of the children of Noaḥ, forever.
36

11 And Nimroḏ son of Kush was still in the land of
Shin’ar, and he reigned over it and dwelt there, and he
built cities in the land of Shin’ar.
2 And these are the names of the four cities which he
built - and he called their names after the occurrences
that befell them in the building of the tower.
3 And he called the first Baḇel, saying, “Because
HWHY there confused the language of the whole earth.”
And the name of the second he called Ereḵ, because
from there Elohim dispersed them.
4 And the third he called Eḵeḏ, saying there was a
great battle at that place; and the fourth he called
Kalnĕh, because his princes and mighty men were
consumed there, and they troubled HWHY - they
rebelled and transgressed against him.
5 And when Nimroḏ had built these cities in the land
of Shin’ar, he placed in them the remainder of his
people, his princes and his mighty men that were left
in his reign.
6 And Nimroḏ dwelt in Baḇel, and there he renewed
his reign over the rest of his subjects, and he reigned
safely, and the subjects and princes of Nimroḏ called
his name Amraphel, saying, “At the tower his princes
and men fell through his means.”
632

JASHER

And despite this, Nimroḏ did not return to HWHY,
and he continued in wickedness and teaching
wickedness to the sons of men. And Mardon, his son,
was worse than his father, and continued to add to the
abominations of his father.
8 And he caused the sons of men to sin, therefore it
is said, “From the wicked goes forth wickedness.”
9 At that time there was fighting between the clans of
the children of Ḥam, as they were dwelling in the cities
which they had built.
10 And Keḏorla’omer, sovereign of Ĕylam, went away
from the clans of the children of Ḥam, and he fought
with them and he subdued them. And he went to the
five cities of the plain and he fought against them and
he subdued them, and they were under his control.
11 And they served him twelve years, and they gave
him a yearly levy.
12 At that time Naḥor, son of Seruḡ died, in the fortyninth year of the life of Aḇram son of Teraḥ.
13 And in the fiftieth year of the life of Aḇram son of
Teraḥ, Aḇram came forth from the house of Noaḥ, and
went to his father’s house.
14 And Aḇram knew HWHY, and he went in His Ways
and Torah, and HWHY his Elohim was with him.
15 And Teraḥ his father was in those days, still captain
of the army of sovereign Nimroḏ, and he still followed
strange mighty ones.
16 And Aḇram came to his father’s house and saw
twelve mighty ones standing there in their temples,
and the wrath of Aḇram was kindled when he saw
these images in his father’s house.
17 And Aḇram said, “As HWHY lives these images shall
not remain in my father’s house. So shall HWHY who
created me do to me if in three days’ time I do not break
them all.”
18 And Aḇram went from them, and his wrath burned
within him. And Aḇram hastened and went from the
7

633

YASHAR

chamber to his father’s outer court, and he found his
father sitting in the court, and all his servants with him,
and Aḇram came and sat before him.
19 And Aḇram asked his father, saying, “Father, tell
me where is Elohim who created the shamayim and
earth, and all the sons of men on earth, and who
created you and me?” And Teraḥ answered his son
Aḇram and said, “Look, those who created us are all
with us in the house.”
20 And Aḇram said to his father, “My master, show
them to me please.” And Teraḥ brought Aḇram into the
chamber of the inner court, and Aḇram looked, and
see, the whole room was full of mighty ones of wood
and stone, twelve great images and others smaller
than they without number.
21 And Teraḥ said to his son, “Look, these are they
which made all you see on earth, and which created
you and I, and all mankind.”
22 And Teraḥ bowed down to his mighty ones, and he
then went away from them, and Aḇram, his son, went
away with him.
23 And when Aḇram had gone from them he went to
his mother and sat before her, and he said to his
mother, “See, my father has shown me those who
made the shamayim and earth, and all the sons of
men.
24 “Now, therefore, hurry and fetch a kid from the
flock, and make of it a tasty dish, that I may bring it to
my father’s mighty ones as an offering for them to eat;
maybe I may become acceptable to them.”
25 And his mother did so, and she fetched a kid, and
made a tasty dish of it, and brought it to Aḇram. And
Aḇram took the tasty dish from his mother and brought
it before his father’s mighty ones, and he drew near to
them that they might eat; and Teraḥ his father, did not
know of it.
634

JASHER

And Aḇram saw on the day when he was sitting
among them, that they had no voice, no hearing, no
motion, and not one of them could stretch out his hand
to eat.
27 And Aḇram mocked them, and said, “Indeed the
tasty dish that I prepared has not pleased them, or
maybe it was too little for them, and for that reason
they would not eat; therefore tomorrow I will prepare a
fresh tasty dish, better and more plentiful than this, in
order that I may see the result.”
28 And it came to be on the next day that Aḇram
directed his mother concerning the tasty dish, and his
mother rose and took three fine kids from the flock, and
she made of them an excellent tasty dish, such as her
son loved, and she gave it to her son Aḇram; and
Teraḥ his father did not know of it.
29 And Aḇram took the tasty dish from his mother, and
brought it before his father’s mighty ones into the
chamber. And he came near to them that they might
eat, and he placed it before them, and Aḇram sat
before them all day, thinking maybe they might eat.
30 And Aḇram watched them, and see, they had
neither voice, nor hearing, nor did one of them stretch
out his hand to the meat to eat.
31 And in the evening of that day in the house, the
Ruaḥ of Elohim came upon Aḇram.
32 And he called out and said, “Woe to my father and
this wicked generation, whose hearts are all inclined to
vanity, who serve these idols of wood and stone which
can neither eat, smell, hear nor speak! Who have
mouths without speech, eyes without sight, ears
without hearing, hands without feeling, and legs which
cannot move. Like them are those that made them and
that trust in them.”
33 And when Aḇram saw all these matters his wrath
was kindled against his father, and he hastened and
took a hatchet in his hand, and came into the chamber
26

635

YASHAR

of the mighty ones, and he broke all his father’s mighty
ones.
34 And when he had done breaking the images, he
placed the hatchet in the hand of the great mighty one
which was there before them, and he went out. And
Teraḥ his father came home, for he had heard at the
door the sound of the striking of the hatchet; so Teraḥ
came into the house to know what this was about.
35 And Teraḥ, having heard the noise of the hatchet in
the room of images, ran to the room to the images, and
he met Aḇram going out.
36 And Teraḥ entered the room and found all the idols
fallen down and broken, and the hatchet in the hand of
the largest, which was not broken, and the tasty dish
which Aḇram his son had made was still before them.
37 And when Teraḥ saw this his wrath was greatly
kindled, and he hastened and went from the room to
Aḇram.
38 And he found Aḇram his son still sitting in the
house; and he said to him, “What is this deed you have
done to my mighty ones?”
39 And Aḇram answered Teraḥ his father and he said,
“Not so my master, for I brought a tasty dish before
them, and when I came near to them with the meat that
they might eat, they all at once stretched out their
hands to eat before the large one had put out his hand
to eat.
40 “And the large one saw their works that they did
before him, and his wrath was violently kindled against
them, and he went and took the hatchet that was in the
house and came to them and broke them all, and look,
the hatchet is yet in his hand as you see.”
41 And Teraḥ’s wrath was kindled against his son
Aḇram, when he spoke this; and Teraḥ said to Aḇram
his son in his wrath, “What is this tale that you have
told? You speak lies to me!
636

JASHER

“Is there in these mighty ones spirit, being or power
to do all you have told me? Are they not wood and
stone, and have I not myself made them, and can you
speak such lies, saying that the large mighty one that
was with them smote them? It is you that placed the
hatchet in his hands, and then say he smote them all!”
43 And Aḇram answered his father and said to him,
“And how can you then serve these idols in whom
there is no power to do any matter? Can those idols in
which you trust deliver you? Can they hear your
prayers when you call upon them? Can they deliver
you from the hands of your enemies, or will they fight
your battles for you against your enemies, that you
should serve wood and stone which can neither speak
nor hear?
44 “And now indeed it is not good for you nor for the
sons of men that are connected with you, to do these
matters. Are you so ignorant, so foolish or so short of
understanding that you will serve wood and stone, and
do after this manner,
45 and forget HWHY Elohim who made the shamayim
and earth, and who created you in the earth, and bring
a great evil upon your beings in this matter by serving
stone and wood?
46 “Did not our fathers in days of old sin in this matter,
and HWHY Elohim of the universe brought the waters of
the flood upon them and destroyed the whole earth?
47 “And how can you continue to do this and serve
mighty ones of wood and stone, who cannot hear, or
speak, or deliver you from oppression, bringing down
the wrath of the Elohim of the universe upon you?
48 “Now therefore my father, refrain from this, and do
not bring evil upon your being and the beings of your
household.”
49 And Aḇram hastened and leaped from before his
father, and took the hatchet from his father’s largest
idol, with which Aḇram broke it and ran away.
42

637

YASHAR

And Teraḥ, seeing all that Aḇram had done,
hastened to go from his house, and he went to the
sovereign and he came before Nimroḏ and stood
before him. And he bowed down to the sovereign, and
the sovereign said, “What do you want?”
51 And he said, “I beg you my master, to hear me...
Now, fifty years ago a child was born to me, and thus
has he done to my mighty ones and thus has he
spoken; and now therefore, my master and sovereign,
send for him that he may come before you, and judge
him according to the law, that we may be delivered
from his evil.”
52 And the sovereign sent three men of his servants,
and they went and brought Aḇram before the
sovereign. And Nimroḏ and all his princes and
servants were sitting before him that day, and Teraḥ
also sat before them.
53 And the sovereign said to Aḇram, “What is this that
you have done to your father and to his mighty ones?”
And Aḇram answered the sovereign in the words that
he spoke to his father, and he said, “The large mighty
one that was with them in the house did to them what
you have heard.”
54 And the sovereign said to Aḇram, “Had they power
to speak, and eat, and do as you have said?” And
Aḇram answered the sovereign, saying, “And if there
be no power in them why do you serve them and cause
the sons of men to stray through your folly?”
55 “Do you think that they can deliver you or do
anything small or great, that you should serve them?
And why will you not acknowledge the Elohim of the
whole universe, who created you and in whose power
it is to kill and keep alive?
56 “O foolish, simple, and ignorant sovereign, woe
unto you forever!
57 “I thought you would teach your servants the
upright Way, but you have not done this, and have
50

638

JASHER

filled the whole earth with your sins and the sins of your
people who have followed your ways.
58 “Do you not know, or have you not heard, that this
evil which you do, our ancestors sinned there in days
of old? And the eternal Elohim brought the waters of
the flood upon them and destroyed them all, and also
destroyed the whole earth for their sakes. And will you
and your people rise up now and do likewise in this
work, in order to bring down the wrath of HWHY Elohim
of the universe, and to bring evil upon you and the
whole earth?
59 “Now therefore put away this evil deed which you
do, and serve the Elohim of the universe, as your being
is in His hands, and then it will be well with you.
60 “And if your wicked heart will not listen to my words
to cause you to forsake your evil ways, and to serve
the eternal Elohim, then will you die in shame in the
latter days, you, your people, and all who are
connected with you, hearing your words or walking in
your evil ways.”
61 And when Aḇram had ceased speaking before the
sovereign and princes, Aḇram lifted up his eyes to the
shamayim, and he said, “HWHY sees all the wicked,
and He will judge them.”

12 And when the sovereign heard the words of
Aḇram he ordered him to be put into prison; and Aḇram
was ten days in prison.
2 And at the end of those days the sovereign ordered
that all the sovereigns, princes and governors of
different provinces and the wise men should come
before him, and they sat before him, and Aḇram was
still in the prison house.
3 And the sovereign said to the princes and wise
men, “Have you heard what Aḇram, son of Teraḥ, has
done to his father? Thus has he done to him, and I
ordered him to be brought before me, and thus has he
639

YASHAR

spoken. His heart did not doubt him, neither did he stir
in my presence, and see, now he is confined in the
prison.
4 “And therefore decide what judgment is due to this
man who reviled the sovereign; who spoke and did all
the matters that you heard.”
5 And they all answered the sovereign saying, “The
man who reviles the sovereign should be hanged upon
a tree; but having done all the matters that he said, and
having despised our mighty ones, he must therefore
be burned to death, for this is the law in this matter.
6 “If it pleases the sovereign to do this, let him order
his servants to kindle a fire both night and day in your
brick furnace, and then we will throw this man into it!”
And the sovereign did so, and he commanded his
servants that they should prepare a fire for three days
and three nights in the sovereign’s furnace, that is in
Kasdim. And the sovereign ordered them to take
Aḇram from prison and bring him out to be burned.
7 And all the sovereign’s servants, princes, masters,
governors, and judges, and all the inhabitants of the
land - about nine hundred thousand men - stood
opposite the furnace to see Aḇram.
8 And all the women and little ones crowded on the
roofs and towers to see what was done with Aḇram.
And they all stood together at a distance, and there
was not a man left that did not come on that day to
watch the event.
9 And when Aḇram was brought, the astrologers of
the sovereign and the wise men saw Aḇram, and they
cried out to the sovereign, saying, “Our sovereign
master! Indeed, this is the man whom we know to have
been the child at whose birth the great star swallowed
the four stars, which we declared to the sovereign now
fifty years since.

640

JASHER

“And see, now his father has also transgressed
your commands, and mocked you by bringing you
another child, which you killed.”
11 And when the sovereign heard their words, he was
exceedingly wroth, and he ordered Teraḥ to be
brought before him.
12 And the sovereign said, “Have you heard what the
astrologers have spoken? Now tell me truly, did you do
so? And if you shall speak truth you shall be acquitted.”
13 And seeing that the sovereign’s wrath was greatly
burning, Teraḥ said to the sovereign, “My master and
sovereign, you have heard the truth, and what the wise
men have spoken is right.” And the sovereign said,
“How could you do this matter, to transgress my orders
and to give me a child that you did not bring forth, and
to take value for him?”
14 And Teraḥ answered the sovereign, “Because my
tender feelings were stirred for my son at that time, and
I took a son of my female servant, and I brought him to
the sovereign.”
15 And the sovereign said, “Who advised you to do
this? Tell me, do not hide anything from me, and then
you shall not die.”
16 And Teraḥ was greatly afraid in the sovereign’s
presence, and he said to the sovereign, “It was Haran
my eldest son who advised me to this.” And Haran was
thirty-two years old in those days that Aḇram was born.
17 But Haran did not advise his father to do anything,
for Teraḥ said this to the sovereign in order to deliver
his being from the sovereign, for he feared greatly. And
the sovereign said to Teraḥ, “Haran your son who
advised you to do this shall die through fire with Aḇram;
for the sentence of death is upon him for having
rebelled against the sovereign’s desire in doing this
matter!”
18 And Haran at that time felt inclined to follow the
Ways of Aḇram, but he kept it within himself.
10

641

YASHAR

And Haran said in his heart, “See, now the
sovereign has seized Aḇram because of these matters
which Aḇram did, and it shall come to pass, that if
Aḇram prevails over the sovereign I will follow him, but
if the sovereign prevails, I will go after the sovereign.”
20 And when Teraḥ had spoken this to the sovereign
concerning Haran his son, the sovereign ordered
Haran to be seized with Aḇram.
21 And they brought them both, Aḇram and Haran his
brother, to throw them into the fire; and all the
inhabitants of the land and the sovereign’s servants
and princes and all the women and little ones were
there, standing over them that day.
22 And the sovereign’s servants took Aḇram and his
brother, and they stripped them of all their clothes
except their lower garments which were on them.
23 And they bound their hands and feet with flax cords,
and the servants of the sovereign lifted them up and
threw them both into the furnace.
24 And HWHY loved Aḇram and He had compassion on
him, and HWHY came down and delivered Aḇram from
the fire and he was not burned.
25 But all the cords with which they bound him were
burned, while Aḇram remained and walked about in
the fire.
26 And Haran died when they had thrown him into the
fire, and he was burned to ashes, for his heart was not
perfect with HWHY. And those men who threw him into
the fire, the flame of the fire spread over them, and
they were burned, and twelve men of them died.
27 And Aḇram walked in the midst of the fire three
days and three nights, and all the servants of the
sovereign saw him walking in the fire, and they came
and told the sovereign, saying, “See, we have seen
Aḇram walking about in the midst of the fire, and even
the lower garments which are upon him are not
19

642

JASHER

burned, but the cord with which he was bound is
burned!”
28 And when the sovereign heard their words his heart
fainted and he would not believe them; so he sent
other trustworthy princes to see this matter, and they
went and saw it and told it to the sovereign; and the
sovereign rose to go and see it, and he saw Aḇram
walking to and fro in the midst of the fire, and he saw
the body of Haran burned, and the sovereign
wondered greatly.
29 And the sovereign ordered Aḇram to be taken out
from the fire; and his servants approached to take him
out but they could not, for the fire was round about and
the flame ascending toward them from the furnace.
30 And the sovereign’s servants fled from it, and the
sovereign rebuked them, saying, “Make haste and
bring Aḇram out of the fire so that you shall not die!”
31 And the servants of the sovereign again
approached to bring Aḇram out, and the flames came
upon them and burned their faces so that eight of them
died.
32 And when the sovereign saw that his servants
could not approach the fire lest they should be burned,
the sovereign called to Aḇram, “O servant of the
Elohim who is in the shamayim, come out from the
midst of the fire and come here before me.” and Aḇram
listened to the voice of the sovereign, and he came out
from the fire and came and stood before the sovereign.
33 And when Aḇram came out, the sovereign and all
his servants saw Aḇram coming before the sovereign,
with his lower garments upon him, for they were not
burned, but the cord with which he was bound was
burned.
34 And the sovereign said to Aḇram, “How is it that you
were not burned in the fire?”
35 And Aḇram said to the sovereign, “The Elohim of
the shamayim and earth in whom I trust and who has
643

YASHAR

all in His power, He delivered me from the fire into
which you cast me.”
36 And Haran the brother of Aḇram was burned to
ashes, and they sought for his body, but they found it
consumed.
37 And Haran was eighty-two years old when he died
in the fire of Kasdim. And the sovereign, princes,
inhabitants of the land, seeing that Aḇram was
delivered from the fire, came and bowed down to
Aḇram.
38 And Aḇram said to them, “Do not bow down to me,
but bow down to the Elohim of the world who made
you, and serve Him, and go in His Ways for it is He
who delivered me from out of this fire, and it is He who
created the beings and spirits of all men, and formed
man in his mother’s womb, and brought him forth into
the world; and it is He who will deliver those who trust
in Him from all pain.”
39 And this matter seemed very wondrous in the eyes
of the sovereign and princes, that Aḇram was saved
from the fire and that Haran was burned; and the
sovereign gave Aḇram many presents and he gave
him his two chief servants from the sovereign’s house;
the name of one was Oni and the name of the other
was Eli’ezer.
40 And all the sovereigns, princes and servants gave
Aḇram many gifts of silver and gold and pearl, and the
sovereign and his princes sent him away, and he went
in peace.
41 And Aḇram went out from the sovereign in peace,
and many of the sovereign’s servants followed him,
and about three hundred men joined him.
42 And Aḇram returned on that day and went to his
father’s house, he and the men that followed him, and
Aḇram served HWHY his Elohim all the days of his life,
and he walked in His Ways and followed His Torah.
644

JASHER

And from then onward Aḇram inclined the hearts of
the sons of men to serve HWHY.
44 And at that time Naḥor and Aḇram took for
themselves wives, the daughters of their brother
Haran. The wife of Naḥor was Milkah and the name of
Aḇram’s wife was Sarai, but Sarai, wife of Aḇram, was
barren; she had no offspring in those days.
45 And at the passing of two years from Aḇram’s going
out of the fire, that is, in the fifty-second year of his life,
see, sovereign Nimroḏ sat in Baḇel upon the throne,
and the sovereign fell asleep and dreamed that he was
standing with his companies and armies in a valley
opposite the sovereign’s furnace.
46 And he lifted his eyes and saw a man in the
likeness of Aḇram coming out from the furnace, and
that he came and stood before the sovereign with his
sword drawn, and then leaped to the sovereign with
his sword. The sovereign then fled from the man, for
he was afraid, and while he was running, the man
threw an egg on the sovereign’s head, and the egg
became a great river.
47 And the sovereign dreamed that all his companies
sank in that river and died. And the sovereign fled with
three men who were before him and he escaped.
48 And the sovereign looked at these men and they
were clothed in princely robes, as the garments of
sovereigns, and had the appearance and esteem of
sovereigns.
49 And while they were running, the river again turned
into an egg before the sovereign, and there came out
from the egg a young bird which came before the
sovereign, and flew at his head and plucked out the
sovereign’s eye.
50 And the sovereign was grieved at the sight, and he
awoke out of his sleep and his spirit was agitated; and
he felt a great fear.
43

645

YASHAR

And in the morning the sovereign rose from his
couch in fear, and when he ordered all the wise men
and magicians to come before him, the sovereign
related his dream to them.
52 And a wise servant of the sovereign, whose name
was Anuki, answered the sovereign, saying, “This is
none else but the evil of Aḇram and his seed which will
spring up against my master and sovereign in the latter
days.
53 “And see, the day will come when Aḇram and his
seed and the children of his household will fight
against my sovereign, and they will smite all the
sovereign’s armies and his companies.
54 “And as to what you have said concerning three
men which you saw like yourself, and which escaped,
this means that only you will escape with three
sovereigns from the sovereigns of the earth who will
be with you in battle.
55 “And that which you saw of the river which turned
into an egg as at first, and the young bird plucking out
your eye, this means none else but the seed of Aḇram
which will slay the sovereign in latter days.
56 “This is my sovereign’s dream, and this is its
interpretation, and the dream is true, and the
interpretation which your servant has given you is
right.
57 “Now therefore my sovereign, indeed you know that
it is now fifty-two years since your wise men saw this
at the birth of Aḇram, and if my sovereign will allow
Aḇram to live on the earth it will be to the injury of my
master and sovereign, for all the days that Aḇram lives,
neither you, nor your reign will be established, for this
was known formerly at his birth. And why will my
sovereign not slay him, that his evil may be kept from
you in latter days?”
58 And Nimroḏ listened to the voice of Anuki, and he
sent some of his servants in secret to go and seize
51

646

JASHER

Aḇram, and bring him before the sovereign to suffer
death.
59 And Eli’ezer, Aḇram’s servant whom the sovereign
had given him, was at that time in the presence of the
sovereign, and he heard what Anuki had advised the
sovereign, and what the sovereign had said to cause
Aḇram’s death.
60 And Eli’ezer said to Aḇram, “Hurry, rise up and save
your being, that you may not die through the hands of
the sovereign, for thus did he see in a dream
concerning you, and thus did Anuki interpret it, and
thus also did Anuki advise the sovereign concerning
you.”
61 And Aḇram listened to the voice of Eli’ezer, and
Aḇram hastened and ran for safety to the house of
Noaḥ and his son Shĕm, and he concealed himself
there and found a place of safety. And the sovereign’s
servants came to Aḇram’s house to seek him, but they
could not find him. And they searched through out the
country and he was not to be found, and they went and
searched in every direction and he was not to be met
with.
62 And when the sovereign’s servants could not find
Aḇram they returned to the sovereign, and the
sovereign’s wrath against Aḇram was stilled, as they
did not find him, and the sovereign drove from his mind
this matter concerning Aḇram.
63 And Aḇram was concealed in Noaḥ’s house for one
month, until the sovereign had forgotten this matter,
but Aḇram was still afraid of the sovereign. And Teraḥ
came to see Aḇram his son secretly in the house of
Noaḥ, and Teraḥ was very great in the eyes of the
sovereign.
64 And Aḇram said to his father, “Do you not know that
the sovereign thinks to slay me, and to annihilate my
name from the earth by the advice of his wicked
counsellors?
647

YASHAR

“Now whom have you here, and what have you in
this land? Arise, let us go together to the land of
Kena’an, that we may be delivered from his hand, lest
you also perish through him in the latter days.
66 “Do you not know, or have you not heard, that it is
not through love that Nimroḏ gives you all this honour,
but it is only for his benefit that he bestows all this good
upon you?
67 “And if he does to you greater good than this,
indeed these are only vanities of the world, for wealth
and riches cannot help in the day of rage and wrath.
68 “Now therefore listen to my voice, and let us arise
and go to the land of Kena’an, out of the reach of injury
from Nimroḏ; and serve HWHY who created you in the
earth and it will be well with you. And cast away all the
worthlessness which you pursue.”
69 And Aḇram ceased to speak, then Noaḥ and his
son Shĕm answered Teraḥ, saying, “The word is right
which Aḇram has said to you.”
70 And Teraḥ listened to the voice of his son Aḇram,
and Teraḥ did all that Aḇram said, for this was from
HWHY, that the sovereign should not cause Aḇram’s
death.
65

13 And Teraḥ took his son Aḇram and his grandson
Lot, son of Haran, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, the
wife of his son Aḇram, and all the beings of his
household and went with them from Ur-Kasdim to go
to the land of Kena’an. And when they came as far as
the land of Haran they remained there, for it was
exceedingly good land for pasture, and of large
enough for those who accompanied them.
2 And the people of the land of Ḥaran saw that Aḇram
was good and upright with Elohim and men, and that
HWHY his Elohim was with him. And some of the people
of the land of Ḥaran came and joined Aḇram, and he
taught them the instruction of HWHY and His Ways, and
648

JASHER

these men remained with Aḇram in his house and they
clung to him.
3 And Aḇram remained in the land three years, and
at the passing of three years HWHY appeared to Aḇram
and said to him; “I am HWHY who brought you out from
Ur-Kasdim, and delivered you from the hands of all
your enemies.
4 “And now therefore if you will listen to My voice and
keep My Commandments, My Torot and My Laws,
then will I cause your enemies to fall before you, and I
will multiply your seed like the stars of the shamayim.
And I will send My beraḵah on all the works of your
hands, and you shall lack nothing.
5 “Arise now, take your wife and all belonging to you
and go to the land of Kena’an and remain there, and I
will be Elohim to you there, and I will baraḵ you.” And
Aḇram rose and took his wife and all belonging to him,
and he went to the land of Kena’an as HWHY had told
him; and Aḇram was fifty years old when he went from
Ḥaran.
6 And Aḇram came to the land of Kena’an and dwelt
in the midst of the city, and he pitched his tent there
among the children of Kena’an, inhabitants of the land.
7 And HWHY appeared to Aḇram when he came to the
land of Kena’an, and said to him, “This is the land
which I gave to you and to your seed after you forever.
And I will make your seed like the stars of the
shamayim, and I will give to your seed all the lands
which you see for an inheritance.”
8 And Aḇram built an altar in the place where Elohim
had spoken to him, and there Aḇram called on the
Name of HWHY.
9 At that time, at the end of three years of Aḇram’s
dwelling in the land of Kena’an, in that year Noaḥ died,
which was the fifty-eighth year of the life of Aḇram. And
all the days that Noaḥ lived were nine hundred and fifty
years and he died.
649

YASHAR

And Aḇram dwelt in the land of Kena’an, he, his
wife, and all belonging to him, and all those that
accompanied him, together with those that joined him
from the people of the land. But Naḥor, Aḇram’s
brother, and Teraḥ his father, and Lot son of Haran and
all belonging to them dwelt in Ḥaran.
11 In the fifth year of Aḇram’s dwelling in the land of
Kena’an the people of Seḏom and Amorah and all the
cities of the plain revolted from the power of
Keḏorla’omer, sovereign of Ĕylam; for all the
sovereigns of the cities of the plain had served
Keḏorla’omer for twelve years, and given him a yearly
levy, but in those days, in the thirteenth year, they
rebelled against him.
12 And in the tenth year of Aḇram’s dwelling in the land
of Kena’an there was fighting between Nimroḏ
sovereign of Shin’ar and Keḏorla’omer sovereign of
Ĕylam, and Nimroḏ came to fight against Keḏorla’omer
and to subdue him.
13 For Keḏorla’omer was at that time one of the
princes of the armies of Nimroḏ. And when all the
people at the tower were dispersed and those that
remained were also scattered over the face of the
earth, Keḏorla’omer went to the land of Ĕylam and
reigned over it and rebelled against his master.
14 And in those days when Nimroḏ saw that the cities
of the plain had rebelled, he came with pride and wrath
to fight against Keḏorla’omer. And Nimroḏ assembled
all his princes and subjects - about seven hundred
thousand men - and went against Keḏorla’omer. And
Keḏorla’omer went out to meet him with five thousand
men, and they prepared for battle in the valley of Baḇel
which is between Ĕylam and Shin’ar.
15 And all those sovereigns fought there, and Nimroḏ
and his people were smitten before the people of
Keḏorla’omer, and there fell from Nimroḏ’s men about
10

650

JASHER

six hundred thousand, and Mardon the sovereign’s
son fell among them.
16 And Nimroḏ fled and returned in shame and
disgrace to his land, and he was under subjection to
Keḏorla’omer for a long time. And Keḏorla’omer
returned to his land and sent princes of his army to the
sovereigns that dwelt around him, to Aryoḵ sovereign
of Ellasar, and to Tiḏ’al sovereign of Goyim, and made
a covenant with them, and they were all obedient to his
commands.
17 And it came to be in the fifteenth year of Aḇram’s
dwelling in the land of Kena’an, which is the seventieth
year of the life of Aḇram that HWHY appeared to Aḇram
in that year. And he said to him, “I am HWHY who
brought you out from Ur-Kasdim to give you this land
for an inheritance.
18 “Now therefore, walk before Me and be perfect and
keep My Commands, for to you and to your seed I will
give this land for an inheritance, from the river
Mitsrayim to the great river Perath.
19 “And you shall come to your fathers in peace and
in good age, and the fourth generation shall return
here in this land and shall inherit it forever.” And Aḇram
built an altar, and he called on the Name of HWHY who
appeared to him, and he offered burnt offerings on the
altar to HWHY.
20 At that time Aḇram returned and went to Ḥaran to
see his father and mother, and his father’s household.
And Aḇram and his wife and all belonging to him
returned to Ḥaran, and Aḇram dwelt in Ḥaran five
years.
21 And many of the people of Ḥaran, about seventytwo men, followed Aḇram. And Aḇram taught them the
instruction of HWHY and His Ways, and he taught them
to know HWHY.

651

YASHAR

In those days HWHY appeared to Aḇram in Ḥaran,
and He said to him, “See, I spoke to you these twenty
years ago saying,
23 “Go out from your land, from your birth-place and
from your father’s house, to the land which I have
shown you to give it to you and to your children, for
there in that land will I baraḵ you, and make you a great
nation, and make your name great, and in you shall the
clans of the earth be baruḵ.
24 Now therefore arise, go out from this place, you,
your wife, and all belonging to you, also every one born
in your I house and all the beings you have made in
Ḥaran, and bring them out with you from here, and rise
to return to the land of Kena’an.
25 And Aḇram arose and took his wife Sarai and all
belonging to him and all that were born to him in his
house and the beings which they had made in Ḥaran,
and they came out to go to the land of Kena’an.
26 And Aḇram went and returned to the land of
Kena’an, according to the word of HWHY, and Lot son
of his brother Haran went with him. And Aḇram was
seventy-five years old when he went out from Ḥaran to
return to the land of Kena’an.
27 And he came to the land of Kena’an according to
the word of HWHY to Aḇram, and he pitched his tent
and he dwelt in the plain of Mamrĕ. And with him was
Lot his brother’s son, and all belonging to him.
28 And HWHY again appeared to Aḇram and said, “To
your seed I will give this land.” And he built an altar
there to HWHY who appeared to him, which is still in the
plains of Mamrĕ to this day.
22

14 In those days there was in the land of Shin’ar a
wise man who had understanding in all wisdom, and
good-looking, but he was poor and needy. His name
was Riḵayon and he was hard pressed to support
himself.
652

JASHER

And he resolved to go to Mitsrayim, to Oswiris son
of Anamim sovereign of Mitsrayim, to show the
sovereign his wisdom - for maybe he might find favour
in his sight, to raise him up and give him support - and
Riḵayon did so.
3 And when Riḵayon came to Mitsrayim he asked the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim concerning the sovereign, and
the inhabitants of Mitsrayim told him the custom of the
sovereign of Mitsrayim, for it was then the custom of
the sovereign of Mitsrayim that he went from his royal
palace and was seen abroad only one day in the year,
and after that the sovereign would return to his palace
to remain there.
4 And on the day when the sovereign went forth he
passed judgment in the land, and every one having a
case came before the sovereign that day to obtain his
request.
5 And when Riḵayon heard of the custom in
Mitsrayim and that he could not come into the
presence of the sovereign, he grieved greatly and was
very sorrowful.
6 And in the evening Riḵayon went out and found a
house in ruins, formerly a bakehouse in Mitsrayim, and
he stayed there all night in bitterness of being and
pinched with hunger, and sleep fled from his eyes.
7 And Riḵayon considered within himself what he
should do in the town until the sovereign made his
appearance, and how maintain himself there.
8 And he rose in the morning and walked about, and
met in his way those who sold vegetables and various
kinds of seed with which they supplied the inhabitants.
9 And Riḵayon wanted to do the same in order to get
a livelihood in the city, but he was unacquainted with
the custom of the people, and he was like a blind man
among them.
10 And he went and obtained vegetables to sell them
for his support, and the rabble assembled about him
2

653

YASHAR

and ridiculed him, and took his vegetables from him
and left him nothing.
11 And he rose up from there in bitterness of being,
and went sighing to the bakehouse in which he had
remained all the night before, and he slept there the
second night.
12 And on that night again he reasoned within himself
how he could save himself from starvation, and he
devised a scheme how to act.
13 And he rose up in the morning and acted cleverly,
and went and hired thirty strong men of the rabble
carrying their weapons in their hands, and he led them
to the top of the Mitsrite tomb, and he placed them
there.
14 And he commanded them, saying, “Thus said the
sovereign, ‘Strengthen yourselves and be mighty men,
and let no man be buried here until two hundred pieces
of silver be given, and then he may be buried.’ ” And
those men did according to the order of Riḵayon to the
people of Mitsrayim the whole of that year.
15 And in eight months time Riḵayon and his men
gathered great riches of silver and gold, and Riḵayon
took a great quantity of horses and other animals, and
he hired more men, and he gave them horses and they
remained with him.
16 And at the turn of the year, at the time the sovereign
went forth into the town, all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim
assembled together to speak to him concerning the
work of Riḵayon and his men.
17 And the sovereign went forth on the appointed day,
and all the Mitsrites came before him and cried to him,
saying,
18 “May the sovereign live forever. What is this matter
you do in the town to your servants, to not allow a dead
body to be buried until so much silver and gold be
given? Was there ever the like of this done in the whole
earth, from the days of former sovereigns even from
654

JASHER

the days of Aḏam, to this day, that the dead should not
be buried except for a fixed price?
19 “We know it to be the custom of sovereigns to take
a yearly levy from the living, and you do not only do
this, but from the dead also you exact a levy day by
day.
20 “Now, O sovereign, we can no longer bear this, for
this sake the whole city is ruined, and do you not know
it?”
21 And when the sovereign heard all that they had
spoken he was very wroth, and his wrath burned within
him at this matter, for he had known nothing of it.
22 And the sovereign said, “Who and where is he that
dares to do this wicked matter in my land without my
command? Indeed you will tell me!”
23 And they told him all the works of Riḵayon and his
men, and the sovereign’s wrath was aroused, and he
ordered Riḵayon and his men to be brought before
him.
24 And Riḵayon took about a thousand children, sons
and daughters, and clothed them in silk and
embroidery, and he put them on horses and sent them
to the sovereign by means of his men. And he also
took a great quantity of silver and gold and precious
stones, and a strong and good-looking horse, as a
present for the sovereign, with which he came before
the sovereign and bowed down to the earth before
him. And the sovereign, his servants and all the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim wondered at the work of
Riḵayon, and they saw his riches and the present that
he had brought to the sovereign.
25 And it greatly pleased the sovereign and he
wondered at it, and when Riḵayon sat before him, the
sovereign asked him concerning all his works. And
Riḵayon spoke all his words wisely before the
sovereign, his servants and all the inhabitants of
Mitsrayim.
655

YASHAR

And when the sovereign heard the words of
Riḵayon and his wisdom, Riḵayon found favour in his
sight, and he met with favour and kindness from all the
servants of the sovereign and from all the inhabitants
of Mitsrayim, because of his wisdom and excellent
speeches, and from that time they loved him
exceedingly.
27 And the sovereign answered and said to Riḵayon,
“Your name shall no more be called Riḵayon but your
name shall be Pharaoh, since you exacted a levy from
the dead,” and he called his name Pharaoh.
28 And the sovereign and his subjects loved Riḵayon
for his wisdom, and they consulted with all the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim to make him prefect under the
sovereign.
29 And all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim and its wise
men did so, and it was made a law in Mitsrayim.
30 And they made Riḵayon Pharaoh prefect under
Oswiris sovereign of Mitsrayim, and Riḵayon Pharaoh
governed over Mitsrayim, daily administering rightruling to the whole city, but Oswiris the sovereign
would judge the people of the land one day in the year,
when he went out to make his appearance.
31 And Riḵayon Pharaoh cunningly usurped the reign
of Mitsrayim, and he exacted a levy from all the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim.
32 And all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim greatly loved
Riḵayon Pharaoh, and they made a decree to call
every sovereign that should reign over them and their
seed in Mitsrayim, Pharaoh.
33 Therefore all the sovereigns that reigned in
Mitsrayim from that time onward were called Pharaoh
to this day.
26

15 And in that year there was a severe scarcity of
food throughout the land of Kena’an, and the
656

JASHER

inhabitants of the land could not remain because of the
scarcity of food for it was very grievous.
2 And Aḇram and all belonging to him rose and went
down to Mitsrayim because of the scarcity of food, and
when they were at the wadi of Mitsrayim they remained
there some time to rest from the fatigue of the journey.
3 And Aḇram and Sarai were walking at the border of
the wadi of Mitsrayim, and Aḇram saw his wife Sarai
that she was very good-looking.
4 And Aḇram said to his wife Sarai, “Since Elohim
has created you with such a good-looking appearance,
I am afraid of the Mitsrites lest they should slay me and
take you away, for the fear of Elohim is not in these
places.
5 “Indeed then you shall do this: say you are my sister
to all that may ask you, in order that it may be well with
me, and that we may live and not be put to death.”
6 And Aḇram commanded the same to all those that
came with him to Mitsrayim because of the scarcity of
food; also his nephew Lot he commanded, saying, “If
the Mitsrites ask you concerning Sarai say, ‘She is the
sister of Aḇram.’ ”
7 And yet with all these orders Aḇram did not put
confidence in them, but he took Sarai and placed her
in a chest and concealed it among their goods, for
Aḇram was greatly concerned about Sarai because of
the wickedness of the Mitsrites.
8 And Aḇram and all belonging to him rose up from
the wadi of Mitsrayim and came to Mitsrayim. And they
had scarcely entered the gates of the city when the
guards stood up to them saying, “Give tithe to the
sovereign from what you have, and then you may
come into the town.” And Aḇram and those that were
with him did so.
9 And Aḇram with the people that were with him
came to Mitsrayim, and when they came they brought
657

YASHAR

the chest in which Sarai was concealed and the
Mitsrites saw the chest.
10 And the sovereign’s servants approached Aḇram,
saying, “What have your here in this chest which we
have not seen? Now open the chest and give tithe to
the sovereign of all that it contains.”
11 And Aḇram said, “This chest I will not open, but all
you demand upon it I will give. And Pharaoh’s officers
answered Aḇram, saying, “It is a chest of precious
stones, give us the tenth of it.”
12 Aḇram said, “All that you desire I will give, but you
must not open the chest.”
13 But the sovereign’s officers pressed Aḇram, and
they reached the chest and opened it with force, and
they looked, and see, a good-looking woman was in
the chest!
14 And when the officers of the sovereign saw Sarai
they were struck with admiration at her good looks, and
all the princes and servants of Pharaoh assembled to
see Sarai, for she was very good-looking. And the
sovereign’s officers ran and told Pharaoh all that they
had seen, and they praised Sarai to the sovereign, and
Pharaoh ordered her to be brought, and the woman
came before the sovereign.
15 And Pharaoh saw Sarai and she pleased him
exceedingly, and he was struck with her good looks.
And the sovereign rejoiced greatly for her sake, and
bestowed presents on those who brought him the
news concerning her.
16 And the woman was then brought to Pharaoh’s
house, and Aḇram grieved for the sake of his wife, and
he prayed to HWHY deliver her from the hands of
Pharaoh.
17 And Sarai also prayed at that time and said, “O
HWHY Elohim, You told my master Aḇram to go from
his land and from his father’s house to the land of
Kena’an, and You promised to do well with him if he
658

JASHER

would perform Your Commands. Now see, we have
done that which You Commanded us, and we left our
land and our clans, and we went to a strange land and
to a people whom we have not known before.
18 “And we came to this land to avoid the scarcity of
food, and this evil accident has befallen me. Now
therefore, O HWHY Elohim, deliver us and save us from
the hand of this oppressor, and do well with me for the
sake of your favour.”
19 And HWHY listened to the voice of Sarai, and HWHY
sent a messenger to deliver Sarai from the power of
Pharaoh.
20 And the sovereign came and sat before Sarai and
see, a messenger of HWHY was standing over them,
and he appeared to Sarai and said to her, “Do not fear,
for HWHY has heard your prayer.”
21 And the sovereign approached Sarai and said to
her, “What is that man to you who brought you here?”
And she said, “He is my brother.”
22 And the sovereign said, “It is necessary for us to
make him great, to exalt him and to do to him all the
good which you shall command us.” And at that time
the sovereign sent to Aḇram silver and gold and
precious stones in great amount, together with cattle,
male servants and female servants. And the sovereign
ordered Aḇram to be brought, and he sat in the court
of the sovereign’s house, and the sovereign greatly
exalted Aḇram on that night.
23 And the sovereign approached to speak to Sarai,
and he reached out his hand to touch her, when the
messenger smote him heavily, and he was afraid and
he refrained from reaching to her.
24 And when the sovereign came near to Sarai, the
messenger smote him to the ground, and did so to him
the whole night, and the sovereign was afraid.
25 And on that night the messenger smote all the
servants of the sovereign, and his whole household
659

YASHAR

severely because of Sarai, and there was a great
lamentation that night among the people of Pharaoh’s
house.
26 And Pharaoh, seeing the evil that befell him, said,
“Indeed this matter has befallen me because of this
woman.” And he removed himself to some distance
from her and spoke pleasing words to her.
27 And the sovereign said to Sarai, “Please tell me
concerning the man with whom you came here,” and
Sarai said, “This man is my husband, and I said to you
that he was my brother for I was afraid, lest you should
put him to death through wickedness.”
28 And the sovereign kept away from Sarai, and the
plagues of the messenger of HWHY ceased from him
and his household. And Pharaoh knew that he was
smitten because of Sarai, and the sovereign was
greatly astonished at this.
29 And in the morning the sovereign called for Aḇram
and said to him, “What is this you have done to me?
Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’, owing to which I
took her to me for a wife, and therefore this heavy
plague has come upon me and my household?
30 “Now therefore here is your wife, take her and go
from our land lest we all die for her sake!” And Pharaoh
took more cattle, male servants and female servants,
and silver and gold, to give to Aḇram, and he returned
Sarai his wife to him.
31 And the sovereign took a maiden whom he brought
forth by his concubines, and he gave her to Sarai for a
female servant.
32 And the sovereign said to his daughter, “It is better
for you, my daughter to be a female servant in this
man’s house than to be mistress in my house, after we
have seen the evil that befell us because of this
woman.”
33 And Aḇram arose, and he and all belonging to him
went away from Mitsrayim. And Pharaoh ordered
660

JASHER

some of his men to accompany him and all that went
with him.
34 And Aḇram returned to the land of Kena’an, to the
place where he had made the altar, where he at first
had pitched his tent.
35 And Lot son of Haran, Aḇram’s brother, had a
numerous stock of cattle, flocks and herds and tents,
for HWHY was good to them because of Aḇram.
36 And when Aḇram was dwelling in the land, the
herdsmen of Lot quarrelled. with the herdsmen of
Aḇram, for their property was too great for them to
remain together in the land, and the land could not
bear them because of their cattle.
37 And when Aḇram’s herdsmen went to feed their
flock they would not go into the fields of the people of
the land, but the cattle of Lot’s herdsmen did
otherwise, for they were sent to feed in the fields of the
people of the land.
38 And the people of the land saw this occurrence
daily, and they came to Aḇram and quarrelled with him
because of Lot’s herdsmen.
39 And Aḇram said to Lot, “What is this you are doing
to me, to make me despicable to the inhabitants of the
land, that you ordered your herdsman to feed your
cattle in the fields of other people? Do you not know
that I am a stranger in this land among the children of
Kena’an, and why would you do this to me?”
40 And Aḇram quarrelled daily with Lot because of
this, but Lot would not listen to Aḇram, and he
continued to do the same, and the inhabitants of the
land came and told Aḇram.
41 And Aḇram said to Lot, “How long will you be for a
stumbling block to me with the inhabitants of the land?
Now please, let there be no more quarrelling between
us, for we are kinsmen.
42 “But please separate from me, go and choose a
place where you may dwell with your cattle and all
661

YASHAR

belonging to you, but keep yourself at a distance from
me, you and your household.
43 “And do not be afraid in going from me, for if anyone
does injury to you, let me know and I will avenge your
cause from him, only remove from me.”
44 And when Aḇram had spoken all these words to
Lot, then Lot rose and lifted his eyes toward the plain
of Yardĕn.
45 And he saw that the whole of the place was well
watered, and good for man as well as affording pasture
for the cattle.
46 And Lot went from Aḇram to that place, and he
pitched his tent there and he dwelt in Seḏom, and they
were separated from each other.
47 And Aḇram dwelt in the plain of Mamrĕ, which is in
Heḇron, and he pitched his tent there, and Aḇram
remained in that place many years.

16 At that time Keḏorla’omer sovereign of Ĕylam sent
to all the neighbouring sovereigns, to Nimroḏ,
sovereign of Shin’ar who was then under his power,
and to Tiḏ’al, sovereign of Goyim, and to Aryoḵ,
sovereign of Ellasar, with whom he made a covenant,
saying, “Come up to me and assist me, that we may
smite all the towns of Seḏom and its inhabitants, for
they have rebelled against me these thirteen years.”
2 And these four sovereigns went up with all their
armies - about eight hundred thousand men - and they
went as they were, and smote every man they found
in their way.
3 And the five sovereigns of Seḏom and Amorah,
Shinaḇ sovereign of Aḏmah, Shem’ĕḇer sovereign of
Tseḇoyim, Bera sovereign of Seḏom, Birsha sovereign
of Amorah, and Bela sovereign of Tso’ar, went out to
meet them, and they all joined together in the valley of
Siddim.
662

JASHER

And these nine sovereigns fought in the valley of
Siddim, and the sovereigns of Seḏom and Amorah
were smitten before the sovereigns of Ĕylam.
5 And the valley of Siddim was full of tar pits and the
sovereigns of Ĕylam pursued the sovereigns of
Seḏom, and the sovereigns of Seḏom with their armies
fled and fell into the tar pits. And all that remained went
to the mountain for safety, and the five sovereigns of
Ĕylam came after them and pursued them to the gates
of Seḏom, and they took all that there was in Seḏom.
6 And they plundered all the cities of Seḏom and
Amorah, and they also took Lot, Aḇram’s brother’s
son, and his property, and they seized all the goods of
the cities of Seḏom, and they went away. And Unik,
Aḇram’s servant, who was in the battle, saw this, and
told Aḇram all that the sovereigns had done to the
cities of Seḏom, and that Lot was taken captive by
them.
7 And Aḇram heard this, and he rose up with about
three hundred and eighteen men that were with him,
and that night he pursued these sovereigns and smote
them. And they all fell before Aḇram and his men, and
there was none remaining but the four sovereigns who
fled, and they went each his own way.
8 And Aḇram recovered all the property of Seḏom,
and he also recovered Lot and his property, his wives
and little ones and all belonging to him, so that Lot
lacked nothing.
9 And when he returned from smiting these
sovereigns, he and his men passed the valley of
Siddim where the sovereigns had fought together.
10 And Bera sovereign of Seḏom, and the rest of his
men that were with him, went out from the tar pits into
which they had fallen, to meet Aḇram and his men.
11 And Aḏoni-Tseḏeq sovereign of Yerushalayim - the
same was Shĕm - went out with his men to meet
4

663

YASHAR

Aḇram and his people, with bread and wine, and they
remained together in the valley of Meleḵ.
12 And Aḏoni-Tseḏeq baraḵ Aḇram, and Aḇram gave
him a tenth from all that he had brought from the spoil
of his enemies, for Aḏoni-Tseḏeq was a kohĕn before
Elohim.
13 And all the sovereigns of Seḏom and Amorah who
were there, with their servants, approached Aḇram
and begged of him to return them their servants whom
he had made captive, and to take for himself all the
property.
14 And Aḇram answered the sovereigns of Seḏom,
saying, “As HWHY lives who created the shamayim and
the earth, and who redeemed my being from all
affliction, and who delivered me this day from my
enemies, and gave them into my hand, I will not take
anything belonging to you, that you may not boast
tomorrow, saying, ‘Aḇram became rich from our
property that he saved.’
15 “For HWHY my Elohim in whom I trust said to me,
‘You shall lack nothing, for I will baraḵ you in all the
works of your hands.’
16 “And now therefore see, here is all belonging to
you, take it and go. As HWHY lives I will not take from
you from a living being down to a shoestring or thread,
except the expense of the food of those who went out
with me to battle. Also the portions of the men who
went with me: Anĕr, Eshkol, and Mamrĕ, they and their
men, as well as those also who had remained to watch
the baggage, they shall take their portion of the spoil.”
17 And the sovereigns of Seḏom gave Aḇram
according to all that he had said, and they pressed him
to take of whatever he chose, but he would not.
18 And he sent away the sovereigns of Seḏom and the
remainder of their men, and he gave them orders
about Lot, and they went to their respective places.
664

JASHER

And he also sent away Lot, his brother’s son, with
his property, and he went with them, and Lot returned
to his home, to Seḏom. And Aḇram and his people
returned to their home to the plains of Mamrĕ, which is
in Ḥeḇron.
20 At that time HWHY again appeared to Aḇram in
Ḥeḇron, and He said to him, “Do not fear, your reward
is very great before Me, for I will not leave you, until I
shall have multiplied you, and baraḵ you and made
your seed like the stars in the shamayim, which cannot
be measured nor numbered.
21 “And I will give to your seed all these lands that you
see with your eyes. To them I will give them for an
inheritance forever, only be strong and do not fear,
walk before Me and be perfect.”
22 And in the seventy-eighth year of the life of Aḇram,
in that year Re’u, son of Peleḡ died. And all the days
of Re’u were two hundred and thirty-nine years, and
he died.
23 And Sarai, the daughter of Haran, Aḇram’s wife,
was still barren in those days; she did not bear to
Aḇram either son or daughter.
24 And when she saw that she bore no children she
took her female servant Haḡar, whom Pharaoh had
given her, and she gave her to Aḇram her husband for
a wife.
25 For Haḡar learned all the ways of Sarai as Sarai
taught her, she was not in any way lacking in following
her good ways.
26 And Sarai said to Aḇram, “See, here is my female
servant Haḡar, go to her that she may give birth upon
my knees, that I may also obtain children through her.”
27 And at the end of ten years of Aḇram’s dwelling in
the land of Kena’an, which is the eighty-fifth year of
Aḇram’s life, Sarai gave Haḡar to him.
19

665

YASHAR

And Aḇram listened to the voice of his wife Sarai,
and he took his female servant Haḡar and Aḇram
came to her and she conceived.
29 And when Haḡar saw that she had conceived she
greatly rejoiced. But her mistress was despised in her
eyes, and she said within herself, “This can only be
that I am better before Elohim than Sarai my mistress,
for all the days that my mistress has been with my
master, she did not conceive, but HWHY has caused me
in so short a time to conceive by him.”
30 And when Sarai saw that Haḡar had conceived by
Aḇram, Sarai was jealous of her female servant, and
Sarai said within herself, “This is indeed none else
other than she must be better than I am.”
31 And Sarai said to Aḇram, “My wrong be upon you,
for at the time when you prayed before HWHY for
children, why did you not pray for my sake, that HWHY
should give me seed from you?
32 “And when I speak to Haḡar in your presence, she
despises my words, because she has conceived, and
you will say nothing to her! May HWHY judge between
you and I for what you have done to me.”
33 And Aḇram said to Sarai, “See, your female servant
is in your hand, do to her as seems good in your eyes.”
And Sarai afflicted her, and Haḡar fled from her to the
wilderness.
34 And a Messenger of HWHY found her in the place
where she had fled, by a well, and He said to her, “Do
not fear, for I will multiply your seed, for you shall bear
a son and you shall call his name Yishma’ĕl. Now then
return to Sarai your mistress, and submit yourself
under her hands.”
35 And Haḡar called the place of that well, Be’ĕr Laḥai
Ro’i. It is between Qaḏĕsh and the wilderness of
Bereḏ.
36 And at that time Haḡar returned to her master’s
house. And at the end of days Haḡar bore a son to
28

666

JASHER

Aḇram, and Aḇram called his name Yishma’ĕl. And
Aḇram was eighty-six years old when he brought him
forth.

17 And in those days, in the ninety-first year of the
life of Aḇram, the children of the Ḥittites fought against
the children of Tuḇal, for when HWHY had scattered the
sons of men upon the face of the earth, the children of
the Ḥittites went and established themselves in the
plain of Kanopia, and they built themselves cities there
and dwelt by the river Tiḇre’u.
2 And the children of Tuḇal dwelt in Tusqanah, and
their boundaries reached the river Tiḇre’u, and the
children of Tuḇal built a city in Tusqanah, and they
called the name Sabinah, after the name of Sabinah
son of Tuḇal their father, and they dwell there to this
day.
3 And it came to be at that time, the children of the
Ḥittites fought against the children of Tuḇal, and the
children of Tuḇal were smitten before the children of
the Ḥittites. And the children of the Ḥittites caused
three hundred and seventy men to fall from the
children of Tuḇal.
4 And at that time the children of Tuḇal swore to the
children of the Ḥittites, saying, “You shall not
intermarry among us, and no man shall give his
daughter to any of the sons of the Ḥittites.”
5 For all the daughters of Tuḇal were in those days
lovely, for then no women were found in the whole
earth so lovely as the daughters of Tuḇal.
6 And all who delighted in the good looks of women
went to the daughters of Tuḇal and took wives from
them. And the sons of men, sovereigns and princes,
who greatly delighted in the good looks of women, took
wives in those days from the daughters of Tuḇal.
7 And at the end of three years after the children of
Tuḇal had sworn to the children of the Ḥittites not to
667

YASHAR

give them their daughters for wives, about twenty men
of the children of the Ḥittites went to take some of the
daughters of Tuḇal, but they found none.
8 For the children of Tuḇal kept their oaths not to
intermarry with them, and they would not break their
oaths.
9 And in the days of harvest when the children of
Tuḇal went into their fields to reap their harvest, the
young men of the Ḥittites assembled and went to the
city of Sabinah, and each man took a young woman
from the daughters of Tuḇal, and they came to their
cities.
10 And the children of Tuḇal heard of it and they went
to fight against them, but they could not prevail over
them, for the mountain was exceedingly high from
them. And when they saw they could not prevail over
them they returned to their land.
11 And at the turn of the year the children of Tuḇal
went and hired about ten thousand men from those
cities that were near them, and they went to fight
against the children of the Ḥittites.
12 And the children of Tuḇal went to fight against the
children of the Ḥittites, to destroy their land and to
distress them, and in this battle the children of Tuḇal
prevailed over the children of the Ḥittites, and the
children of the Ḥittites, seeing that they were greatly
distressed, lifted up the children which they had had by
the daughters of Tuḇal upon the wall which had been
built, to be before the eyes of the children of Tuḇal.
13 And the children of the Ḥittites said to them, “Have
you come to fight against your own sons and
daughters, and have we not been considered your
flesh and bones from that time till now?”
14 And when the children of Tuḇal heard this they
ceased to fight against the children of the Ḥittites, and
they went away,
668

JASHER

and they returned to their cities. And at that time the
children of the Ḥittites assembled and built two cities
by the sea, and they called one Purtu and the other
Ariza.
16 And Aḇram son of Teraḥ was then ninety-nine
years old.
17 At that time HWHY appeared to him and He said to
him, “I will establish My Covenant between Me and
you, and I will greatly multiply your seed. And this is
the Covenant which I make between you and I: that
every male child be circumcised, you and your seed
after you.
18 “At eight days old it shall be circumcised, and this
Covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
Covenant.
19 “And now therefore your name shall no longer be
called Aḇram, but Aḇraham, and your wife shall no
longer be called Sarai, but Sarah.
20 “For I will baraḵ you both, and I will multiply your
seed after you that you shall become a great nation,
and sovereigns shall come forth from you.”
15

18 And Aḇraham rose and did all that Elohim had
ordered him. And he took the men of his household
and those bought with his silver, and he circumcised
them as HWHY had commanded him.
2 And there was not one left whom he did not
circumcise. And Aḇraham and his son Yishma’ĕl were
circumcised in the flesh of their foreskin; Yishma’ĕl
was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the
flesh of his foreskin.
3 And in the third day Aḇraham went out of his tent
and sat at the door to enjoy the heat of the sun, during
the pain of his flesh.
4 And HWHY appeared to him in the plain of Mamrĕ,
and sent three of His ministering messengers to visit
him. And he was sitting at the door of the tent, and he
669

YASHAR

lifted his eyes and looked, and saw three men were
coming from a distance. And he rose up and ran to
meet them, and he bowed down to them and brought
them into his house.
5 And he said to them, “If I have now found favour in
your sight, turn in and eat a piece of bread.” And he
pressed them, and they turned in and he gave them
water and they washed their feet, and he placed them
under a tree at the door of the tent.
6 And Aḇraham ran and took a calf, tender and good,
and he hastened to kill it, and gave it to his servant
El’azar to prepare.
7 And Aḇraham came to Sarah into the tent, and he
said to her, “Make ready three measures of fine meal
quickly, knead it and make cakes to cover the pot
containing the meat.” And she did so.
8 And Aḇraham hastened and brought before them
butter and milk, beef and lamb, and gave it before them
to eat before the flesh of the calf was sufficiently done,
and they ate.
9 And when they had finished eating one of them said
to him, “I will return to you according to the time of life,
and Sarah your wife shall have a son.”
10 And the men afterward departed and went their
ways, to the places to which they were sent.
11 In those days all the people of Seḏom and Amorah,
and of the whole five cities, were exceedingly wicked
and sinful against HWHY and they provoked HWHY with
their abominations. And they grew mightily in
abominations and scoffing before HWHY, and in those
days their wickedness and crimes were great before
HWHY.
12 And in their land they had a very extensive valley about half a day’s walk - and in it there were fountains
of water and a great amount of greenery surrounding
the water.
670

JASHER

And all the people of Seḏom and Amorah went
there four times in the year, with their wives and
children and all belonging to them, and they rejoiced
there with timbrels and dances.
14 And in the time of rejoicing they would all rise and
lay hold of their neighbour’s wives, and some, the
maiden daughters of their neighbour, and they enjoyed
them. And each man saw his wife and daughter in the
hands of his neighbour and did not say a word.
15 And they did so from morning to night, and
afterward they returned home, each man to his house
and each woman to her tent; so they always did four
times in the year.
16 Also when a stranger came into their cities and
brought goods which he had purchased with a view to
sell there, the people of these cities would assemble men, women and children, young and old - and go to
the man and take his goods by force, giving a little to
each man until there was an end to all the goods of the
owner which he had brought into the land.
17 And if the owner of the goods quarrelled with them,
saying, “What is this deed which you have done to
me?” Then they would approach to him one by one,
and each would show him the little which he took and
taunt him, saying, “I only took that little which you gave
me!” And when he heard this from them all, he would
arise and go from them in sorrow and bitterness of
being, then they would all arise and go after him, and
drive him out of the city with great noise and tumult.
18 And there was a man from the country of Ĕylam
who was leisurely going on the way, seated upon his
donkey, which carried a fine blanket of dyed colours,
and the blanket was bound with a rope on the donkey.
19 And the man was on his journey passing through
the street of Seḏom when the sun went down in the
evening. And he remained there in order to stay during
the night, but no one would let him into his house. And
13

671

YASHAR

at that time, there was in Seḏom a wicked man of evil
plots, one skillful to do evil, and his name was Haḏaḏ.
20 And he lifted up his eyes and saw the traveller in
the street of the city, and he came to him and said,
“From where do you come, and where are you going?”
21 And the man said to him, “I am travelling from
Ḥeḇron to Ĕylam where I belong, and as I passed, the
sun went down and no one would allow me to enter his
house, though I had bread and water and also straw
and food for my donkey, and am lacking nothing.”
22 And Haḏaḏ answered and said to him, “All that you
want shall be supplied by me, but you shall not stay in
the street all night.”
23 And Haḏaḏ brought him to his house, and he took
off the blanket from the donkey with the rope, and
brought them to his house, and he gave the donkey
straw and food while the traveller ate and drank in
Haḏaḏ’s house. And he stayed there that night.
24 And in the morning the traveller rose early to
continue his journey, when Haḏaḏ said to him, “Wait,
refresh your heart with a piece of bread and then go.”
And the man did so, and he remained with him, and
they both ate and drank together during the day, when
the man rose up to go.
25 And Haḏaḏ said to him, “See, now the day is
declining, you had better remain all night that your
heart may be refreshed.” And he pressed him so that
he stayed there all night. And on the second day he
rose early to go away, when Haḏaḏ pressed him,
saying, “Refresh your heart with a piece of bread and
then go.” And he remained and ate with him the
second day also, and then the man rose up to continue
his journey.
26 And Haḏaḏ said to him, “See, now the day is
declining, remain with me to refresh your heart and in
the morning rise early and go your way.”
672

JASHER

And the man would not remain, but rose and
saddled his donkey. And while he was saddling his
donkey, the wife of Haḏaḏ said to her husband, “See,
this man has remained with us for two days eating and
drinking and he has given us nothing, and now shall
he go away from us without giving anything?” and
Haḏaḏ said to her, “Be silent.”
28 And the man saddled his donkey to go, and he
asked Haḏaḏ to give him the rope and blanket to tie it
on the donkey.
29 And Haḏaḏ said to him, “What are you saying?”
And he said to him, “That you, my master shall give me
the rope and the blanket made with dyed colours which
you laid up with you in your house to take care of.”
30 And Haḏaḏ answered the man, saying, “This is the
interpretation of your dream, the rope which you saw,
means that your life will be lengthened out like a cord,
and having seen the blanket dyed with all kinds of
colours, means that you shall have a vineyard in which
you will plant trees of all fruits.”
31 And the traveller answered, saying, “Not so my
master, for I was awake when I gave you the rope and
also a blanket woven with dyed colours, which you
took off the donkey to put them aside for me!” and
Haḏaḏ answered and said, “Indeed I have told you the
interpretation of your dream, and it is a good dream,
and this is the interpretation of it.
32 “Now the sons of men give me four pieces of silver,
which is my charge for interpreting dreams, and of you
I only require three pieces of silver.
33 And the man was provoked at the words of Haḏaḏ,
and he cried bitterly, and he brought Haḏaḏ to Sĕraq,
judge of Seḏom.
34 And the man laid his cause before Sĕraq the judge,
when Haḏaḏ replied, saying, “It is not so, but so the
matter stands.” and the judge said to the traveller,
27

673

YASHAR

“This man Haḏaḏ tells you the truth, for he is famed in
the cities for the accurate interpretation of dreams.”
35 And the man cried at the word of the judge, and he
said, “Not so my master, for it was in the day that I gave
him the rope and blanket which was on the donkey, in
order to put them aside in his house!” And they both
disputed before the judge, the one saying, “So the
matter was,” and the other declaring otherwise.
36 And Haḏaḏ said to the man, “Give me four pieces
of silver that I charge for my interpretations of dreams;
I will not make any allowance. And give me the
expense of the four meals that you ate in my house.”
37 And the man said to Haḏaḏ, “Truly I will pay you for
what I ate in your house, only give me the rope and
blanket which you laid up in your house.”
38 And Haḏaḏ replied before the judge and said to the
man, “Did I not tell you the interpretation of your
dream? the rope means that your days shall be
prolonged like a cord, and the blanket, that you will
have a vineyard in which you will plant all kinds of fruit
trees.
39 “This is the proper interpretation of your dream,
now give me the four pieces of silver that I require as
a compensation, for I will make you no allowance.”
40 And the man cried at the words of Haḏaḏ and they
both quarrelled before the judge. And the judge gave
orders to his servants, who drove them harshly from
the house.
41 And they went away quarrelling from the judge,
then the people of Seḏom heard them. And they
gathered about them and cried out against the
stranger, and they drove him harshly from the city.
42 And the man continued his journey on his donkey
with bitterness of being, lamenting and weeping.
43 And while he was going along, he wept at what had
befallen him in the corrupt city of Seḏom.
674

JASHER

19 And the cities of Seḏom had four judges for four
cities, and these were their names: Sĕraq in the city of
Seḏom, Sharkaḏ in Amorah, Zaḇnaq in Aḏmah, and
Mĕnon in Tseḇoyim.
2 And El’azar Aḇraham’s servant appointed to them
different names, and he converted Sĕraq to Sharkaḏ,
Sharkaḏ to Shakrura, Zaḇnaq to Kezoḇim, and Mĕnon
to Matsloḏin.
3 And by desire of their four judges, the people of
Seḏom and Amorah had beds erected in the streets of
the cities, and if a man came to these places they laid
hold of him and brought him to one of their beds, and
by force made him to lie in them.
4 And as he lay down, three men would stand at his
head and three at his feet, and measure him by the
length of the bed. And if the man was less than the bed
these six men would stretch him at each end, and
when he cried out to them they would not answer him.
5 And if he was longer than the bed they would draw
together the two sides of the bed at each end, until the
man had reached the gates of death.
6 And if he continued to cry out to them, they would
answer him, saying, “So shall it be done to a man that
comes into our land!”
7 And when men heard all these matters that the
people of the cities of Seḏom did, they refrained from
coming there.
8 And when a poor man came to their land they would
give him silver and gold, and send a call in the whole
city not to give him a piece of bread to eat. And if the
stranger should remain there some days, and die from
hunger, not having been able to obtain a piece of
bread, then at his death all the people of the city would
come and take their silver and gold which they had
given to him.
675

YASHAR

And those that could recognise the silver or gold
which they had given him took it back. And at his death
they also stripped him of his garments, and they would
fight about them, and he that prevailed over his
neighbour took them.
10 After that, they would carry him and bury him under
some of the shrubs in the desert. So they did all the
days to anyone that came to them and died in their
land.
11 And in the course of time Sarah sent El’azar to
Seḏom, to see Lot and inquire after his welfare.
12 And El’azar went to Seḏom, and he met a man of
Seḏom fighting with a stranger. And the man of Seḏom
stripped the poor man of all his clothes and went away.
13 And the poor man cried to El’azar and pleaded his
favour because of what the man of Seḏom had done
to him.
14 And he said to him, “Why do you act this way to the
poor man who came to your land?”
15 And the man of Seḏom answered El’azar, saying,
“Is this man your brother, or have the people of Seḏom
made you a judge this day, that you speak about this
man?”
16 And El’azar strove with the man of Seḏom because
of the poor man, and when El’azar approached to
recover the poor man’s clothes from the man of
Seḏom, he hastened and with a stone smote El’azar
on the forehead.
17 And the blood flowed exceedingly from El’azar’s
forehead, and when the man saw the blood he caught
hold of El’azar, saying, “Give me my payment for
having rid you of this bad blood that was in your
forehead, for such is the custom and the law in our
land.”
18 And El’azar said to him, “You have wounded me
and require me to pay you your payment?” and El’azar
would not listen to the words of the man of Seḏom.
9

676

JASHER

And the man laid hold of El’azar and brought him to
Sharkaḏ the judge of Seḏom for judgment.
20 And the man spoke to the judge, saying, “Please,
my master, so has this man done, for I smote him with
a stone so that the blood flowed from his forehead, and
he is unwilling to give me my payment.”
21 And the judge said to El’azar, “This man speaks
truth to you. Give him his payment, for this is the
custom in our land.” And El’azar heard the words of the
judge, and he lifted up a stone and smote the judge.
And the stone struck on his forehead, and the blood
flowed exceedingly from the forehead of the judge.
And El’azar said, “If this then is the custom in your
land, give to this man what I should have given him, for
this has been your decision; you decreed it.”
22 And El’azar left the man of Seḏom with the judge,
and he went away.
23 And when the sovereigns of Ĕylam had fought
against the sovereigns of Seḏom, the sovereigns of
Ĕylam captured all the property of Seḏom, and they
took Lot captive, with his property. And when it was
told to Aḇraham he went and fought against the
sovereigns of Ĕylam, and he recovered from their
hands all the property of Lot as well as the property of
Seḏom.
24 At that time the wife of Lot bore him a daughter, and
he called her name Paltith, saying, “Because Elohim
had delivered him and his whole household from the
sovereigns of Ĕylam.” And Paltith daughter of Lot grew
up, and one of the men of Seḏom took her for a wife.
25 And a poor man came into the city to seek a
livelihood, and he remained in the city some days. And
all the people of Seḏom sent a call, as was their
custom, not to give the man a piece of bread to eat,
until he dropped dead upon the earth, and they did so.
26 And Paltith the daughter of Lot saw the man lying
in the streets starved with hunger, and no one would
19

677

YASHAR

give him any matter to keep him alive, and he was just
upon the point of death.
27 And her being was filled with pity because of the
man, and she fed him secretly with bread for many
days, and the being of this man was revived.
28 For when she went out to fetch water she would put
the bread in the water pitcher, and when she came to
the place where the poor man was, she took the bread
from the pitcher and gave it him to eat; so she did many
days.
29 And all the people of Seḏom and Amorah
wondered how this man could bear starvation for so
many days.
30 And they said to each other, “This can only be that
he eats and drinks, for no man can bear starvation for
so many days or live as this man has, without even his
appearance changing.” And three men concealed
themselves in a place where the poor man was
stationed, to know who it was that brought him bread
to eat.
31 And Paltith daughter of Lot went out that day to
fetch water, and she put bread into her pitcher of water.
And she went to draw water by the poor man’s place,
and she took out the bread from the pitcher and gave
it to the poor man and he ate it.
32 And the three men saw what Paltith did for the poor
man, and they said to her, “It is you then who has
supported him! And therefore he has not starved, nor
changed in appearance nor died like the rest.”
33 And the three men came out of the place in which
they were concealed, and they seized Paltith and the
bread which was in the poor man’s hand.
34 And they took Paltith and brought her before their
judges, and said to them, “Thus did she do, and it is
she who supplied the poor man with bread, so he did
not die all this time. Now therefore declare to us the
678

JASHER

punishment due to this woman for having transgressed
our law.”
35 And the people of Seḏom and Amorah assembled
and kindled a fire in the street of the city, and they took
the woman and threw her into the fire and she was
burned to ashes.
36 And in the city of Aḏmah there was a woman to
whom they did the same.
37 For a traveller came into the city of Aḏmah to stay
there all night, with the intention of going home in the
morning, and he sat opposite the door of the house of
the young woman’s father, to remain there, as the sun
had gone down when he had reached that place. And
the young woman saw him sitting by the door of the
house.
38 And he asked her for a drink of water and she said
to him, “Who are you?” and he said to her, “I was
walking on the way today, and reached here when the
sun went down, so I will stay here all night, and in the
morning I will rise early and continue my journey.”
39 And the young woman went into the house and
brought the man bread and water to eat and drink.
40 And this matter became known to the people of
Aḏmah, and they assembled and brought the young
woman before the judges, so that they should judge
her for this deed.
41 And the judge said, “The judgment of death must
pass upon this woman because she transgressed our
law, and this therefore is the decision concerning her.”
42 And the people of those cities assembled and
brought out the young woman, and rubbed her with
honey from head to foot, as the judge had decreed,
and they placed her before a swarm of bees which
were then in their hives. And the bees flew upon her
and stung her so that her whole body was swollen.

679

YASHAR

And the young woman cried out because of the
bees, but no one took notice of her or pitied her, and
her cries went up to the shamayim.
44 And HWHY was provoked at this and at all the works
of the cities of Seḏom, for they had a great amount of
food, and had peace among them, and still would not
sustain the poor and the needy. And in those days their
evil doings and sins became great before HWHY.
45 And HWHY sent two of the messengers that had
come to Aḇraham’s house, to destroy Seḏom and its
cities.
46 And the messengers rose up from the door of
Aḇraham’s tent, after they had eaten and drunk, and
they reached Seḏom in the evening. And Lot was then
sitting in the gate of Seḏom, and when he saw them
he rose to meet them, and he bowed down to the
ground.
47 And he pressed them greatly and brought them into
his house, and he gave them food which they ate, and
they stayed all night in his house.
48 And the messengers said to Lot, “Arise, go out from
this place, you and all belonging to you, lest you be
consumed in the iniquity of this city, for HWHY will
destroy this place.”
49 And the messengers laid hold upon the hand of Lot
and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hands of
his children, and all belonging to him, and they brought
him out and put him outside the cities.
50 And they said to Lot, “Escape for your life!” And he
fled and all belonging to him.
51 Then HWHY rained upon Seḏom and upon Amorah
and upon all these cities sulphur and fire from HWHY
out of the shamayim.
52 And He overthrew these cities, all the plain and all
the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon
the ground. And Ado the wife of Lot looked back to see
the destruction of the cities, for her compassion was
43

680

JASHER

moved because of her daughters who remained in
Seḏom, for they did not go with her.
53 And when she looked back she became a post of
salt, and it is still in that place to this day.
54 And the oxen which stood in that place daily licked
up the salt to the end of their feet, and in the morning
it would spring forth anew, and they still lick it up to this
day.
55 And Lot and two of his daughters that remained
with him fled and escaped to the cave of Aḏullam, and
they remained there for some time.
56 And Aḇraham rose early in the morning to see what
had been done to the cities of Seḏom, and he looked
and saw the smoke of the cities going up like the
smoke of a furnace.
57 And Lot and his two daughters remained in the
cave. And they made their father drink wine, and they
lay with him, for they said there was no man upon earth
that could raise up seed from them, for they thought
that the whole earth was destroyed.
58 And they both lay with their father, and they
conceived and bore sons. And the first-born called the
name of her son Mo’aḇ, saying, “From my father I
conceived him.” He is the father of the Mo’aḇites to this
day.
59 And also the younger called her son Ben-Ammi; he
is the father of the children of Ammon to this day.
60 And after this, Lot and his two daughters went away
from there, and he dwelt on the other side of the
Yardĕn with his two daughters and their sons. And the
sons of Lot grew up, and they went and took for
themselves wives from the land of Kena’an, and they
brought forth children and they were fruitful and
multiplied.

20 And at that time Aḇraham journeyed from the
plain of Mamrĕ, and he went to the land of the
681

YASHAR

Pelishtites, and he dwelt in Gerar. It was in the twentyfifth year of Aḇraham’s being in the land of Kena’an,
and the hundredth year of the life of Aḇraham, that he
came to Gerar in the land of the Pelishtites.
2 And when they entered the land he said to Sarah
his wife, “Say you are my sister, to anyone that shall
ask you, in order that we may escape the evil of the
inhabitants of the land.”
3 And as Aḇraham was dwelling in the land of the
Pelishtites, the servants of Aḇimeleḵ, sovereign of the
Pelishtites, saw that Sarah was exceedingly goodlooking, and they asked Aḇraham concerning her, and
he said, “She is my sister.”
4 And the servants of Aḇimeleḵ went to Aḇimeleḵ,
saying, “A man from the land of Kena’an is come to
dwell in the land, and he has a sister that is
exceedingly lovely.”
5 And Aḇimeleḵ heard the words of his servants who
praised Sarah to him, and Aḇimeleḵ sent his officers,
and they brought Sarah to the sovereign.
6 And Sarah came to the house of Aḇimeleḵ, and the
sovereign saw that Sarah was good-looking, and she
pleased him exceedingly.
7 And he approached her and said to her, “What is
that man to you with whom you came into our land?”
and Sarah answered and said, “He is my brother, and
we came from the land of Kena’an to dwell wherever
we could find a place.”
8 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Sarah, “See, my land is
before you, place your brother in any part of this land
that pleases you, and it will be our duty to exalt and
elevate him above all the people of the land since he
is your brother.”
9 And Aḇimeleḵ sent for Aḇraham, and Aḇraham
came to Aḇimeleḵ.

682

JASHER

And Aḇimeleḵ said to Aḇraham, “See, I have given
orders that you shall be honoured as you desire
because of your sister Sarah.”
11 And Aḇraham went out from the sovereign, and the
sovereign’s present came after him.
12 As at evening time, before men lie down to rest, the
sovereign was sitting on his throne, and a deep sleep
fell upon him, and he lay on the throne and slept till
morning.
13 And he dreamed that a messenger of HWHY came
to him with a drawn sword in his hand, and the
messenger stood over Aḇimeleḵ, and sought to slay
him with the sword. And the sovereign was afraid in his
dream, and said to the messenger, “In what have I
sinned against you that you come to slay me with your
sword?”
14 And the messenger answered and said to
Aḇimeleḵ, “See, you die because of the woman which
you brought into your house last night, for she is a
married woman, the wife of Aḇraham who came to
your house. Now therefore return that man his wife, for
she is his wife. And if you do not return her, know that
you will indeed die, you and all belonging to you.”
15 And on that night there was a great outcry in the
land of the Pelishtites, and the inhabitants of the land
saw the figure of a man standing with a drawn sword
in his hand, and he smote the inhabitants of the land
with the sword, continuing to smite them.
16 And the messenger of HWHY smote the whole land
of the Pelishtites on that night, and there was a great
confusion on that night and on the following morning.
17 And every womb was closed, and all their issues,
and the hand of HWHY was upon them because of
Sarah, wife of Aḇraham, whom Aḇimeleḵ had taken.
18 And in the morning Aḇimeleḵ rose with fear and
confusion and with a great dread, and he sent and had
10

683

YASHAR

his servants called in, and related his dream to them,
and the people were greatly afraid.
19 And one man standing among the servants of the
sovereign answered the sovereign, saying, “O royal
sovereign, restore this woman to her husband, for he
is her husband, for the same befell the sovereign of
Mitsrayim when this man came to Mitsrayim.
20 “And he said concerning his wife, ‘She is my sister,’
for such is his manner of doing when he comes to dwell
in the land in which he is a stranger.
21 “And Pharaoh sent and took this woman for a wife,
and HWHY brought upon him grievous plagues until he
returned the woman to her husband.
22 “Now therefore, O royal sovereign, know what
came to pass last night to the whole land, for there was
a very great fear and great pain and lamentation, and
we know that it was because of the woman which you
took.
23 “Now, therefore, restore this woman to her
husband, lest it should befall us as it did to Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim and his subjects, and that we
may not die.” And Aḇimeleḵ hastened and called and
had Sarah called for. And she came before him, and
he had Aḇraham called for, and he came before him.
24 And Aḇimeleḵ said to them, “What is this matter you
have been doing in saying you are brother and sister,
and I took this woman for a wife?”
25 And Aḇraham said, “Because I thought I would
suffer death because of my wife.” And Aḇimeleḵ took
flocks and herds, and male servants and female
servants, and a thousand pieces of silver, and he gave
them to Aḇraham, and he returned Sarah to him.
26 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Aḇraham, “See, the whole
land is before you, dwell in it wherever you shall
choose.”

684

JASHER

And Aḇraham and Sarah, his wife, went out from
the sovereign’s presence with honour and respect, and
they dwelt in the land, even in Gerar.
28 And all the inhabitants of the land of the Pelishtites
and the sovereign’s servants were still in pain, through
the plague which the messenger had inflicted upon
them the whole night because of Sarah.
29 And Aḇimeleḵ sent for Aḇraham, saying, “Pray now
for your servants to HWHY your Elohim, that He may put
away this death from among us.”
30 And Aḇraham prayed for the sake of Aḇimeleḵ and
his subjects, and HWHY heard the prayer of Aḇraham,
and He healed Aḇimeleḵ and all his subjects.
27

21 And it came to be at that time, at the end of a year
and four months of Aḇraham’s dwelling in the land of
the Pelishtites in Gerar, that Elohim visited Sarah, and
HWHY remembered her, and she conceived and bore a
son to Aḇraham.
2 And Aḇraham called the name of the son which was
born to him, which Sarah bore to him, Yitsḥaq.
3 And Aḇraham circumcised his son Yitsḥaq at eight
days old, as Elohim had commanded Aḇraham to do
unto his seed after him. And Aḇraham was one
hundred, and Sarah ninety years old, when Yitsḥaq
was born to them.
4 And the child grew up and he was weaned, and
Aḇraham made a great feast on the day that Yitsḥaq
was weaned.
5 And Shĕm and Ĕḇer and all the great people of the
land, and Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites, and
his servants, and Piḵol, the commander of his army,
came to eat and drink and rejoice at the feast which
Aḇraham made on the day of his son Yitsḥaq being
weaned.
6 Also Teraḥ, the father of Aḇraham, and Naḥor his
brother, came from Ḥaran, they and all belonging to
685

YASHAR

them, for they greatly rejoiced on hearing that a son
had been born to Sarah.
7 And they came to Aḇraham, and they ate and drank
at the feast which Aḇraham made on the day of
Yitsḥaq being weaned.
8 And Teraḥ and Naḥor rejoiced with Aḇraham, and
they remained with him many days in the land of the
Pelishtites.
9 At that time, Seruḡ son of Re’u died, in the first year
of the birth of Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham.
10 And all the days of Seruḡ were two hundred and
thirty-nine years, and he died.
11 And Yishma’ĕl son of Aḇraham was grown up in
those days; he was fourteen years old when Sarah
bore Yitsḥaq to Aḇraham.
12 And Elohim was with Yishma’ĕl son of Aḇraham,
and he grew up, and he learned to use the bow and
became an archer.
13 And when Yitsḥaq was five years old he was sitting
with Yishma’ĕl at the door of the tent.
14 And Yishma’ĕl came to Yitsḥaq and seated himself
opposite to him, and he took the bow and drew it and
put the arrow in it, and intended to slay Yitsḥaq.
15 And Sarah saw the act which Yishma’ĕl desired to
do to her son Yitsḥaq, and it grieved her exceedingly
because of her son, and she sent for Aḇraham, and
said to him, “Drive out this female servant and her son,
for her son shall not be heir with my son, for so he
sought to do to him today.”
16 And Aḇraham listened to the voice of Sarah, and
he rose early in the morning, and he took twelve loaves
and a bottle of water which he gave to Haḡar, and sent
her away with her son. And Haḡar went with her son
to the wilderness, and they dwelt in the wilderness of
Paran with the inhabitants of the wilderness. And
Yishma’ĕl was an archer, and he dwelt in the
wilderness a long time.
686

JASHER

And afterward, he and his mother went to the land
of Mitsrayim, and they dwelt there. And Haḡar took a
wife for her son from Mitsrayim, and her name was
Meriḇah.
18 And the wife of Yishma’ĕl conceived and bore four
sons and two daughters, and afterward Yishma’ĕl and
his mother and his wife and children went and returned
to the wilderness.
19 And they made themselves tents in the wilderness,
in which they dwelt, and they continued to travel and
then to rest monthly and yearly.
20 And Elohim gave Yishma’ĕl flocks and herds and
tents because of Aḇraham his father, and the man
increased in cattle.
21 And Yishma’ĕl dwelt in deserts and in tents,
travelling and resting for a long time, and he did not
see the face of his father.
22 And some time after, Aḇraham said to Sarah his
wife, “I will go and see my son Yishma’ĕl, for I have a
desire to see him, for I have not seen him for a long
time.”
23 And Aḇraham rode on one of his camels to the
wilderness to seek his son Yishma’ĕl, for he heard that
he was dwelling in a tent in the wilderness with all
belonging to him.
24 And Aḇraham went to the wilderness, and he
reached the tent of Yishma’ĕl about noon. And he
asked after Yishma’ĕl, and he found the wife of
Yishma’ĕl sitting in the tent with her children, and
Yishma’ĕl her husband and his mother were not with
them.
25 And Aḇraham asked the wife of Yishma’ĕl, saying,
“Where has Yishma’ĕl gone?” and she said, “He has
gone to the field to hunt.” And Aḇraham was still
mounted upon the camel, for he would not get off to
the ground as he had sworn to his wife Sarah that he
would not get off of the camel.
17

687

YASHAR

And Aḇraham said to Yishma’ĕl’s wife, “My
daughter, give me a little water that I may drink, for I
am weary from the journey.”
27 And Yishma’ĕl’s wife answered and said to
Aḇraham, “We have neither water nor bread.” And she
continued sitting in the tent and did not notice
Aḇraham, neither did she ask him who he was.
28 But she was beating her children in the tent, and
she was cursing them, and she also cursed her
husband Yishma’ĕl and reproached him. And
Aḇraham heard the words of Yishma’ĕl’s wife to her
children, and he was very wroth and displeased.
29 And Aḇraham called to the woman to come out to
him from the tent, and the woman came and stood
opposite to Aḇraham, for Aḇraham was still mounted
on the camel.
30 And Aḇraham said to Yishma’ĕl’s wife, “When your
husband Yishma’ĕl returns home say these words to
him:
31 ‘A very old man from the land of the Pelishtites
came here to seek you, and thus was his appearance
and figure. I did not ask him who he was, and seeing
you were not here he spoke to me and said, “When
Yishma’ĕl your husband returns tell him thus did the
man say, ‘When you come home put away this nail of
the tent which you have placed here, and put another
nail in its place.’ ” ’ ”
32 And Aḇraham finished his instructions to the
woman, and he turned and went off on the camel
homeward.
33 And after that, Yishma’ĕl came from the chase, he
and his mother, and returned to the tent, and his wife
spoke these words to him:
34 “A very old man from the land of the Pelishtites
came to seek you, and thus was his appearance and
figure. I did not ask him who he was, and seeing you
were not at home he said to me, ‘When your husband
26

688

JASHER

comes home tell him, “Thus saith the old man, ‘Put
away the nail of the tent which you have placed here
and place another nail in its place.’ ” ’ ”
35 And Yishma’ĕl heard the words of his wife, and he
knew that it was his father, and that his wife did not
honour him.
36 And Yishma’ĕl understood his father’s words that
he had spoken to his wife, and Yishma’ĕl listened to
the voice of his father, and Yishma’ĕl drove out the
woman and she went away.
37 And afterward Yishma’ĕl went to the land of
Kena’an, and he took another wife and he brought her
to his tent to the place where he then dwelt.
38 And at the end of three years Aḇraham said, “I will
go again and see Yishma’ĕl my son, for I have not
seen him for a long time.”
39 And he rode on his camel and went to the
wilderness, and he reached the tent of Yishma’ĕl about
noon.
40 And he asked after Yishma’ĕl, and his wife came
out of the tent and she said, “He is not here my master,
for he has gone to hunt in the fields, and to feed the
camels.” And the woman said to Aḇraham, “Turn in my
master into the tent, and eat a piece of bread, for your
being must be wearied because of the journey.”
41 And Aḇraham said to her, “I will not stop for I am in
haste to continue my journey, but give me a little water
to drink, for I am thirsty.” And the woman hastened and
ran into the tent and she brought out water and bread
to Aḇraham, which she placed before him and she
urged him to eat. And he ate and drank and his heart
was refreshed and he baraḵ his son Yishma’ĕl.
42 And he finished his meal and he baraḵ HWHY and
he said to Yishma’ĕl’s wife, “When Yishma’ĕl comes
home say these words to him:
43 ‘A very old man from the land of the Pelishtites
came here and asked after you, and you were not
689

YASHAR

here. And I brought him out bread and water and he
ate and drank and his heart was refreshed.
44 ‘And he spoke these words to me: “When Yishma’ĕl
your husband comes home, say to him, ‘The nail of the
tent which your have is very good, do not put it away
from the tent.’ ” ’ ”
45 And Aḇraham finished instructing the woman, and
he rode off to his home to the land of the Pelishtites.
And when Yishma’ĕl came to his tent, his wife went out
to meet him with joy and a cheerful heart.
46 And she said to him, “An old man came here from
the land of the Pelishtites and thus was his
appearance. And he asked after you and you were not
here, so I brought out bread and water, and he ate and
drank and his heart was refreshed.
47 “And he spoke these words to me: ‘When Yishma’ĕl
your husband comes home say to him, “The nail of the
tent which you have is very good, do not put it away
from the tent.” ’ ”
48 And Yishma’ĕl knew that it was his father, and that
his wife had honoured him, and HWHY baraḵ Yishma’ĕl.

22 And Yishma’ĕl then rose up and took his wife and
his children and his cattle and all belonging to him, and
he journeyed from there and he went to his father in
the land of the Pelishtites.
2 And Aḇraham related to Yishma’ĕl his son the
matter with the first wife that Yishma’ĕl took, according
to what she did.
3 And Yishma’ĕl and his children dwelt with Aḇraham
many days in that land, and Aḇraham dwelt in the land
of the Pelishtites a long time.
4 And the days increased and reached twenty-six
years, and after that Aḇraham with his servants and all
belonging to him went from the land of the Pelishtites
and moved to a great distance. And they came near to
Ḥeḇron, and they remained there, and the servants of
690

JASHER

Aḇraham dug wells of water, and Aḇraham and all
belonging to him dwelt by the water. And the servants
of Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites heard the
report that Aḇraham’s servants had dug wells of water
in the borders of the land.
5 And they came and quarrelled with the servants of
Aḇraham, and they robbed them of the great well
which they had dug.
6 And Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites heard of
this matter, and he, with Piḵol the commander of his
army and twenty of his men came to Aḇraham, and
Aḇimeleḵ spoke to Aḇraham concerning his servants,
and Aḇraham rebuked Aḇimeleḵ concerning the well of
which his servants had robbed him.
7 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Aḇraham, “As HWHY lives,
who created the whole earth, I did not hear of the deed
which my servants did to your servants until this day.”
8 And Aḇraham took seven ewe lambs and gave
them to Aḇimeleḵ, saying, “Please, take these from my
hands that it may be a witness for me that I dug this
well.”
9 And Aḇimeleḵ took the seven ewe lambs which
Aḇraham had given to him, for he had also given him
cattle and herds in great amount, and Aḇimeleḵ swore
to Aḇraham concerning the well. Therefore he called
that well Be’ĕrsheḇa, for there they both swore an oath
concerning it.
10 And they both made a covenant in Be’ĕrsheḇa, and
Aḇimeleḵ rose up with Piḵol the commander of his
army and all his men, and they returned to the land of
the Pelishtites. And Aḇraham and all belonging to him
dwelt in Be’ĕrsheḇa, and he was in that land a long
time.
11 And Aḇraham planted a large grove in Be’ĕrsheḇa,
and he made four gates for it facing the four sides of
the earth. And he planted a vineyard in it, so that if a
traveler came to Aḇraham he entered any gate which
691

YASHAR

was on his way, and remained there and ate and drank
and satisfied himself and then departed.
12 For the house of Aḇraham was always open to the
sons of men that passed and returned, who came daily
to eat and drink in the house of Aḇraham.
13 And any man who had hunger and came to
Aḇraham’s house, Aḇraham would give him bread that
he might eat and drink and be satisfied. And anyone
that came naked to his house he would clothe with
garments as he might choose, and give him silver and
gold and make known to him HWHY who had created
him in the earth. Aḇraham did this all his life.
14 And Aḇraham and his children and all belonging to
him dwelt in Be’ĕrsheḇa, and he pitched his tent as far
as Ḥeḇron.
15 And Aḇraham’s brother Naḥor and his father and all
belonging to them dwelt in Ḥaran, for they did not come
with Aḇraham to the land of Kena’an.
16 And children were born to Naḥor which Milkah the
daughter of Haran, and sister to Sarah, Aḇraham’s
wife, bore to him.
17 And these are the names of those that were born to
him: Uts, Buz, Qemu’ĕl, Keseḏ, Ḥazo, Pildash,
Yiḏlaph, and Bethu’ĕl, being eight sons. These are the
children of Milkah which she bore to Naḥor, Aḇraham’s
brother.
18 And Naḥor had a concubine and her name was
Re’uwmah, and she also bore to Naḥor, Teḇaḥ,
Gaḥam, Taḥash and Ma’aḵah, being four sons.
19 And the children that were born to Naḥor were
twelve sons besides his daughters, and they also had
children born to them in Ḥaran.
20 And the children of Uts, the first-born of Naḥor were
Aḇi, Ḥereph, Gaḏin, Melush, and Deḇorah their sister.
21 And the sons of Buz were Baraḵ’ĕl, Na’amath,
Shewa, and Maḏonu.
22 And the sons of Qemu’ĕl were Aram and Reḥoḇ.
692

JASHER

And the sons of Keseḏ were Anammeleḵ, Meshai,
Benon and Yiphi. And the sons of Ḥazo were Pildash,
Meḥi and Ĕpher.
24 And the sons of Pildash were Aruḏ, Ḥammum,
Mereḏ and Moloch.
25 And the sons of Yiḏlaph were Mushan, Kushan and
Mutsi.
26 And the children of Bethu’ĕl were Saḵar, Laḇan and
their sister Riḇqah.
27 These are the clans of the children of Naḥor, that
were born to them in Ḥaran. And Aram son of Qemu’ĕl,
and Reḥoḇ his brother went away from Ḥaran, and
they found a valley in the land by the river Perath.
28 And they built a city there, and they called the name
of the city after the name of Pethor son of Aram - that
is Aram-Naharayim to this day.
29 And the children of Keseḏ also went to dwell where
they could find a place, and they went and they found
a valley opposite to the land of Shin’ar, and they dwelt
there.
30 And they built themselves a city there, and they
called the name of the city, Keseḏ after the name of
their father. That is the land of Kasdim to this day. And
the Kasdim dwelt in that land and they were fruitful and
multiplied exceedingly.
31 And Teraḥ, father of Naḥor and Aḇraham, went and
took another wife in his old age, and her name was
Pelilah, and she conceived and bore him a son and he
called his name Tsoḇah.
32 And Teraḥ lived twenty-five years after he brought
forth Tsoḇah.
33 And Teraḥ died in that year, that is, in the thirty-fifth
year of the birth of Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham.
34 And the days of Teraḥ were two hundred and five
years, and he was buried in Ḥaran.
35 And Tsoḇah son of Teraḥ lived thirty years and he
brought forth Aram, Aḥlith and Merik.
23

693

YASHAR

And Aram, son of Tsoḇah, son of Teraḥ, had three
wives and he brought forth twelve sons and three
daughters. And HWHY gave to Aram son of Tsoḇah,
riches and possessions, and a great amount of cattle,
and flocks and herds, and the man increased greatly.
37 And Aram son of Tsoḇah and his brother and all his
household journeyed from Ḥaran. And they went to
dwell where they should find a place, for their property
was too great to remain in Ḥaran, for they could not
stop in Ḥaran together with their brothers, the children
of Naḥor.
38 And Aram son of Tsoḇah went with his brothers,
and they found a valley at a distance toward the
eastern country and they dwelt there.
39 And they also built a city there, and they called the
name of it Aram, after the name of their eldest brother
- that is Aram Tsoḇah to this day.
40 And Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham was growing up in
those days, and Aḇraham his father taught him the
Way of HWHY to know HWHY, and HWHY was with him.
41 And when Yitsḥaq was thirty-seven years old,
Yishma’ĕl his brother was going about with him in the
tent.
42 And Yishma’ĕl boasted of himself to Yitsḥaq,
saying, “I was thirteen years old when HWHY spoke to
my father to circumcise us, and I did according to the
Word of HWHY which He spoke to my father, and I gave
my being to HWHY, and I did not transgress His Word
which He commanded my father.”
43 And Yitsḥaq answered Yishma’ĕl, saying, “Why do
you boast to me about this? About a little bit of your
flesh which you took from your body, concerning which
HWHY commanded you.
44 “As HWHY lives, the Elohim of my father Aḇraham,
if HWHY should say to my father, ‘Take now your son
Yitsḥaq and offer him as an offering before Me, I would
not refrain but would joyfully consent to it.”
36

694

JASHER

And HWHY heard the word that Yitsḥaq spoke to
Yishma’ĕl, and it seemed good in the eyes of HWHY,
and He thought to try Aḇraham in this matter.
46 And the day arrived when the sons of Elohim came
and placed themselves before HWHY, and Satan also
came with the sons of Elohim before HWHY.
47 And HWHY said to Satan, “From where do you
come?” and Satan answered HWHY and said, “From
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.”
48 And HWHY said to Satan, “What is your word to me
concerning all the children of the earth?” and Satan
answered HWHY and said, “I have seen all the children
of the earth who serve You and remember You when
they require anything from You.
49 “And when You give them the matter which they
require from You, they sit at their ease, and forsake
You and they remember You no more.
50 “Have You seen Aḇraham son of Teraḥ, who at first
had no children, and he served You and erected altars
to You wherever he came, and he brought up offerings
upon them, and he proclaimed Your Name continually
to all the children of the earth.
51 “And now that his son Yitsḥaq is born to him, he
has forsaken You. He has made a great feast for all
the inhabitants of the land, but he has forgotten HWHY.
52 “For among all that he has done he brought You no
offering; neither burnt offering nor peace offering,
neither ox, lamb, nor goat of all that he slaughtered on
the day that his son was weaned.
53 “Even from the time of his son’s birth till now, being
thirty-seven years, he built no altar before You, nor
brought any offering to You, for he saw that You gave
what he requested before You, and he therefore
forsook You.”
54 And HWHY said to Satan, “Have you thus
considered My servant Aḇraham? For there is none
45

695

YASHAR

like him upon earth, a perfect and an upright man
before Me, one that fears Elohim and avoids evil. As I
live, were I to say to him, ‘Bring up Yitsḥaq your son
before Me,’ he would not withhold him from Me, much
more if I told him to bring up a burnt offering before Me
from his flock or herds.”
55 And Satan answered HWHY and said, “Speak now
to Aḇraham then as You have said, and You will see
whether he will not this day transgress and cast aside
Your words.”

23 At that time the word of HWHY came to Aḇraham,
and He said to him, “Aḇraham!” And he said, “Here I
am.”
2 And He said to him, “Take now your son, your only
son whom your love, even Yitsḥaq, and go to the land
of Moriyah, and offer him there for a burnt offering
upon one of the mountains which shall be shown to
you. For there will your see a cloud and the esteem of
HWHY.”
3 And Aḇraham said within himself, “How shall I
separate my son Yitsḥaq from Sarah his mother, in
order to offer him as a burnt offering before HWHY?”
4 And Aḇraham came into the tent, and he sat before
Sarah his wife, and he spoke these words to her:
5 “My son Yitsḥaq is grown and for some time he has
not studied the service of his Elohim. Now tomorrow I
will go and bring him to Shĕm, and Ĕḇer his son, and
there he will learn the Ways of HWHY for they will teach
him to know HWHY as well as to know that when he
prays continually before HWHY, He will answer him.
Therefore, there he will know the Way of serving HWHY
his Elohim.
6 And Sarah said, “You have spoken well. Go my
master and do to him as you have said, but do not
remove him a great distance from me, neither let him
696

JASHER

remain there too long, for my being is bound within his
being.”
7 And Aḇraham said to Sarah, “My daughter, let us
pray to HWHY our Elohim that He may do good with us.”
8 And Sarah took her son Yitsḥaq and he stayed all
that night with her, and she kissed and embraced him,
and gave him instructions till morning.
9 And she said to him, “O my son, how can my being
separate itself from you?” And she still kissed him and
embraced him, and she gave Aḇraham instructions
concerning him.
10 And Sarah said to Aḇraham, “O my master, please
take heed of your son, and keep your eyes on him, for
I have no other son nor daughter but him.
11 “O forsake him not. If he is hungry give him bread,
and if he is thirsty give him water to drink. Do not let
him go on foot, neither let him sit in the sun.
12 “Neither let him go by himself on the way, neither
force him from whatever he may desire, but do to him
as he may say to you.”
13 And Sarah wept bitterly the whole night for the sake
of Yitsḥaq, and she gave him instructions till morning.
14 And in the morning Sarah selected a very fine and
good-looking garment from those garments which she
had in the house, that Aḇimeleḵ had given to her.
15 And she dressed Yitsḥaq her son with it, and she
put a turban on his head, and she enclosed a precious
stone in the top of the turban, and she gave them
provision for the journey, and they went forth. And
Yitsḥaq went with his father Aḇraham, and some of
their servants accompanied them to see them on the
way.
16 And Sarah went out with them, and she
accompanied them on the way to see them off, and
they said to her, “Return to the tent.”
17 And when Sarah heard the words of her son
Yitsḥaq she wept bitterly, and Aḇraham her husband
697

YASHAR

wept with her, and their son wept with them a great
weeping. Those who went with them also wept greatly.
18 And Sarah caught hold of her son Yitsḥaq, and she
held him in her arms, and she embraced him and
continued to weep with him, and Sarah said, “Who
knows if after this day I shall ever see you again?”
19 And they still wept together, Aḇraham, Sarah and
Yitsḥaq, and all those that accompanied them on the
way wept with them. And Sarah afterward turned away
from her son, weeping bitterly, and all her male
servants and female servants returned with her to the
tent.
20 And Aḇraham went with Yitsḥaq his son to offer him
as a burnt offering before HWHY, as He had
commanded him.
21 And Aḇraham took two of his young men with him,
Yishma’ĕl son of Haḡar and El’azar his servant, and
they went together with them. And while they were
walking on the way the young men spoke these words
to themselves.
22 And Yishma’ĕl said to El’azar, “Now my father
Aḇraham is going with Yitsḥaq to offer him for a burnt
offering to HWHY, as He commanded him.
23 “Now when he returns he will give to me all that he
possesses, to inherit after him, for I am his first-born.”
24 And El’azar answered Yishma’ĕl and said, “Indeed,
Aḇraham drove you away with your mother, and swore
that you should not inherit any matter of all he
possesses. And to whom will he give all that he has,
with all his treasures, but to me his servant, who has
been trustworthy in his house, who has served him
night and day, and has done all that he desired me?
He will bequeath all that he possesses to me at his
death.”
25 And while Aḇraham was proceeding with his son
Yitsḥaq along the way, Satan came and appeared to
Aḇraham in the form of a very aged man, humble and
698

JASHER

of lowly spirit. And he approached Aḇraham and said
to him, “Are you stupid or senseless, that you go to do
this matter today to your only son?
26 “For Elohim gave you a son in your latter days, in
your old age, and will you go and slaughter him this
day? For he committed no violence, and will you cause
the being of your only son to perish from the earth?
27 “Do you not know and understand that this matter
cannot be from HWHY? For HWHY cannot do to man
such evil upon earth to say to him, ‘Go slaughter your
child.’ ”
28 And Aḇraham heard this and knew that it was the
word of Satan who attempted to draw him aside from
the Way of HWHY, but Aḇraham would not listen to the
voice of Satan, and Aḇraham rebuked him so that he
went away.
29 And Satan returned and came to Yitsḥaq. And he
appeared to Yitsḥaq in the form of a young man,
handsome and well favoured.
30 And he approached Yitsḥaq and said to him, “Do
you not know and understand that your foolish old
father brings you to the slaughter this day for naught?
31 “Now therefore, my son, do not listen nor attend to
him, for he is a foolish old man, and do not let your
precious being and good-looking figure be lost from
the earth.”
32 And Yitsḥaq heard this, and said to Aḇraham,
“Have you heard, my father, that which this man has
spoken? Even thus has he spoken.”
33 And Aḇraham answered his son Yitsḥaq and said
to him, “Take heed of him but do not listen to his words,
nor attend to him, for he is ha’Satan, endeavouring to
draw us aside this day from the Commands of Elohim.”
34 And Aḇraham again rebuked Satan, and Satan
went from them. And seeing he could not prevail over
them he hid himself from them, and he went and
passed before them on the way. And he transformed
699

YASHAR

himself into a large stream of water on the way, and
Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq and his two young men reached
that place, and they saw a stream large and powerful
as the mighty waters.
35 And they entered the stream and passed into it, and
the waters at first reached their legs.
36 And they went deeper into the stream and the
waters reached up to their necks, and they were all
afraid because of the water. And while they were going
over the stream Aḇraham recognized that place, and
he knew that there was no water there before.
37 And Aḇraham said to his son Yitsḥaq, “I know this
place in which there was no stream nor water. Now
therefore, it is ha’Satan who does all this to us, to draw
us aside this day from the Commands of Elohim.”
38 And Aḇraham rebuked him and said to him, “HWHY
rebuke you, O Satan, begone from us for we go by the
Commands of Elohim!”
39 And Satan was afraid at the voice of Aḇraham, and
he went away from them, and the place again became
dry land as it was at first.
40 And Aḇraham went with Yitsḥaq toward the place
that Elohim had told him.
41 And on the third day, Aḇraham lifted up his eyes
and saw the place at a distance which Elohim had told
him of.
42 And a column of fire appeared to him that reached
from the earth to the shamayim, and a cloud of esteem
upon the mountain. And the esteem of HWHY was seen
in the cloud.
43 And Aḇraham said to Yitsḥaq, “My son, do you see
in that mountain, which we see at a distance, that
which I see upon it?”
44 And Yitsḥaq answered and said to his father, “I see!
And look, a column of fire and a cloud, and the esteem
of HWHY is seen upon the cloud.”
700

JASHER

And Aḇraham knew that his son Yitsḥaq was
accepted before HWHY for a burnt offering.
46 And Aḇraham said to El’azar and to Yishma’ĕl his
son, “Do you also see that which we see upon the
mountain which is at a distance?”
47 And they answered and said, “We see nothing
more than like the other mountains of the earth.” And
Aḇraham knew that they were not accepted before
HWHY to go with them, and Aḇraham said to them,
“Stay here with the donkey while Yitsḥaq my son and I
go over to the mountain and worship there before
HWHY and then return to you.”
48 And El’azar and Yishma’ĕl remained in that place,
as Aḇraham had commanded.
49 And Aḇraham took wood for a burnt offering and
placed it upon his son Yitsḥaq, and he took the fire and
the knife, and they both went to that place.
50 And when they were going along Yitsḥaq said to his
father, “Look, I see here the fire and wood, but where
then is the lamb that is to be the burnt offering before
HWHY?”
51 And Aḇraham answered his son Yitsḥaq, saying,
“HWHY has made choice of you my son, to be a perfect
burnt offering instead of the lamb.”
52 And Yitsḥaq said to his father, “I will do all that HWHY
spoke to you with joy and cheerfulness of heart.”
53 And Aḇraham said further to Yitsḥaq his son, “Is
there in your heart any thought or counsel concerning
this, which is not proper? Please, tell me my son. O my
son do not conceal it from me.”
54 And Yitsḥaq answered his father Aḇraham and said
to him, “O my father, as HWHY lives and as your being
lives, there is nothing in my heart to cause me to
deviate either to the right or to the left from the word
that he has spoken to you.
45

701

YASHAR

“Neither limb nor muscle has moved or stirred at
this, nor is there in my heart any thought or evil counsel
concerning this.
56 “But I am of joyful and cheerful heart in this matter,
and I say, ‘Baruḵ is HWHY who has this day chosen me
to be a burnt offering before Him.’ ”
57 And Aḇraham greatly rejoiced at the words of
Yitsḥaq, and they went on together and came to that
place HWHY had spoken of.
58 And Aḇraham approached to build the altar in that
place, and Aḇraham was weeping. And Yitsḥaq took
stones and mortar until they had finished building the
altar.
59 And Aḇraham took the wood and placed it in order
on the altar which he had built.
60 And he took his son Yitsḥaq and bound him in order
to place him upon the wood which was on the altar, to
slay him for a burnt offering before HWHY.
61 And Yitsḥaq said to his father, “Bind me safely and
then place me upon the altar lest I should turn and
move, and break loose from the force of the knife upon
my flesh and thereof profane the burnt offering.” And
Aḇraham did so.
62 And Yitsḥaq said further to his father, “O my father,
when you have slain me and burnt me for an offering,
take with you that which remains of my ashes to bring
to Sarah my mother, and say to her, ‘This is the sweet
smelling fragrance of Yitsḥaq.’ But do not tell her this
if she should sit near a well or upon any high place,
lest she should cast her being after me and die.”
63 And Aḇraham heard the words of Yitsḥaq, and he
lifted up his voice and wept when Yitsḥaq spoke these
words. And Aḇraham’s tears gushed down upon
Yitsḥaq his son, and Yitsḥaq wept bitterly, and he said
to his father, “Hasten, O my father, and do with me the
will of HWHY our Elohim as He has commanded you.”
55

702

JASHER

And the hearts of Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq rejoiced at
this which HWHY had commanded them, but the eye
wept bitterly while the heart rejoiced.
65 And Aḇraham bound his son Yitsḥaq, and placed
him on the altar upon the wood, and Yitsḥaq stretched
out his neck upon the altar before his father, and
Aḇraham stretched out his hand to take the knife to
slay his son as a burnt offering before HWHY.
66 At that time the messengers of favour came before
HWHY and spoke to Him concerning Yitsḥaq, saying,
67 “O HWHY, You are a compassionate Sovereign
showing favour over all that You have created in the
shamayim and in earth, and You support them all.
Therefore give ransom and redemption instead of Your
servant Yitsḥaq, and pity and have compassion on
Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq his son, who are this day
performing Your Commands.
68 “Have You seen, O HWHY, how Yitsḥaq son of
Aḇraham Your servant is bound down to the slaughter
like a beast? Now therefore let Your compassion be
roused for them, O HWHY.”
69 At that time HWHY appeared to Aḇraham, and called
to him, from the shamayim, and said to him, “Do not
lay your hand upon the boy, neither do any matter to
him, for now I know that you revere Elohim in
performing this act, and in not withholding your son,
your only son, from Me.”
70 And Aḇraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and
see, a ram was caught in a thicket by its horns. That
was the ram which HWHY Elohim had created in the
earth in the day that he made the earth and the
shamayim.
71 For HWHY had prepared this ram from that day, to
be a burnt offering instead of Yitsḥaq.
72 And this ram was advancing to Aḇraham when
Satan caught hold of it and entangled its horns in the
64

703

YASHAR

thicket, that he might not advance to Aḇraham, in order
that Aḇraham might slay his son.
73 And Aḇraham, seeing the ram advanced toward it
but Satan withheld it; took it and brought it before the
altar. And he loosened his son Yitsḥaq from his
binding, and he put the ram in his place, and Aḇraham
killed the ram upon the altar, and offered it as a burnt
offering in the place of his son Yitsḥaq.
74 And Aḇraham sprinkled some of the blood of the
ram on the altar, and he lifted his voice and said, “This
is in the place of my son, and may this be considered
this day as the blood of my son before HWHY.”
75 And all that Aḇraham did on this occasion by the
altar, he would lift his voice and say, “This is in the
place of my son, and may it be considered this day
before HWHY in the place of my son.” And Aḇraham
finished the whole of the service by the altar, and the
service was accepted before HWHY, and was
accounted as if it had been Yitsḥaq. And HWHY baraḵ
Aḇraham and his seed on that day.
76 And Satan went to Sarah, and he appeared to her
in the form of an old man, very humble and meek. And
Aḇraham was still occupied with the burnt offering
before HWHY.
77 And he said to her, “Do you not know all the work
that Aḇraham has done with your only son this day?
For he took Yitsḥaq and built an altar, and killed him,
and offered him as a burnt offering on the altar. And
Yitsḥaq cried and wept before his father, but he did not
look to him, neither did he have compassion on him.”
78 And Satan repeated these words, and he went
away from her. And Sarah heard all the words of
Satan, and she thought him to be an old man from
among the sons of men who had been with her son,
and had come and told her these matters.
79 And Sarah lifted up her voice and wept and cried
out bitterly because of her son, and she threw herself
704

JASHER

upon the ground and she cast dust upon her head, and
she said, “O my son, Yitsḥaq my son. O that I had died
this day instead of you!” And she continued to weep
and said, “It grieves me for you, O my son, my son
Yitsḥaq. O that I had died this day in your place!”
80 And she still continued to weep, and said, “It
grieves me for you after I have reared you and have
brought you up. Now my joy is turned into mourning
over you. I, that had a longing for you, and cried and
prayed to Elohim till I bore you at ninety years old. And
now you have served this day for the knife and the fire,
to be made an offering.
81 “But I console myself with you, my son, in it being
the word of HWHY, for you performed the Command of
your Elohim. For who can transgress the Word of our
Elohim, in whose hands is the being of every living
creature?
82 “You are just, O HWHY our Elohim, for all Your works
are good and righteous. For I also rejoice in Your Word
which you commanded, and while my eye weeps
bitterly, my heart rejoices!”
83 And Sarah laid her head upon the bosom of one of
her female servants, and she became as still as a
stone.
84 She afterward rose up and went about making
inquiries till she came to Ḥeḇron. And she inquired of
all those whom she met walking on the way, but no one
could tell her what had befell her son.
85 And she came with her female servants and male
servants to Qiryath Arba, which is Ḥeḇron, and she
asked concerning her son, and she remained there
while she sent some of her servants to seek where
Aḇraham had gone with Yitsḥaq. They went to seek
him in the house of Shĕm and Ĕḇer, but they could not
find him, and they sought throughout the land but he
was not there.
705

YASHAR

And see, Satan came to Sarah in the form of an old
man, and he came and stood before her, and said to
her, “I spoke falsely to you, for Aḇraham did not kill his
son and he is not dead.” And when she heard the word,
her joy was so exceedingly violent for the sake of her
son, that her being went out through joy. She died and
was gathered to her people.
87 And when Aḇraham had finished his service he
returned with his son Yitsḥaq to his young men, and
they rose up and went together to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and
they came home.
88 And Aḇraham sought for Sarah, and could not find
her. And he made inquiries concerning her, and they
said to him, “She went as far as Ḥeḇron to seek you
both where you had gone, for thus was she informed.”
89 And Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq went to her to Ḥeḇron,
and when they found that she was dead they lifted up
their voices and wept bitterly over her. And Yitsḥaq fell
upon his mother’s face and wept over her, and he said,
“O my mother, my mother, how have you left me, and
where have you gone? O how, how have you left me?”
90 And Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq wept greatly, and all
their servants wept with them because of Sarah, and
they mourned over her a great and grievous mourning.
86

24 And the life of Sarah was one hundred and
twenty-seven years, and Sarah died. And Aḇraham
rose up from before his dead to seek a burial place to
bury his wife Sarah, and he went and spoke to the
children of Ḥĕth, the inhabitants of the land, saying,
2 “I am a stranger and a sojourner with you in your
land. Give me a possession for a burial place in your
land, that I may bury my dead from before me.”
3 And the children of Ḥĕth said to Aḇraham, “See, the
land is before you. In the choicest of our burial places
bury your dead, for no man shall withhold you from
burying your dead.”
706

JASHER

And Aḇraham said to them, “If you are agreeable to
this, go and ask for me from Ephron, son of Tsoḥar,
requesting that he may give me the cave of Maḵpĕlah,
which is in the end of his field, and I will purchase it
from him for whatever he desires for it.”
5 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Ḥĕth, and
they went and called for him, and he came before
Aḇraham. And Ephron said to Aḇraham, “See, all you
require your servant will do.” And Aḇraham said, “No,
but I will buy the cave and the field which you have for
value, in order that it may be for a possession for a
burial place forever.”
6 And Ephron answered and said, “See the field and
the cave are before you, give whatever you desire.”
And Aḇraham said, “Only at full value will I buy it from
your hand, and from the hands of those that go in at
the gate of your city, and from the hand of your seed
forever.”
7 And Ephron and all his brothers heard this, and
Aḇraham weighed to Ephron four hundred sheqels of
silver into the hands of Ephron and into the hands of
all his brothers. And Aḇraham wrote this matter, and
he wrote it and witnessed it with four witnesses.
8 And these are the names of the witnesses, Amiḡal
son of Aḇishna the Ḥittite, Aḏiḥorom son of Ashunaḵ
the Ḥiwwite, Aḇdon son of Aḥiram the Gomerite,
Baqdil son of Aḇuḏish the Tsiḏonian.
9 And Aḇraham took the book of the purchase, and
placed it in his treasures. And these are the words that
Aḇraham wrote in the book, namely:
10 That the cave and the field Aḇraham bought from
Ephron the Ḥittite, and from his seed, and from those
that go out of his city, and from their seed forever, are
to be a purchase to Aḇraham and to his seed and to
those that go forth from his loins, for a possession of a
burial place forever. And he put a seal on it and
witnessed it with witnesses.
4

707

YASHAR

And the field and the cave that was in it, and all that
place were made secure to Aḇraham and to his seed
after him, from the children of Ḥĕth; see, it is before
Mamrĕ in Ḥeḇron, which is in the land of Kena’an.
12 And after this Aḇraham buried his wife Sarah there,
and that place and all its boundary became to
Aḇraham and to his seed as a possession for a burial
place.
13 And Aḇraham buried Sarah with ceremony as
observed at the burial of sovereigns, and she was
buried in very fine and attractive garments.
14 And at her coffin was Shĕm, his sons Ĕḇer and
Aḇimeleḵ, together with Anĕr, Eshkol and Mamrĕ. And
all the noblemen of the land followed her coffin.
15 And the days of Sarah were one hundred and
twenty-seven years and she died. And Aḇraham made
a great and grievous mourning, and he performed the
custom of mourning for seven days.
16 And all the inhabitants of the land comforted
Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq his son for the sake of Sarah.
17 And when the days of their mourning passed by,
Aḇraham sent his son Yitsḥaq away, and he went to
the house of Shĕm and Ĕḇer, to learn the Ways of
HWHY and His Torot. And Aḇraham remained there
three years.
18 At that time Aḇraham rose up with all his servants,
and they went and returned homeward to Be’ĕrsheḇa,
and Aḇraham and all his servants remained in
Be’ĕrsheḇa.
19 And at the turn of the year, Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of
the Pelishtites died in that year. He was one hundred
and ninety-three years old at his death. And Aḇraham
went with his people to the land of the Pelishtites, and
they comforted the whole household and all his
servants, and he then turned and went home.
20 And it came to be, after the death of Aḇimeleḵ that
the people of Gerar took Ben-Maliḵ his son, and he
11

708

JASHER

was only twelve years old, and they made him sit in the
place of his father.
21 And they called his name Aḇimeleḵ after the name
of his father, for thus was their custom to do in Gerar.
And Aḇimeleḵ reigned instead of Aḇimeleḵ his father,
and he sat upon his throne.
22 And Lot son of Haran also died in those days, in the
thirty-ninth year of the life of Yitsḥaq. And all the days
that Lot lived were one hundred and forty years, and
he died.
23 And these are the children of Lot, that were born to
him by his daughters. The name of the first-born was
Mo’aḇ, and the name of the second was Ben-Ammi.
24 And the two sons of Lot went and took for
themselves wives from the land of Kena’an, and they
bore children to them. And the children of Mo’aḇ were
Ĕḏ, Mayon, Tarsus, and Kanwil, four sons. These are
fathers to the children of Mo’aḇ to this day.
25 And all the clans of the children of Lot went to dwell
wherever they should settle, for they were fruitful and
increased abundantly.
26 And they went and built themselves cities in the
land where they dwelt, and they called the names of
the cities which they built after their own names.
27 And Naḥor son of Teraḥ, brother to Aḇraham, died
in those days, in the fortieth year of the life of Yitsḥaq.
And all the days of Naḥor were one hundred and
seventy-two years and he died, and was buried in
Ḥaran.
28 And when Aḇraham heard that his brother was
dead he grieved sadly, and he mourned over his
brother many days.
29 And Aḇraham called for El’azar his head servant, to
give him orders concerning his house, and he came
and stood before him.
30 And Aḇraham said to him, “See, I am old. I do not
know the day of my death; for I am advanced in days.
709

YASHAR

Now therefore rise up, go forth, and do not take a wife
for my son from this place and from this land, from the
daughters of the Kena’anites among whom we dwell.
31 “But go to my land and to my birthplace, and take
from there a wife for my son. And HWHY Elohim of the
shamayim and earth who took me from my father’s
house and brought me to this place, and said to me,
‘To your seed will I give this land for an inheritance
forever,’ He will send His messenger before you and
prosper your way, that you may obtain a wife for my
son from my clan and from my father’s house.”
32 And the servant answered his master Aḇraham and
said, “See, I go to your birthplace and to your father’s
house, and take a wife for your son from there. But if
the woman is not willing to follow me to this land, shall
I take your son back to the land of your birthplace?”
33 And Aḇraham said to him, “Take heed that you do
not bring my son there again! For HWHY before whom
I have walked, He will send His messenger before you
and prosper your way.”
34 And El’azar did as Aḇraham ordered him, and
El’azar swore to Aḇraham his master upon this matter.
And El’azar rose up and took ten camels from the
camels of his master, and ten men from his master’s
servants with him, and they rose up and went to Ḥaran,
the city of Aḇraham and Naḥor, in order to take a wife
for Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham. And while they were gone
Aḇraham sent to the house of Shĕm and Ĕḇer, and
they brought from there his son Yitsḥaq.
35 And Yitsḥaq came home to his father’s house to
Be’ĕrsheḇa, while El’azar and his men came to Ḥaran.
And they stopped in the city by the watering place, and
he made his camels to kneel down by the water and
they remained there.
36 And El’azar, Aḇraham’s servant, prayed and said,
“O Elohim of Aḇraham my master; please meet before
me this day and show kindness to my master, that You
710

JASHER

shall appoint this day a wife for my master’s son from
his clan.”
37 And HWHY listened to the voice of El’azar, for the
sake of his servant Aḇraham, and he encountered the
daughter of Bethu’ĕl, son of Milkah, the wife of Naḥor,
brother to Aḇraham. And El’azar came to her house.
38 And El’azar related to them all concerning him, and
that he was Aḇraham’s servant, and they greatly
rejoiced with him.
39 And they all baraḵ HWHY who brought this matter
about, and they gave him Riḇqah, the daughter of
Bethu’ĕl, as a wife for Yitsḥaq.
40 And the young woman was of very attractive
appearance. She was a maiden, and Riḇqah was ten
years old in those days.
41 And Bethu’ĕl and Laḇan and his children made a
feast on that night, and El’azar and his men came and
ate and drank and rejoiced there on that night.
42 And El’azar rose up in the morning, he and the men
that were with him, and he called to the whole
household of Bethu’ĕl, saying, “Send me away that I
may go to my master.” And they rose up and sent away
Riḇqah and her nurse Deḇorah, the daughter of Uts,
and they gave her silver and gold, male servants and
female servants, and they baraḵ her.
43 And they sent El’azar away with his men, and the
servants took Riḇqah, and he went and returned to his
master to the land of Kena’an.
44 And Yitsḥaq took Riḇqah and she became his wife,
and he brought her into the tent.
45 And Yitsḥaq was forty years old when he took
Riḇqah, the daughter of his uncle Bethu’ĕl, for a wife.

25 And it came to be at that time that Aḇraham again
took a wife in his old age, and her name was Qeturah,
from the land of Kena’an.
711

YASHAR

And she bore unto him Zimran, Yoqshan, Meḏan,
Miḏyan, Yishbaq and Shuwaḥ, being six sons. And the
children of Zimran were Aḇiḥĕn, Moliḵ and Narim.
3 And the sons of Yoqshan were Sheḇa and Deḏan,
and the sons of Meḏan were Amiḏa, Yo’aḇ, Goḥi,
Elisha and Nothaḵ; and the sons of Miḏyan were
Ĕphah, Ĕpher, Ḥanoḵ, Aḇiḏa and Elda’ah.
4 And the sons of Yishbaq were Makiro, Beyoduwa
and Tator.
5 And the sons of Shuwaḥ were Bildaḏ, Mamdaḏ,
Munan and Mĕḇan; all these are the clans of the
children of Qeturah the Kena’anite woman which she
bore to Aḇraham the Iḇri.
6 And Aḇraham sent all these away, and he gave
them gifts, and they went away from his son Yitsḥaq to
dwell wherever they found a place.
7 And all these went to the mountain at the east, and
they built themselves six cities in which they dwell to
this day.
8 But the children of Sheḇa and Deḏan, children of
Yoqshan, with their children, did not dwell with their
brothers in their cities, but they journeyed and pitched
their tents in the lands and wildernesses to this day.
9 And the children of Miḏyan, son of Aḇraham, went
to the east of the land of Kush, and there they found a
large valley in the eastern country, and they remained
there and built a city. And they dwelt in it - that is the
land of Miḏyan to this day.
10 And Miḏyan dwelt in the city which he built, he and
his five sons and all belonging to him.
11 And these are the names of the sons of Miḏyan
according to their names in their cities, Ĕphah, Ĕpher,
Ḥanoḵ, Aḇiḏa and Elda’ah.
12 And the sons of Ĕphah were Mĕthaḵ, Mĕshar, Aḇi
and Tsanuwa. And the sons of Ĕpher were Ephron,
Tsur, Alirun and Medin. And the sons of Ḥanoḵ were
Re’uw’ĕl, Reqem, Azi, Elyashuḇ and Alad.
2

712

JASHER

And the sons of Aḇiḏa were Ḥur, Meluḏ, Keruri,
Molḵi. And the sons of Elda’ah were Miḵer, and Reḇa,
and Malkiyah and Gaḇol - these are the names of the
Miḏyanites according to their clans. And afterward the
clans of Miḏyan spread throughout the land of Miḏyan.
14 And these are the generations of Yishma’ĕl the son
Aḇraham, whom Haḡar, Sarah’s female servant, bore
to Aḇraham.
15 And Yishma’ĕl took a wife from the land of
Mitsrayim, and her name was Riḇah, the same is
Meriḇah.
16 And Riḇah bore unto Yishma’ĕl Neḇayoth, Qĕḏar,
Aḏbe’ĕl, Miḇsam and their sister Basemath.
17 And Yishma’ĕl drove away his wife Riḇah, and she
went from him and returned to Mitsrayim to the house
of her father, and she dwelt there, for she had been
very evil in the sight of Yishma’ĕl, and in the sight of
his father Aḇraham.
18 And afterward Yishma’ĕl took a wife from the land
of Kena’an, and her name was Malḵuth. And she bore
to him Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Ḥaḏaḏ, Tĕma, Yetur,
Naphish and Qĕḏemah.
19 These are the sons of Yishma’ĕl, and these are
their names, being twelve princes according to their
nations. And the clans of Yishma’ĕl afterward spread
out, and Yishma’ĕl took his children and all the
property that he had gained, together with the beings
of his household and all belonging to him, and they
went to dwell where they should find a place.
20 And they went and dwelt near the wilderness of
Paran, and their dwelling was from Ḥawilah to Shur that is before Mitsrayim as you come toward Ashshur.
21 And Yishma’ĕl and his sons dwelt in the land, and
they had children born to them, and they were fruitful
and increased abundantly.
13

713

YASHAR

And these are the names of the sons of Neḇayoth
the first-born of Yishma’ĕl: Mend, Send, Mayon. And
the sons of Qĕḏar were Alyon, Qesem, Ḥamaḏ and Ĕli.
23 And the sons of Aḏbe’ĕl were Ḥamad and Yaḇin.
And the sons of Miḇsam were Oḇaḏyah, Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ
and Ye’ush - these are the clans of the children of
Ribah the wife of Yishma’ĕl.
24 And the sons of Mishma son of Yishma’ĕl were
Shammua, Zeḵaryon and Oḇĕḏ. And the sons of
Dumah were Keseḏ, Ĕli, Maḵmaḏ and Ameḏ.
25 And the sons of Massa were Mĕlon, Mula and
Eḇidaḏon. And the sons of Ḥaḏaḏ were Azzur, Minzar
and Eḇeḏ-Melek. And the sons of Tĕma were Sĕ’ir,
Saḏon and Yakol.
26 And the sons of Yetur were Merith, Ya’ish, Alyo,
and Paḥoth. And the sons of Naphish were EḇeḏTameḏ, Aḇiyasaph and Mir, And the sons of Qĕḏemah
were Kalip, Taḥti, and Omir - these were the children
of Malḵuth the wife of Yishma’ĕl according to their
clans.
27 All these are the clans of Yishma’ĕl according to
their generations, and they dwelt in those lands
wherein they had built themselves cities to this day.
28 And Riḇqah the daughter of Bethu’ĕl, the wife of
Aḇraham’s son Yitsḥaq, was barren in those days, she
had no offspring. And Yitsḥaq dwelt with his father in
the land of Kena’an and HWHY was with Yitsḥaq. And
Arpaḵshaḏ son of Shĕm, son of Noaḥ died in those
days, in the forty-eighth year of the life of Yitsḥaq. And
all the days that Arpaḵshaḏ lived were four hundred
and thirty-eight years, and he died.
22

26 And in the fifty-ninth year of the life of Yitsḥaq son
of Aḇraham, Riḇqah his wife was still barren in those
days.
2 And Riḇqah said to Yitsḥaq, “Truly I have heard, my
master, that your mother Sarah was barren in her days
714

JASHER

until my master Aḇraham, your father, prayed for her
and she conceived by him.
3 “Now therefore stand up, pray also to Elohim and
He will hear your prayer and remember us through His
compassions.”
4 And Yitsḥaq answered his wife Riḇqah, saying,
“Aḇraham has already prayed for me to Elohim to
multiply his seed, now therefore this barrenness to us
must proceed from you.”
5 And Riḇqah said to him, “But arise now also and
pray, that HWHY may hear your prayer and grant me
children.” And Yitsḥaq listened to the words of his wife,
and Yitsḥaq and his wife rose up and went to the land
of Moriyah to pray there and to seek HWHY. And when
they had reached that place, Yitsḥaq stood up and
prayed to HWHY for the sake of his wife because she
was barren.
6 And Yitsḥaq said, “O HWHY, Elohim of the
shamayim and earth, whose goodness and
compassions fill the earth. You who took my father
from his father’s house and from his birthplace, and
brought him to this land, and said to him, ‘To your seed
I will give this land.’ And You promised him and
declared to him, ‘I will multiply your seed as the stars
of the shamayim and as the sand of the sea.’ Now may
Your words be verified which You spoke to my father.
7 “For You HWHY are our Elohim. Our eyes are toward
You to give us seed of men, as You promised us, for
You are HWHY our Elohim, and our eyes are directed
toward You alone.”
8 And HWHY heard the prayer of Yitsḥaq son of
Aḇraham, and HWHY was entreated of him, and Riḇqah
his wife conceived.
9 And in about seven months after, the children
struggled together within her, and it pained her greatly
so that she was wearied because of them, and she
said to all the women who were then in the land, “Did
715

YASHAR

such a matter come upon you as it has to me?” and
they said to her, “No.”
10 And she said to them, “Why am I alone in this
among all the women that are on earth?” and she went
to the land of Moriyah to seek HWHY because of this.
And she went to Shĕm and Ĕḇer his son to make
inquiries of them in this matter, and that they should
seek HWHY in this matter respecting her.
11 And she also asked Aḇraham to seek and inquire
of HWHY about all that had befallen her.
12 And they all inquired of HWHY concerning this
matter, and they brought her word from HWHY and told
her, “Two children are in your womb, and two nations
shall rise from them. And one nation shall be stronger
than the other, and the greater shall serve the
younger.”
13 And when her days to be delivered were
completed, she knelt down, and see, there were twins
in her womb, as HWHY had spoken to her.
14 And the first came out red all over like a hairy
garment, and all the people of the land called his name
Ĕsaw, saying that, “This one was made complete from
the womb.”
15 And after that came his brother, and his hand took
hold of Ĕsaw’s heel, therefore they called his name
Ya’aqoḇ.
16 And Yitsḥaq, son of Aḇraham, was sixty years old
when he brought them forth.
17 And the boys grew up to their fifteenth year, and
they came among the company of men. Ĕsaw was a
crafty and deceitful man, and an expert hunter in the
field, and Ya’aqoḇ was a complete man and wise,
dwelling in tents, feeding flocks and learning the Torot
of HWHY and the Commands of his father and mother.
18 And Yitsḥaq and the children of his household
dwelt with his father Aḇraham in the land of Kena’an,
as Elohim had commanded them.
716

JASHER

And Yishma’ĕl son of Aḇraham went with his
children and all belonging to them, and they returned
there to the land of Ḥawilah, and they dwelt there.
20 And all the children of Aḇraham’s concubines went
to dwell in the land of the East, for Aḇraham had sent
them away from his son, and had given them presents,
and they went away.
21 And Aḇraham gave all that he had to his son
Yitsḥaq, and he also gave him all his treasures.
22 And he commanded him saying, “Do you not know
and understand, HWHY is Elohim in the shamayim and
in earth, and there is no other beside Him?
23 “And it was He who took me from my father’s
house, and from my birth place, and gave me all the
delights upon earth; who delivered me from the
counsel of the wicked, for in Him I trusted.
24 “And He brought me to this place, and He delivered
me from Ur-Kasdim. And He said to me, ‘To your seed
will I give all these lands, and they shall inherit them
when they keep My Commandments, My Laws and My
Right-Rulings that I have commanded you, and which
I shall command them.’
25 “Now therefore my son, listen to my voice, and keep
the Commandments of HWHY your Elohim, which I
commanded you. Do not turn from the right Way either
to the right or to the left, in order that it may be well
with you and your children after you forever.
26 “And remember the wonderful works of HWHY, and
His kindness that He has shown toward us, in having
delivered us from the hands of our enemies. And HWHY
our Elohim caused them to fall into our hands, and now
therefore keep all that I have commanded you, and do
not turn away from the Commandments of your
Elohim, and serve none besides Him, in order that it
may be well with you and your seed after you.
27 “And you, teach your children and your seed the
Torot of HWHY and His Commandments, and teach
19

717

YASHAR

them the upright Way in which they should go, in order
that it may be well with them forever.”
28 And Yitsḥaq answered his father and said to him,
“That which Aḏonai has commanded, that I will do, and
I will not depart from the Commands of HWHY my
Elohim. I will keep all that He commanded me.” And
Aḇraham baraḵ his son Yitsḥaq, and also his children,
and Aḇraham taught Ya’aqoḇ the instruction of HWHY
and His Ways.
29 And it came to be at that time, that Aḇraham died,
in the fifteenth year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw,
the sons of Yitsḥaq. And all the days of Aḇraham were
one hundred and seventy-five years, and he died and
was gathered to his people at a good old age, old and
satisfied with days. And Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl his
sons buried him.
30 And when the inhabitants of Kena’an heard that
Aḇraham was dead, they all came with their
sovereigns and princes and all their men to bury
Aḇraham.
31 And all the inhabitants of the land of Ḥaran, and all
the clans of the house of Aḇraham, and all the princes
and nobles, and the sons of Aḇraham by the
concubines, all came when they heard of Aḇraham’s
death. And they returned Aḇraham’s kindness, and
comforted Yitsḥaq his son, and they buried Aḇraham
in the cave which he bought from Ephron the Ḥittite
and his children, for the possession of a burial place.
32 And all the inhabitants of Kena’an, and all those
who had known Aḇraham, wept for Aḇraham a whole
year, and men and women mourned over him.
33 And all the little children, and all the inhabitants of
the land wept for the sake of Aḇraham, for Aḇraham
had been good to them all, and because he had been
upright with Elohim and men.
34 And there arose not a man who revered Elohim like
Aḇraham, for he had feared his Elohim from his youth,
718

JASHER

and had served HWHY, and had gone in all His Ways
during his life; from his childhood to the day of his
death.
35 And HWHY was with him and delivered him from the
counsel of Nimroḏ and his people, and when he fought
against the four sovereigns of Ĕylam he conquered
them.
36 And he brought all the children of the earth to the
service of Elohim, and he taught them the Ways of
HWHY, and caused them to know HWHY.
37 And he formed a grove and he planted a vineyard
in it, and he had always prepared meat and drink in his
tent to those that passed through the land, that they
might satisfy themselves in his house.
38 And HWHY Elohim delivered the whole earth
because of Aḇraham.
39 And it came to be after the death of Aḇraham that
Elohim baraḵ his son Yitsḥaq and his children, and
HWHY was with Yitsḥaq as He had been with his father
Aḇraham, for Yitsḥaq kept all the Commandments of
HWHY as Aḇraham his father had commanded him. He
did not turn to the right or to the left from the right path
which his father had commanded him.

27 And at that time, after, the death of Aḇraham,
Ĕsaw frequently went in the field to hunt.
2 And Nimroḏ sovereign of Baḇel - the same was
Amraphel - also frequently went with his mighty men to
hunt in the field, and to walk about with his men in the
cool of the day.
3 And Nimroḏ was observing Ĕsaw all the days, for a
jealousy was formed in the heart of Nimroḏ against
Ĕsaw all the days.
4 And on a certain day, Ĕsaw went in the field to hunt,
and he found Nimroḏ walking in the wilderness with his
two men.
719

YASHAR

And all his mighty men and his people were with
him in the wilderness, but they turned back at a
distance from him, and they went from him in different
directions to hunt. And Ĕsaw concealed himself from
Nimroḏ, and he lay in wait for him in the wilderness.
6 And Nimroḏ and his men that were with him did not
know him, and Nimroḏ and his men frequently walked
about in the field at the cool of the day, and to know
where his men were hunting in the field.
7 And Nimroḏ and two of his men that were with him
came to the place where they were, when Ĕsaw leaped
suddenly from his ambush, and drew his sword, and
hastened and ran to Nimroḏ and cut off his head.
8 And Ĕsaw fought a desperate fight against the two
men that were with Nimroḏ, and when they called out
to him, Ĕsaw turned to them and smote them to death
with his sword.
9 And all the mighty men of Nimroḏ, who had left him
to go to the wilderness, heard the cry at a distance.
And they knew the voices of those two men, and they
ran to know the cause of it, whereupon they found their
sovereign and the two men that were with him lying
dead in the wilderness.
10 And when Ĕsaw saw the mighty men of Nimroḏ
coming at a distance, he fled, and thereby escaped.
And Ĕsaw took the valuable garments of Nimroḏ,
which Nimroḏ’s father had bequeathed to Nimroḏ, and
with which Nimroḏ prevailed over the whole land, and
he ran and concealed them in his house.
11 And Ĕsaw took those garments and ran into the city
because of Nimroḏ’s men. And he came to his father’s
house wearied and exhausted from the fight, and he
was ready to die through grief when he approached his
brother Ya’aqoḇ and sat before him.
12 And he said to his brother Ya’aqoḇ, “Look, I shall
die this day, and why then do I want the birthright?”
And Ya’aqoḇ acted wisely with Ĕsaw in this matter, and
5

720

JASHER

Ĕsaw sold his birthright to Ya’aqoḇ, for it was so
brought about by HWHY.
13 And Ĕsaw’s portion in the cave of the field of
Maḵpĕlah, which Aḇraham had bought from the
children of Ḥĕth for the possession of a burial ground,
Ĕsaw also sold to Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ bought all this
from his brother Ĕsaw for value given.
14 And Ya’aqoḇ wrote the whole of this in a book, and
he witnessed the same with witnesses, and he sealed
it, and the book remained in the hands of Ya’aqoḇ.
15 And when Nimroḏ son of Kush died, his men lifted
him up and brought him with lamenting, and buried him
in his city. And all the days that Nimroḏ lived were two
hundred and fifteen years and he died.
16 And the days that Nimroḏ reigned over the people
of the land were one hundred and eighty-five years.
And Nimroḏ died by the sword of Ĕsaw in shame and
contempt, and the seed of Aḇraham caused his death
as he had seen in his dream.
17 And at the death of Nimroḏ, his reign became
divided into many divisions, and all those parts that
Nimroḏ reigned over were restored to the respective
sovereigns of the land, who recovered them after the
death of Nimroḏ. And all the people of the house of
Nimroḏ were enslaved for a long time to all the other
sovereigns of the land.

28 And in those days, after the death of Aḇraham, in
that year HWHY brought a severe scarcity of food in the
land. And while the scarcity of food was raging in the
land of Kena’an, Yitsḥaq rose up to go down to
Mitsrayim because of the scarcity of food, as his father
Aḇraham had done.
2 And HWHY appeared that night to Yitsḥaq and He
said to him, “Do not go down to Mitsrayim, but rise and
go to Gerar, to Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites,
and remain there till the scarcity of food ceases.”
721

YASHAR

And Yitsḥaq rose up and went to Gerar, as HWHY
commanded him, and he remained there a full year.
4 And when Yitsḥaq came to Gerar, the people of the
land saw that Riḇqah his wife was of good-looking
appearance, and the people of Gerar asked Yitsḥaq
concerning his wife, and he said, “She is my sister,” for
he was afraid to say she was his wife lest the people
of the land should slay him because of her.
5 And the princes of Aḇimeleḵ went and praised the
woman to the sovereign, but he did not answer them,
neither did he attend to their words.
6 But he heard them say that Yitsḥaq declared her to
be his sister, so the sovereign reserved this within
himself.
7 And when Yitsḥaq had remained three months in
the land, Aḇimeleḵ looked out of the window, and he
looked, and see, Yitsḥaq was playing with Riḇqah his
wife, for Yitsḥaq dwelt in the outer house belonging to
the sovereign, so that the house of Yitsḥaq was
opposite the house of the sovereign.
8 And the sovereign said to Yitsḥaq, “What is this you
have done to us in saying of your wife, ‘She is my
sister?’ how easily might one of the great men of the
people have lain with her, and you would then have
brought guilt upon us.”
9 And Yitsḥaq said to Aḇimeleḵ, “Because I was
afraid lest I die because of my wife, therefore I said,
‘She is my sister.’ ”
10 At that time Aḇimeleḵ gave orders to all his princes
and great men, and they took Yitsḥaq and Riḇqah his
wife and brought them before the sovereign.
11 And the sovereign commanded that they should
dress them in princely garments, and make them ride
through the streets of the city, and proclaim before
them throughout the land, saying, “This is the man and
this is his wife; whoever touches this man or his wife
shall indeed die.” And Yitsḥaq returned with his wife to
3

722

JASHER

the sovereign’s house, and HWHY was with Yitsḥaq and
he continued to become great and lacked nothing.
12 And HWHY caused Yitsḥaq to find favour in the sight
of Aḇimeleḵ, and in the sight of all his subjects, and
Aḇimeleḵ acted well with Yitsḥaq, for Aḇimeleḵ
remembered the oath and the covenant that existed
between his father and Aḇraham.
13 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Yitsḥaq, “See, the whole
earth is before you; dwell wherever it may seem good
in your eyes until you shall return to your land.” And
Aḇimeleḵ gave Yitsḥaq fields and vineyards and the
best part of the land of Gerar, to sow and reap and eat
the fruits of the ground until the days of the scarcity of
food had passed by.
14 And Yitsḥaq sowed in that land, and received a
hundred-fold in the same year, and HWHY baraḵ him.
15 And the man became great, and he had
possessions of flocks and possessions of herds and
great supply of servants.
16 And when the days of the scarcity of food had
passed away HWHY appeared to Yitsḥaq and said to
him, “Rise up, go out from this place and return to your
land, to the land of Kena’an.” And Yitsḥaq rose up and
returned to Ḥeḇron which is in the land of Kena’an, he
and all belonging to him as HWHY commanded him.
17 And after this Shelaḥ the son at Arpaḵshaḏ died in
that year, which is the eighteenth year of the lives of
Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw. And all the days that Shelaḥ lived
were four hundred and thirty-three years and he died.
18 At that time Yitsḥaq sent his younger son Ya’aqoḇ
to the house of Shĕm and Ĕḇer, and he learned the
Torot of HWHY, and Ya’aqoḇ remained in the house of
Shĕm and Ĕḇer for thirty-two years. But Ĕsaw his
brother did not go, for he was not willing to go, and he
remained in his father’s house in the land of Kena’an.

723

YASHAR

And Ĕsaw was continually hunting in the fields to
bring home what he could get. So Ĕsaw did all the
days.
20 And Ĕsaw was a crafty and deceitful man, one who
hunted after the hearts of men and persuaded them.
And Ĕsaw was a mighty man of the field, and in the
course of time went as usual to hunt, and he came as
far as the field of Sĕ’ir - the same is Eḏom.
21 And he remained in the land of Sĕ’ir hunting in the
field a year and four months.
22 And Ĕsaw saw there in the land of Sĕ’ir the
daughter of a man of Kena’an, and her name was
Yahuḏith, the daughter of Be’ĕri, son of Ĕpher, from
the clans of Ḥĕth, son of Kena’an.
23 And Ĕsaw took her for a wife, and he came to her.
Ĕsaw was forty years old when he took her, and he
brought her to Ḥeḇron, the land of his father’s dwelling
place, and he dwelt there.
24 And it came to be in those days, in the hundred and
tenth year of the life of Yitsḥaq, that is, in the fiftieth
year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ, in that year Shĕm son of
Noaḥ died. Shĕm was six hundred years old at his
death.
25 And when Shĕm died, Ya’aqoḇ returned to his
father at Ḥeḇron which is in the land of Kena’an.
26 And in the fifty-sixth year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ,
people came from Ḥaran. And Riḇqah was told
concerning her brother Laḇan, son of Bethu’ĕl.
27 For the wife of Laḇan was barren in those days, and
bore no children, and also all his female servants bore
none to him.
28 And HWHY afterward remembered Aḏina the wife of
Laḇan, and she conceived and bore twin daughters.
And Laḇan called the names of his daughters, the
name of the elder Lĕ’ah, and the name of the younger
Raḥĕl.
19

724

JASHER

And those people came and told these matters to
Riḇqah, and Riḇqah rejoiced greatly that HWHY had
visited her brother and that he had gained children.
29

29 And Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham became old and
advanced in days, and his eyes became heavy
through age; they were dim and could not see.
2 At that time Yitsḥaq called to Ĕsaw his son, saying,
“Please get your weapons, your quiver and your bow.
Rise up and go out into the field and get me some
venison, and make me a tasty dish and bring it to me,
that I may eat in order that I may baraḵ you before my
death, as I have now become old and grey-headed.”
3 And Ĕsaw did so, and he took his weapon and went
out into the field to hunt for venison, as usual, to bring
to his father as he had ordered him, so that he might
baraḵ him.
4 And Riḇqah heard all the words that Yitsḥaq had
spoken to Ĕsaw, and she hastened and called her son
Ya’aqoḇ, saying, “Thus did your father speak to your
brother Ĕsaw, and thus did I hear. Now therefore hurry
and do that which I shall tell you.
5 “Please rise up and go to the flock and bring me
two fine kids of the goats, and I will get the tasty dish
for your father, and you shall bring the tasty dish that
he may eat before your brother has come from the
hunt, in order that your father may baraḵ you.”
6 And Ya’aqoḇ hurried and did as his mother had
commanded him, and he made the tasty dish and
brought it before his father before Ĕsaw had come from
his hunt.
7 And Yitsḥaq said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Who are you, my
son?” And he said, “I am your first-born Ĕsaw. I have
done as you ordered me. Now therefore please rise up
and eat of my hunt, in order that your being may baraḵ
me as you spoke unto me.”
725

YASHAR

And Yitsḥaq rose up and he ate and drank, and his
heart was comforted, and he baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ and
Ya’aqoḇ went away from his father. And as soon as
Yitsḥaq had baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ and he had gone away
from him, see Ĕsaw came from his hunt from the field,
and he also made a tasty dish and brought it to his
father to eat of it and to baraḵ him.
9 And Yitsḥaq said to Ĕsaw, “And who was he that
has taken venison and brought it to me before you
came and whom I baraḵ?” And Ĕsaw knew that his
brother Ya’aqoḇ had done this, and the wrath of Ĕsaw
was kindled against his brother Ya’aqoḇ that he had
acted so toward him.
10 And Ĕsaw said, “Is he not rightly called Ya’aqoḇ?
For he has taken me by the heel twice! He took away
my birthright and now he has taken away my beraḵah.”
And Ĕsaw wept greatly, and when Yitsḥaq heard the
voice of his son Ĕsaw weeping, Yitsḥaq said to Ĕsaw,
“What can I do, my son? Your brother came with deceit
and took away your beraḵah.” and Ĕsaw hated his
brother Ya’aqoḇ because of the beraḵah that his father
had given him, and his wrath was greatly roused
against him.
11 And Ya’aqoḇ was very much afraid of his brother
Ĕsaw, and he rose up and fled to the house of Ĕḇer
son of Shĕm, and he concealed himself there because
of his brother. And Ya’aqoḇ was sixty-three years old
when he went out from the land of Kena’an from
Ḥeḇron, and Ya’aqoḇ was concealed in the house of
Ĕḇer fourteen years because of his brother Ĕsaw. And
there he continued to learn the Ways of HWHY and His
Commandments.
12 And when Ĕsaw saw that Ya’aqoḇ had fled and
escaped from him, and that Ya’aqoḇ had cunningly
obtained the beraḵah, then Ĕsaw grieved exceedingly,
and he was also displeased at his father and mother.
And he also rose up and took his wife and went away
8

726

JASHER

from his father and mother to the land of Sĕ’ir, and he
dwelt there. And Ĕsaw saw there a woman from
among the daughters of Ḥĕth whose name was
Basemath, the daughter of Ĕlon the Ḥittite, and he took
her for a wife in addition to his first wife, and Ĕsaw
called her name Aḏah, saying the beraḵah had in that
time passed from him.
13 And Ĕsaw dwelt in the land of Sĕ’ir six months
without seeing his father and mother. And afterward
Ĕsaw took his wives and rose up and returned to the
land of Kena’an, and Ĕsaw placed his two wives in his
father’s house in Ḥeḇron.
14 And the wives of Ĕsaw grieved and provoked
Yitsḥaq and Riḇqah with their works, for they did not
walk in the Ways of HWHY, but served their father’s
mighty ones of wood and stone as their father had
taught them, but they were more wicked than their
father.
15 And they went according to the evil desires of their
hearts, and they slaughtered and burnt incense to the
Ba’als, and Yitsḥaq and Riḇqah became weary of
them.
16 And Riḇqah said, “I am weary of my life because of
the daughters of Ḥĕth. If Ya’aqoḇ takes a wife of the
daughters of Ḥĕth, such as these which are of the
daughters of the land, what good then is life to me?”
17 And in those days Aḏah the wife of Ĕsaw conceived
and bore him a son, and Ĕsaw called the name of the
son that was born unto him Eliphaz. And Ĕsaw was
sixty-five years old when she bore him.
18 And Yishma’ĕl son of Aḇraham died in those days,
in the sixty-fourth year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ. And all
the days that Yishma’ĕl lived were one hundred and
thirty-seven years and he died.
19 And when Yitsḥaq heard that Yishma’ĕl was dead
he mourned for him, and Yitsḥaq lamented over him
many days.
727

YASHAR

And at the end of fourteen years of Ya’aqoḇ’s
dwelling in the house of Ĕḇer, Ya’aqoḇ desired to see
his father and mother, and Ya’aqoḇ came to the house
of his father and mother to Ḥeḇron. And Ĕsaw had in
those days forgotten what Ya’aqoḇ had done to him in
having taken the beraḵah from him in those days.
21 And when Ĕsaw saw Ya’aqoḇ coming to his father
and mother he remembered what Ya’aqoḇ had done
to him, and he was greatly wroth against him and
sought to slay him.
22 And Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham was old and
advanced in days, and Ĕsaw said, “Now my father’s
time is drawing near that he must die, and when he
dies I will slay my brother Ya’aqoḇ.”
23 And this was told to Riḇqah, and she hastened and
sent and called for Ya’aqoḇ her son, and she said to
him, “Arise, go and flee to Ḥaran to my brother Laḇan,
and remain there for some time, until your brother’s
wrath be turned from you, and then you shall come
back.
24 And Yitsḥaq called to Ya’aqoḇ and said to him, “Do
not take a wife from the daughters of Kena’an, for thus
did our father Aḇraham command us according to the
Word of HWHY which He commanded him, saying,
‘Unto your seed I will give this land. If your children
keep My Covenant that I have made with you, then I
will also perform to your children that which I have
spoken to you and I will not forsake them.’
25 “Now therefore my son listen to my voice, to all that
I shall command you, and refrain from taking a wife
from among the daughters of Kena’an. Arise, go to
Ḥaran to the house of Bethu’ĕl your mother’s father,
and take for yourself a wife from there from the
daughters of Laḇan your mother’s brother.
26 “Therefore take heed lest you should forget HWHY
your Elohim and all His Ways in the land to which you
20

728

JASHER

go, and should join with the people of the land and
pursue worthlessness and forsake HWHY your Elohim.
27 “But when you come to the land, serve HWHY there.
Do not turn to the right or to the left from the Way which
I commanded you and which you learned.
28 “And may the Almighty Elohim grant you favour in
the sight of the people of the earth, that you may take
there a wife according to your choice; one who is good
and upright in the Ways of HWHY.
29 “And may Elohim give to you and your seed the
beraḵah of your father Aḇraham, and make you fruitful
and multiply you, and may you become a multitude of
people in the land where you go. And may Elohim
cause you to return to this land, the land of your
father’s dwelling, with children and with great riches,
with joy and with pleasure.”
30 And Yitsḥaq finished commanding Ya’aqoḇ and a
beraḵah on him, and he gave him many gifts, together
with silver and gold, and he sent him away. And
Ya’aqoḇ listened to his father and mother; he kissed
them and arose and went to Paddan Aram. And
Ya’aqoḇ was seventy-seven years old when he went
out from the land of Kena’an from Be’ĕrsheḇa.
31 And when Ya’aqoḇ went away to go to Ḥaran, Ĕsaw
called to his son Eliphaz, and secretly spoke to him,
saying, “Now hurry, take your sword in your hand and
pursue Ya’aqoḇ and pass before him on the way. And
lay in wait for him, and slay him with your sword on one
of the mountains, and take all belonging to him and
come back.”
32 And Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw was an active man and
expert with the bow as his father had taught him, and
he was a noted hunter in the field and a mighty man.
33 And Eliphaz did as his father had commanded him,
and Eliphaz was at that time thirteen years old. And
Eliphaz rose up and went and took ten of his mother’s
brothers with him and pursued Ya’aqoḇ.
729

YASHAR

And he closely followed Ya’aqoḇ, and he lay in wait
for him in the border of the land of Kena’an opposite to
the city of Sheḵem.
35 And Ya’aqoḇ saw Eliphaz and his men pursuing
him, and Ya’aqoḇ stood still in the place in which he
was going, in order to know what this was, for he did
not know the matter. And Eliphaz drew his sword and
he went on advancing, he and his men, toward
Ya’aqoḇ. And Ya’aqoḇ said to them, “What is it to do
with you that you have come here, and what does it
mean that you pursue with your swords?”
36 And Eliphaz came near to Ya’aqoḇ and he
answered and said to him, “Thus did my father
command me, and now therefore I will not deviate from
the orders which my father gave me!” And when
Ya’aqoḇ saw that Ĕsaw had spoken to Eliphaz to
employ force, Ya’aqoḇ then approached and pleaded
with Eliphaz and his men, saying to him,
37 “See, all that I have and which my father and
mother gave to me, take for yourself and go from me,
and do not slay me, and may this matter be accounted
to you as righteousness.”
38 And HWHY caused Ya’aqoḇ to find favour in the
sight of Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw, and his men, and they
listened to the voice of Ya’aqoḇ, and they did not put
him to death. And Eliphaz and his men took all
belonging to Ya’aqoḇ together with the silver and gold
that he had brought with him from Be’ĕrsheḇa. They
left him nothing.
39 And Eliphaz and his men went away from him and
returned to Ĕsaw to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and they told him all
that had occurred to them with Ya’aqoḇ, and they gave
him all that they had taken from Ya’aqoḇ.
40 And Ĕsaw was wroth at Eliphaz his son, and at his
men that were with him, because they had not put
Ya’aqoḇ to death.
34

730

JASHER

And they answered and said to Ĕsaw, “Because
Ya’aqoḇ pleaded with us in this matter not to slay him,
our compassion was aroused toward him, and we took
all belonging to him and brought it to you.” And Ĕsaw
took all the silver and gold which Eliphaz had taken
from Ya’aqoḇ and he put them aside in his house.
42 At that time when Ĕsaw saw that Yitsḥaq had baraḵ
Ya’aqoḇ, and had commanded him, saying, “You shall
not take a wife from among the daughters of Kena’an,”
and that the daughters of Kena’an were evil in the sight
of Yitsḥaq and Riḇqah,
43 then he went to the house of Yishma’ĕl his uncle,
and in addition to his older wives he took Maḥalath the
daughter of Yishma’ĕl, the sister of Neḇayoth, for a
wife.
41

30 And Ya’aqoḇ went forth continuing his way to
Ḥaran, and he came as far as mount Moriyah. And he
stayed there all night near the city of Luz, and HWHY
appeared there to Ya’aqoḇ on that night, and He said
to him, “I am HWHY, Elohim of Aḇraham and the Elohim
of Yitsḥaq your father. The land upon which you lie, I
will give unto you and your seed.
2 And see, I am with you and will keep you wherever
you go, and I will multiply your seed as the stars of the
shamayim, and I will cause all your enemies to fall
before you. And when they shall fight against you, they
shall not prevail over you, and I will bring you again to
this land with joy, with children, and with great riches.”
3 And Ya’aqoḇ awoke from his sleep and he rejoiced
greatly at the vision which he had seen. And he called
the name of that place Bĕyth Ĕl.
4 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up from that place greatly
rejoicing, and when he walked his feet felt light to him
for joy. And he went from there to the land of the
children of the East, and he returned to Ḥaran and he
sat by the shepherd’s well.
731

YASHAR

And there he found some men going from Ḥaran to
feed their flocks, and Ya’aqoḇ made inquiries of them,
and they said, “We are from Ḥaran.”
6 And he said to them, “Do you know Laḇan, son of
Naḥor?” and they said, “We know him, and look, his
daughter Raḥĕl is coming along to feed her father’s
flock.”
7 While he was still speaking with them, Raḥĕl the
daughter of Laḇan came to feed her father’s sheep, for
she was a shepherdess.
8 And when Ya’aqoḇ saw Raḥĕl, the daughter of
Laḇan, his mother’s brother, he ran and kissed her,
and lifted up his voice and wept.
9 And Ya’aqoḇ told Raḥĕl that he was the son of
Riḇqah, her father’s sister, and Raḥĕl ran and told her
father, and Ya’aqoḇ continued to cry because he had
nothing with him to bring to the house of Laḇan.
10 And when Laḇan heard that his sister’s son
Ya’aqoḇ had come, he ran and kissed him and
embraced him and brought him into the house and
gave him bread, and he ate.
11 And Ya’aqoḇ related to Laḇan what his brother
Ĕsaw had done to him, and what his son Eliphaz had
done to him on the way.
12 And Ya’aqoḇ dwelt in Laḇan’s house for one month,
and Ya’aqoḇ ate and drank in the house of Laḇan. And
afterward Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Tell me what your
wages shall be, for how can you serve me for naught?”
13 And Laḇan had no sons but only daughters, and his
other wives and female servants were still barren in
those days. And these are the names of Laḇan’s
daughters which his wife Aḏina had borne unto him:
the name of the elder was Lĕ’ah and the name of the
younger was Raḥĕl. And Lĕ’ah’s eyes were weak, but
Raḥĕl was lovely of form and appearance, and
Ya’aqoḇ loved her.
5

732

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ said to Laḇan, “I will serve you seven
years for Raḥĕl your younger daughter.” And Laḇan
agreed to this and Ya’aqoḇ served Laḇan seven years
for his daughter Raḥĕl.
15 And in the second year of Ya’aqoḇ’s dwelling in
Ḥaran, that is in the seventy-ninth year of the life of
Ya’aqoḇ, in that year Ĕḇer son of Shĕm died. He was
four hundred and sixty-four years old at his death.
16 And when Ya’aqoḇ heard that Ĕḇer was dead he
grieved exceedingly, and he lamented and mourned
over him many days.
17 And in the third year of Ya’aqoḇ’s dwelling in Ḥaran,
Basemath the daughter of Yishma’ĕl, the wife of Ĕsaw,
bore unto him a son, and Ĕsaw called his name
Re’uw’ĕl.
18 And in the fourth year of Ya’aqoḇ’s dwelling in the
house of Laḇan, HWHY visited Laḇan and remembered
him because of Ya’aqoḇ, and sons were born unto him.
And his first-born was Be’or, his second was Aliḇ, and
the third was Ḥoresh.
19 And HWHY gave Laḇan riches and honour, sons and
daughters, and the man increased greatly because of
Ya’aqoḇ.
20 And in those days, Ya’aqoḇ served Laḇan in all
manner of work, in the house and in the field, and the
beraḵah of HWHY was on all that belonged to Laḇan in
the house and in the field.
21 And in the fifth year Yahuḏith died, the daughter of
Be’ĕri, the wife of Ĕsaw, in the land of Kena’an. And
she had no sons but daughters only.
22 And these are the names of her daughters which
she bore to Ĕsaw: the name of the elder was Marzith,
and the name of the younger was Puith.
23 And when Yahuḏith died, Ĕsaw rose up and went
to Sĕ’ir to hunt in the field, as usual, and Ĕsaw dwelt in
the land of Sĕ’ir for a long time.
14

733

YASHAR

And in the sixth year Ĕsaw took for a wife, in
addition to his other wives, Oholiḇamah, the daughter
of Tsiḇ’on the Ḥiwwite. And Ĕsaw brought her to the
land of Kena’an.
25 And Oholiḇamah conceived and bore unto Ĕsaw
three sons: Ye’ush, Ya’lam, and Qoraḥ.
26 And in those days, in the land of Kena’an, there was
a quarrel between the herdsmen of Ĕsaw and the
herdsmen of the inhabitants of the land of Kena’an, for
Ĕsaw’s cattle and goods were too abundant for him to
remain in the land of Kena’an, in his father’s house,
and the land of Kena’an could not bear him because
of his cattle.
27 And when Ĕsaw saw that his quarrelling increased
with the inhabitants of the land of Kena’an, he rose up
and took his wives and his sons and his daughters, and
all belonging to him, and the cattle which he
possessed, and all his property that he had acquired
in the land of Kena’an, and he went away from the
inhabitants of the land to the land of Sĕ’ir. And Ĕsaw
and all belonging to him dwelt in the land of Sĕ’ir.
28 But from time to time Ĕsaw would go and see his
father and mother in the land of Kena’an. And Ĕsaw
intermarried with the Ḥorites, and he gave his
daughters to the sons of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite.
29 And he gave his elder daughter Marzith to Anah,
son of Tsiḇ’on, his wife’s brother, and Puith he gave to
Azar, son of Bilhan the Ḥorite. And Ĕsaw dwelt on the
mountain, he and his children, and they were fruitful
and multiplied.
24

31 And in the seventh year, Ya’aqoḇ’s service which
he served Laḇan was completed. And Ya’aqoḇ said to
Laḇan, “Give me my wife, for the days of my service
are fulfilled.” And Laḇan did so, and Laḇan and
Ya’aqoḇ assembled all the people of that place and
they made a feast.
734

JASHER

And in the evening Laḇan came to the house, and
afterward Ya’aqoḇ came there with the people of the
feast, and Laḇan put out all the lights that were there
in the house.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Laḇan, “Why do you do this
matter to us?” and Laḇan answered, “Such is our
custom to do in this land.”
4 And afterward Laḇan took his daughter Lĕ’ah, and
he brought her to Ya’aqoḇ. And he came to her but
Ya’aqoḇ did not know that she was Lĕ’ah.
5 And Laḇan gave his daughter Lĕ’ah his female
servant Zilpah for a female servant.
6 And all the people at the feast knew what Laḇan
had done to Ya’aqoḇ, but they did not tell the matter to
Ya’aqoḇ.
7 And all the neighbours came that night to Ya’aqoḇ’s
house, and they ate and drank and rejoiced, and
played before Lĕ’ah on timbrels, and with dances. And
they responded before Ya’aqoḇ, “Hĕlĕ’ah! Hĕlĕ’ah!”
8 And Ya’aqoḇ heard their words but did not
understand their meaning, but he thought such might
be their custom in this land.
9 And the neighbours spoke these words before
Ya’aqoḇ during the night, and Laḇan had put out all the
lights that were in the house that night.
10 And in the morning, when daylight appeared,
Ya’aqoḇ turned to his wife and he looked, and see, it
was Lĕ’ah that had been lying in his bosom! And
Ya’aqoḇ said, “See, now I know what the neighbour
said last night: ‘Hĕlĕ’ah’, they said, and I did not know
it!”
11 And Ya’aqoḇ called to Laḇan, and said to him,
“What is this that you did to me? I only served you for
Raḥĕl, but why did you deceive me and give me
Lĕ’ah?”
12 And Laḇan answered Ya’aqoḇ, saying, “It is not
done so in our place, to give the younger before the
2

735

YASHAR

elder. Now therefore, if you desire to take her sister
likewise, take her unto you for the service which your
will serve me for another seven years.”
13 And Ya’aqoḇ did so, and he also took Raḥĕl for a
wife. And he served Laḇan seven years more, and
Ya’aqoḇ also came to Raḥĕl, and he loved Raḥĕl more
than Lĕ’ah. And Laḇan gave her his female servant
Bilhah for a female servant.
14 And when HWHY saw that Lĕ’ah was hated, HWHY
opened her womb, and she conceived and bore
Ya’aqoḇ four sons in those days.
15 And these are their names: Re’uḇĕn, Shim’on,
Lĕwi, and Yahuḏah, and afterward she ceased
bearing.
16 And at that time Raḥĕl was barren, and she had no
offspring, and Raḥĕl envied her sister Lĕ’ah. And when
Raḥĕl saw that she bore no children to Ya’aqoḇ, she
took her female servant Bilhah, and she bore Ya’aqoḇ
two sons, Dan and Naphtali.
17 And when Lĕ’ah saw that she had ceased bearing,
she also took her female servant Zilpah, and she gave
her to Ya’aqoḇ for a wife. And Ya’aqoḇ also came to
Zilpah, and she also bore Ya’aqoḇ two sons, Gaḏ and
Ashĕr.
18 And Lĕ’ah again conceived and bore Ya’aqoḇ two
sons and one daughter in those days, and these are
their names: Yissasḵar, Zeḇulun, and their sister
Dinah.
19 But Raḥĕl was still barren in those days, and Raḥĕl
prayed to HWHY at that time, and she said, “O HWHY
Elohim remember me and visit me please, for now my
husband will cast me off, for I have borne him no
children.
20 “Now O HWHY Elohim, hear my supplication before
you, and see my affliction, and give me children like
one of the female servants, that I may no longer bear
my reproach.”
736

JASHER

And Elohim heard her and opened her womb, and
Raḥĕl conceived and bore a son, and she said, “HWHY
has taken away my reproach.” And she called his
name Yosĕph, saying, “May HWHY add to me another
son.” And Ya’aqoḇ was ninety-one years old when she
bore him.
22 At that time Ya’aqoḇ’s mother, Riḇqah, sent her
nurse Deḇorah the daughter of Uts, and two of
Yitsḥaq’s servants to Ya’aqoḇ.
23 And they came to Ya’aqoḇ to Ḥaran and they said
to him, “Riḇqah has sent us to you that you return to
your father’s house to the land of Kena’an.” And
Ya’aqoḇ listened to them in this which his mother had
spoken.
24 At that time, the other seven years which Ya’aqoḇ
served Laḇan for Raḥĕl were completed. And it came
to be at the end of fourteen years that he had dwelt in
Ḥaran that Ya’aqoḇ said to Laḇan, “Give me my wives
and send me away, that I may go to my land, for see,
my mother sent to me from the land at Kena’an that I
should return to my father’s house.”
25 And Laḇan said to him, “No, please. If I have found
favour in your sight do not leave me. Appoint me your
wages and I will give them, and remain with me.”
26 And Ya’aqoḇ said to him, “This is what you shall
give me for wages: that I shall this day pass through
all your flock and take away from them every lamb that
is speckled and spotted and such as are brown among
the sheep, and among the goats, and if you will do this
matter for me I will return and feed your flock and keep
them as at first.”
27 And Laḇan did so, and Laḇan removed from his
flock all that Ya’aqoḇ had said, and gave them to him.
28 And Ya’aqoḇ placed all that he had removed from
Laḇan’s flock in the hands of his sons, and Ya’aqoḇ
was feeding the remainder of Laḇan’s flock.
21

737

YASHAR

And when the servants of Yitsḥaq which he had
sent to Ya’aqoḇ saw that Ya’aqoḇ would not then
return with them to the land of Kena’an to his father,
they then went away from him, and they returned home
to the land of Kena’an.
30 But Deḇorah remained with Ya’aqoḇ in Ḥaran, and
she did not return with the servants of Yitsḥaq to the
land of Kena’an, and Deḇorah resided with Ya’aqoḇ’s
wives and children in Ḥaran.
31 And Ya’aqoḇ served Laḇan six years longer, and
when the sheep brought forth, Ya’aqoḇ removed from
them such as were speckled and spotted, as he had
determined with Laḇan. And Ya’aqoḇ did so with
Laḇan for six years, and the man increased abundantly
and he had cattle and female servants and male
servants, camels, and donkeys.
32 And Ya’aqoḇ had two hundred drove of cattle, and
his cattle were of large size and of good-looking
appearance and were very productive. And all the
clans of the sons of men desired to get some of the
cattle of Ya’aqoḇ, for they were exceedingly
prosperous.
33 And many of the sons of men came to obtain some
of Ya’aqoḇ’s flock, and Ya’aqoḇ gave them a sheep for
a man servant or a female servant or for a donkey or a
camel, or whatever Ya’aqoḇ desired from them they
gave him.
34 And Ya’aqoḇ obtained riches and honour and
possessions by means of these matters with the sons
of men, and the children of Laḇan envied him of this
honour.
35 And in the course of time he heard the words of
Laḇan’s sons, saying, “Ya’aqoḇ has taken away all that
was our father’s, and by that which was our father’s
has he acquired all this esteem.”
29

738

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ saw the appearance of Laḇan and of
his children, and see, it was not toward him in those
days as it had been before.
37 And HWHY appeared to Ya’aqoḇ at the passing of
the six years, and said to him, “Arise, go forth out of
this land, and return to the land of your birthplace and
I will be with you.”
38 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up at that time and he mounted
his children and wives and all belonging to him on
camels, and he went out to go to the land of Kena’an
to his father Yitsḥaq.
39 And Laḇan did not know that Ya’aqoḇ had gone
from him, for Laḇan had been sheep-shearing that
day.
40 And Raḥĕl stole her father’s images, and she took
them and she concealed them on the camel upon
which she sat, and she went on.
41 And this is the manner of the images: in taking a
man who is the first-born and slaying him and taking
the hair off his head, and taking salt and salting the
head and anointing it in oil. Then taking a small tablet
of copper or a tablet of gold and writing the name on it,
and placing the tablet under his tongue, and taking the
head with the tablet under the tongue and putting it in
the house, and lighting lights before it and bowing
down to it.
42 And at the time when they bow down to it, it speaks
to them in all matters that they ask of it, through the
power of the name which is written on it.
43 And some make them in the figures of men, of gold
and silver, and go to them in times known to them, and
the figures receive the influence of the stars, and tell
them matters to come. And such were the images
which Raḥĕl stole from her father.
44 And Raḥĕl stole these images which were her
father’s, in order that Laḇan might not know through
them where Ya’aqoḇ had gone.
36

739

YASHAR

And Laḇan came home and he asked concerning
Ya’aqoḇ and his household, but he was not to be
found. And Laḇan sought his images to know where
Ya’aqoḇ had gone, and could not find them, and he
went to some other images, and he inquired of them
and they told him that Ya’aqoḇ had fled from him to his
father - to the land of Kena’an.
46 And Laḇan then rose up and he took his brothers
and all his servants, and he went forth and pursued
Ya’aqoḇ. And he overtook him in mount Gil’aḏ.
47 And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “What is this you have
done to me to flee and deceive me, and lead my
daughters and their children as captives taken by the
sword?
48 “And you did not allow me to kiss them and send
them away with joy, and you stole my mighty ones and
went away!”
49 And Ya’aqoḇ answered Laḇan, saying, “Because I
was afraid lest you would take your daughters by force
from me. And now, with whoever you find your mighty
ones, he shall die.”
50 And Laḇan searched for the images and he looked
in all Ya’aqoḇ’s tents and furniture, but could not find
them.
51 And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “We will make a
covenant together and it shall be a witness between
you and I. If you shall afflict my daughters, or shall take
other wives besides my daughters, even Elohim shall
be a witness between you and I in this matter.”
52 And they took stones and made a heap, and Laḇan
said, “This heap is a witness between you and I,
therefore he called the name of it Gil’aḏ.”
53 And Ya’aqoḇ and Laḇan offered upon the
mountain, and they ate there by the heap, and they
stayed on the mountain all night. And Laḇan rose early
in the morning, and he wept with his daughters and
kissed them, and he returned to his place.
45

740

JASHER

And he hastened and sent off his son Be’or, who
was seventeen years old, with Aḇiḥor son of Uts, son
of Naḥor, and with them were ten men.
55 And they hastened and went and passed on the
way before Ya’aqoḇ, and they came by another way to
the land of Sĕ’ir.
56 And they came to Ĕsaw and said to him, “Thus
spoke your brother and relative, your mother’s brother
Laḇan, son of Bethu’ĕl, saying:
57 ‘Have you heard what Ya’aqoḇ your brother has
done to me, who first came to me naked and bare?
And I went to meet him, and brought him to my house
with honour, and I made him great, and I gave him my
two daughters for wives and also two of my female
servants.
58 ‘And Elohim baraḵ him for my sake, and he
increased abundantly, and had sons, daughters and
female servants.
59 ‘He also has a large stock of flocks and herds,
camels and donkeys, also silver and gold in great
amount. But when he saw that his wealth increased,
he left me while I went to shear my sheep, and he rose
up and fled in secrecy.
60 ‘And he lifted his wives and children upon camels,
and he led away all his cattle and property which he
acquired in my land, and he lifted his face to go to his
father Yitsḥaq, to the land of Kena’an.
61 ‘And he did not allow me to kiss my daughters and
their children, and he led my daughters as captives
taken by the sword, and he also stole my mighty ones
and fled.
62 ‘And now I have left him in the mountain of the wadi
Yabboq - he and all belonging to him - he lacks
nothing.
63 ‘If it be your desire to go to him, go, then and there
you will find him, and you can do to him as your being
54

741

YASHAR

desires.’ ” and Laḇan’s messengers came and told
Ĕsaw all these matters.
64 And Ĕsaw heard all the words of Laḇan’s
messengers, and his wrath was greatly kindled against
Ya’aqoḇ, and he remembered his hatred, and his
wrath burned within him.
65 And Ĕsaw hastened and took his children and
servants and the beings of his household - being sixty
men - and he went and assembled all the children of
Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite and their people - being three hundred
and forty men - and took all this number of four
hundred men with drawn swords, and he went to
Ya’aqoḇ to smite him.
66 And Ĕsaw divided this number into divisions, and
he took the sixty men of his children and servants and
the beings of his household as one head, and gave
them into the hand of Eliphaz his eldest son.
67 And the remaining heads he gave into the hand of
the six sons of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite, and he placed every
man over his generations and children.
68 And the whole of this camp went as it was, and
Ĕsaw went among them toward Ya’aqoḇ, and he
brought them over with speed.
69 And Laḇan’s messengers departed from Ĕsaw and
went to the land of Kena’an, and they came to the
house of Riḇqah the mother of Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw.
70 And they told her saying, “See, your son Ĕsaw has
gone against his brother Ya’aqoḇ with four hundred
men, for he heard that he was coming, and he has
gone to fight against him, and to smite him and to take
all that he has.”
71 And Riḇqah hastened and sent seventy-two men
from the servants of Yitsḥaq to meet Ya’aqoḇ on the
way; for she said, “Maybe Ĕsaw will fight on the way
when he meets him.”
72 And these messengers went on the way to meet
Ya’aqoḇ, and they met him on the way of the wadi on
742

JASHER

the opposite side of the wadi Yabboq. And when he
saw them Ya’aqoḇ said, “This camp is appointed to me
from Elohim.” and Ya’aqoḇ called the name of that
place Maḥanayim.
73 And Ya’aqoḇ knew all his father’s people, and he
kissed them and embraced them and came with them,
and Ya’aqoḇ asked them concerning his father and
mother, and they said, “They are well.”
74 And the messengers said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Riḇqah your
mother has sent us to you, saying, ‘I have heard, my
son, that your brother Ĕsaw has gone out against you
on the way with men from the children of Sĕ’ir the
Ḥorite.
75 ‘And therefore, my son, listen to my voice and see
with your counsel what you will do. And when he
comes up to you, ask peace of him, and do not speak
rashly to him, and give him a present from what you
possess, and from what Elohim has favoured you with.
76 ‘And when he asks you concerning your affairs,
conceal nothing from him, maybe he may turn from his
wrath against you and you will thereby save your
being, you and all belonging to you, for it is your duty
to honour him, for he is your elder brother.’ ”
77 And when Ya’aqoḇ heard the words of his mother
which the messengers had spoken to him, Ya’aqoḇ
lifted up his voice and wept bitterly, and did as his
mother then commanded him.

32 And at that time Ya’aqoḇ sent messengers to his
brother Ĕsaw toward the land of Sĕ’ir, and he spoke to
him words of favour.
2 And he commanded them, saying, “Thus you shall
say to my master, to Ĕsaw, ‘Thus said your servant
Ya’aqoḇ, “Let not my master think that my father’s
beraḵah with which he baraḵ me has proved beneficial
to me.
743

YASHAR

“For I have been these twenty years with Laḇan,
and he deceived me and changed my wages ten times,
as it all has been already told to my master.
4 “And I served him in his house with hard labour, and
Elohim afterward saw my affliction, my labour and the
work of my hands, and He caused me to find favour
and kindness in His sight.
5 “And I, through Elohim’s great favour and kindness,
afterward acquired oxen and donkeys and cattle, and
male servants and female servants.
6 “And now I am coming to my land and my home to
my father and mother, who are in the land of Kena’an.
And I have sent to let my master know all this in order
to find favour in the sight of my master, so that he may
not think that I have obtained wealth of myself, or that
the beraḵah with which my father baraḵ me has
benefited me.” ’ ”
7 And those messengers went to Ĕsaw, and found
him on the borders of the land of Eḏom coming toward
Ya’aqoḇ, and four hundred men of the children of Sĕ’ir
the Ḥorite were standing with drawn swords.
8 And the messengers of Ya’aqoḇ told Ĕsaw all the
words that Ya’aqoḇ had spoken to them concerning
Ĕsaw.
9 And Ĕsaw answered them with pride and contempt,
and said to them, “Indeed I have heard and truly it has
been told to me what Ya’aqoḇ has done to Laḇan, who
exalted him in his house and gave him his daughters
for wives, and he brought forth sons and daughters,
and abundantly increased in wealth and riches in
Laḇan’s house through his means.
10 “And when he saw that his wealth was abundant
and his riches great, he fled with all belonging to him,
from Laḇan’s house, and he led Laḇan’s daughters
away from the face of their father, as captives taken by
the sword without telling him of it.
3

744

JASHER

“And Ya’aqoḇ has not only done so to Laḇan, but
he has also done so and has caught me by the heel
twice, and shall I be silent?
12 “Now therefore I have this day come with my armies
to meet him, and I will do to him according to the desire
of my heart!”
13 And the messengers returned and came to
Ya’aqoḇ and said to him, “We came to your brother, to
Ĕsaw, and we told him all your words, and thus has he
answered us, and see, he comes to meet you with four
hundred men!
14 “Now then know and see what you shall do, and
pray before Elohim to deliver you from him.”
15 And when he heard the words of his brother which
he had spoken to the messengers of Ya’aqoḇ, Ya’aqoḇ
was greatly afraid and he was distressed.
16 And Ya’aqoḇ prayed to HWHY his Elohim, and he
said, “O HWHY Elohim of my fathers, Aḇraham and
Yitsḥaq, You spoke to me when I went away from my
father’s house, saying,
17 ‘I am HWHY Elohim of your father Aḇraham and the
Elohim of Yitsḥaq, to you do I give this land and your
seed after you. And I will make your seed as the stars
of the shamayim, and you shall spread forth to the four
sides of the shamayim, and in you and in your seed
shall all the clans of the earth be baruḵ.’
18 “And You established Your words, and gave to me
riches and children and cattle, as the utmost wishes of
my heart You gave to Your servant. You gave to me
all that I asked from You, so that I lacked nothing.
19 “And You afterward said to me, ‘Return to your
genealogy and to your birth place and I will still do well
with you.’
20 “And now that I have come, and You delivered me
from Laḇan, I shall fall into the hands of Ĕsaw who will
slay me, even together with the mothers of my
children!
11

745

YASHAR

“Now therefore, O HWHY Elohim, please deliver me
from the hands of my brother Ĕsaw, for I am greatly
afraid of him.
22 “And if there is no righteousness in me, do it for the
sake of Aḇraham and my father Yitsḥaq.
23 “For I know that through kindness and favour I have
acquired this wealth. Now therefore I ask You to deliver
me today by Your kindness and to answer me.”
24 And Ya’aqoḇ ceased praying to HWHY, and he
divided the people that were with him with the flocks
and cattle into two camps, and he gave the half into
the hand of Dammeseq, son of El’azar, Aḇraham’s
servant, for a camp, with his children, and the other
half he gave into the hand of his brother Eli’ĕynai son
of El’azar, to be for a camp with his children.
25 And
he commanded them, saying, “Keep
yourselves at a distance with your camps, and do not
come too near each other, and if Ĕsaw comes to one
camp and smites it, the other camp at a distance from
it will escape him.”
26 And Ya’aqoḇ stayed there that night, and during the
whole night he gave his servants instructions
concerning the camps and his children.
27 And HWHY heard the prayer of Ya’aqoḇ on that day,
and HWHY then delivered Ya’aqoḇ from the hands of
his brother Ĕsaw.
28 And HWHY sent three messengers of the
messengers of the shamayim, and they went before
Ĕsaw and came to him.
29 And these messengers appeared to Ĕsaw and his
people as two thousand men, riding on horses
equipped with all kinds of weapons. And they
appeared in the sight of Ĕsaw and all his men to be
divided into four armies, with four chiefs to them.
30 And one army went on and they found Ĕsaw
coming with four hundred men toward his brother
Ya’aqoḇ. And the army ran toward Ĕsaw and his
21

746

JASHER

people and frightened them. And Ĕsaw fell off the
horse in alarm, and all his men separated from him in
that place, for they were greatly afraid.
31 And the whole of the army shouted after them when
they fled from Ĕsaw, and all the men of battle
answered, saying,
32 “Indeed we are the servants of Ya’aqoḇ, who is the
servant of Elohim, and who then can stand against
us?” And Ĕsaw said to them, “O then, my master and
brother Ya’aqoḇ is your master, whom I have not seen
for these twenty years! And now that I have come this
day to see him, do you treat me in this manner?”
33 And the messengers answered him saying, “As
HWHY lives, were not Ya’aqoḇ of whom you speak your
brother, we would not leave one remaining from you
and your people, but only because of Ya’aqoḇ will we
do nothing to them.”
34 And the army passed from Ĕsaw and his men and
went away. And Ĕsaw and his men had gone from
them about a mile when the second army came toward
him with all kinds of weapons, and they also did to
Ĕsaw and his men as the first army had done to them.
35 And when they had left it to go on, see, the third
army came toward him and they were all afraid, and
Ĕsaw fell off the horse. And the whole army cried out,
and said, “Indeed we are the servants of Ya’aqoḇ, who
is the servant of Elohim, and who can stand against
us?”
36 And Ĕsaw again answered them saying, “O then,
Ya’aqoḇ my master and your master is my brother, and
for twenty years I have not seen his face. And hearing
this day that he was coming, I went this day to meet
him, and do you treat me in this manner?”
37 And they answered him, and said to him, “As HWHY
lives, were not Ya’aqoḇ your brother as you say, we
would not leave a remnant from you and your men. But
747

YASHAR

because of Ya’aqoḇ of whom you speak is your
brother, we will not strive with you or your men.”
38 And the third army also passed from them. And he
still continued his way with his men toward Ya’aqoḇ,
when the fourth army came toward him. And they also
did to he and his men as the others had done.
39 And when Ĕsaw saw the evil which the four
messengers had done to he and to his men, he
became greatly afraid of his brother Ya’aqoḇ, and he
went to meet him in peace.
40 And Ĕsaw concealed his hatred against Ya’aqoḇ,
because he was afraid for his life because of his
brother Ya’aqoḇ, and because he thought that the four
armies that he had encountered were Ya’aqoḇ’s
servants.
41 And Ya’aqoḇ stayed that night with his servants in
their camps, and he resolved with his servants to give
to Ĕsaw a present from all that he had with him, and
from all his property. And Ya’aqoḇ rose up in the
morning, he and his men, and they chose from among
the cattle a present for Ĕsaw.
42 And this is the amount of the present which
Ya’aqoḇ chose from his flock to give to his brother
Ĕsaw: and he selected two hundred and forty head
from the flocks, and he selected from the camels and
donkeys thirty each, and of the herds he chose fifty
cattle.
43 And he put them all in ten droves, and he placed
each kind by itself, and he delivered them into the
hands of ten of his servants, each drove by itself.
44 And he commanded them, and said to them, “Keep
yourselves at a distance from each other, and put a
space between the droves, and when Ĕsaw and those
who are with him shall meet you and ask you, saying,
‘Whose are you, and where do you go, and to whom
belongs all this before you?’ You shall say to them, ‘We
748

JASHER

are the servants of Ya’aqoḇ, and we come to meet
Ĕsaw in peace, and see, Ya’aqoḇ comes behind us.
45 ‘And that which is before us is a present sent from
Ya’aqoḇ to his brother Ĕsaw.’
46 “And if they shall say to you, ‘Why does he delay
behind you, from coming to meet his brother and to
see his face?’ Then you shall say to them, ‘Indeed he
comes joyfully behind us to meet his brother.’ ” For he
said, “I will appease him with the present that goes to
him, and after this I will see his I face. Maybe he will
accept me.”
47 So the whole present passed on in the hands of his
servants, and went before him on that day, and he
lodged that night with his camps by the border of the
wadi Yabboq. And he rose up in the middle of the night,
and he took his wives and his female servants, and all
belonging to him, and that night he passed them over
the ford Yabboq.
48 And when he passed all belonging to him over the
wadi, Ya’aqoḇ was left by himself, and a Man met him,
and he wrestled with Him that night until the breaking
of day, and the hollow of Ya’aqoḇ’s thigh was out of
joint through wrestling with Him.
49 And at the break of day the Man left Ya’aqoḇ there,
and He baraḵ him and went away. And Ya’aqoḇ
passed the wadi at the break of day, and he limped on
his thigh.
50 And the sun rose upon him when he had passed
the wadi, and he came up to the place of his cattle and
children.
51 And they went on till midday, and while they were
going the present passed on before them.
52 And Ya’aqoḇ lifted up his eyes and looked, and see,
Ĕsaw was at a distance, coming along with many men
- about four hundred - and Ya’aqoḇ was greatly afraid
of his brother.
749

YASHAR

And Ya’aqoḇ hastened and divided his children to
his wives and his female servants, and his daughter
Dinah he put in a chest, and gave her into the hands
of his servants.
54 And he passed before his children and wives to
meet his brother, and he bowed down to the ground;
he even bowed down seven times until he approached
his brother. And Elohim caused Ya’aqoḇ to find favour
and kindness in the sight of Ĕsaw and his men, for
Elohim had heard the prayer of Ya’aqoḇ.
55 And the fear of Ya’aqoḇ and his dread fell upon his
brother Ĕsaw, for Ĕsaw was greatly afraid of Ya’aqoḇ
for what the messengers of Elohim had done to Ĕsaw,
and Ĕsaw’s wrath against Ya’aqoḇ was turned into
kindness.
56 And when Ĕsaw saw Ya’aqoḇ running toward him,
he also ran toward him and he embraced him, and he
fell upon his neck, and they kissed and they wept.
57 And Elohim put fear and kindness toward Ya’aqoḇ
into the hearts of the men that came with Ĕsaw, and
they also kissed Ya’aqoḇ and embraced him.
58 And Eliphaz, son of Ĕsaw, with his four brothers,
sons of Ĕsaw, also wept with Ya’aqoḇ, and they kissed
him and embraced him, for the fear of Ya’aqoḇ had
fallen upon them all.
59 And Ĕsaw lifted up his eyes and saw the women
with their offspring, the children of Ya’aqoḇ, walking
behind Ya’aqoḇ and bowing along the way to Ĕsaw.
60 And Ĕsaw said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Who are these with
you, my brother? Are they your children or your
servants?” and Ya’aqoḇ answered Ĕsaw and said,
“They are my children which Elohim has graciously
given to your servant.”
61 And while Ya’aqoḇ was speaking to Ĕsaw and his
men, Ĕsaw saw the whole camp, and he said to
Ya’aqoḇ, “Where did you get the whole of the company
that I met last night?” And Ya’aqoḇ said, “To find favour
53

750

JASHER

in the sight of my master, it is that which Elohim
graciously gave to your servant.”
62 And the present came before Ĕsaw, and Ya’aqoḇ
pressed Ĕsaw, saying, “Please take the present that I
have brought to my master.” And Ĕsaw said, “Why is
this my purpose? Keep that which you have for
yourself.”
63 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “It is necessary for me to give all
this, since I have seen your face, that you still live in
peace.”
64 And Ĕsaw refused to take the present, but Ya’aqoḇ
said to him, “I ask you my master, if now I have found
favour in your sight, then receive my present at my
hand, for I have therefore seen your face, as though I
had seen a face like a mighty one, because you were
pleased with me.”
65 And Ĕsaw took the present, and Ya’aqoḇ also gave
to Ĕsaw silver and gold and bdellium, for he pressed
him so much that he took them.
66 And Ĕsaw divided the cattle that were in the camp,
and he gave the half to the men who had come with
him, for they had come on hire, and the other half he
delivered into the hands of his children.
67 And the silver and gold and bdellium he gave into
the hands of Eliphaz his eldest son, and Ĕsaw said to
Ya’aqoḇ, “Let us remain with you, and we will go slowly
along with you until you come to my place with me, that
we may dwell there together.”
68 And Ya’aqoḇ answered his brother and said, “I
would do as my master says to me, but my master
knows that the children are weak, and the flocks and
herds with their young who are with me, go but slowly,
for if they went swiftly they would all die, for you know
their burdens and their fatigue.
69 “Therefore let my master pass on before his
servant, and I will go on slowly for the sake of the
751

YASHAR

children and the flock, until I come to my master’s
place at Sĕ’ir.”
70 And Ĕsaw said to Ya’aqoḇ, “I will place with you
some of the people that are with me to take care of you
on the way, and to bear your load and burden.” And he
said, “What do you need my master, that I may find
favour in your sight?
71 “See, I will come to you to Sĕ’ir to dwell there
together as you have spoken. Go then with your
people for I will follow you.”
72 And Ya’aqoḇ said this to Ĕsaw in order to remove
Ĕsaw and his men from him, so that afterward Ya’aqoḇ
might go to his father’s house to the land of Kena’an.
73 And Ĕsaw listened to the voice of Ya’aqoḇ, and
Ĕsaw returned with the four hundred men that were
with him on their way to Sĕ’ir. And Ya’aqoḇ and all
belonging to him went that day as far as the boundary
of the land of Kena’an in its borders, and he remained
there some time.

33 And after some time, Ya’aqoḇ went away from the
borders of the land, and he came to the land of
Shalĕm, that is the city of Sheḵem, which is in the land
of Kena’an, and he rested in front of the city.
2 And he bought a portion of the field which was
there, from the children of Ḥamor the people of the
land, for five sheqels.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ built himself a house there, and he
pitched his tent there. And he made booths for his
cattle, therefore he called the name of that place
Sukkoth.
4 And Ya’aqoḇ remained in Sukkoth a year and six
months.
5 At that time, some of the women of the inhabitants
of the land went to the city of Sheḵem to dance and
rejoice with the daughters of the people of the city, and
when they went, Raḥĕl and Lĕ’ah the wives of Ya’aqoḇ
752

JASHER

with their clans also went to see the rejoicing of the
daughters of the city.
6 And Dinah the daughter of Ya’aqoḇ also went along
with them and saw the daughters of the city. And they
remained there before these daughters while all the
people of the city were standing by them to see their
rejoicings, and all the great people of the city were
there.
7 And Sheḵem son of Ḥamor, the prince of the land
was also standing there to watch them.
8 And Sheḵem saw Dinah the daughter of Ya’aqoḇ
sitting with her mother before the daughters of the city,
and the maiden pleased him greatly, and he asked his
friends there and his people, saying, “Whose daughter
is that sitting among the women, whom I do not know
in this city?”
9 And they said to him, “Indeed this is the daughter
of Ya’aqoḇ son of Yitsḥaq the Iḇri, who has dwelt in
this city for some time, and when it was reported that
the daughters of the land were going forth to rejoice
she went with her mother and female servants to sit
among them as you see.”
10 And Sheḵem saw Dinah the daughter of Ya’aqoḇ,
and when he looked at her his being became fixed
upon Dinah.
11 And he sent and had her taken by force, and Dinah
came to the house of Sheḵem and he seized her
forcibly and lay with her and humbled her. And he
loved her exceedingly and placed her in his house.
12 And they came and told the matter to Ya’aqoḇ, and
when Ya’aqoḇ heard that Sheḵem had defiled his
daughter Dinah, Ya’aqoḇ sent twelve of his servants to
take Dinah from the house of Sheḵem, and they went
and came to the house of Sheḵem to take away Dinah
from there.
13 And when they came, Sheḵem went out to them
with his men and drove them from his house, and he
753

YASHAR

would not allow them to come before Dinah, but
Sheḵem was sitting with Dinah kissing and embracing
her before their eyes.
14 And the servants of Ya’aqoḇ came back and told
him, saying, “When we came, he and his men drove
us away, and thus did Sheḵem do unto Dinah before
our eyes.”
15 And Ya’aqoḇ also knew that Sheḵem had defiled
his daughter, but he said nothing. And his sons were
feeding his cattle in the field, and Ya’aqoḇ remained
silent till their return.
16 And before his sons came home Ya’aqoḇ sent two
female servants from his servants’ daughters to take
care of Dinah in the house of Sheḵem, and to remain
with her. And Sheḵem sent three of his friends to his
father Ḥamor son of Ḥiddeqem, son of Pereḏ, saying,
“Get me this maiden for a wife.”
17 And Ḥamor son of Ḥiddeqem the Ḥiwwite came to
the house of Sheḵem his son, and he sat before him,
and Ḥamor said to his son, “Sheḵem, is there then no
woman among the daughters of your people that you
will take an Iḇri woman who is not of your people?”
18 And Sheḵem said to him, “You must get only her for
me, for she is delightful in my sight.” And Ḥamor did
according to the word of his son, for he was greatly
loved by him.
19 And Ḥamor went to Ya’aqoḇ to speak with him
concerning this matter, and when he had gone from
the house of his son Sheḵem, before he came to
Ya’aqoḇ to speak to him, see, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had
come from the field as soon as they heard the matter
that Sheḵem son of Ḥamor had done.
20 And the men were very much grieved concerning
their sister, and they all came home kindled with wrath,
before the time of gathering in their cattle.
21 And they came and sat before their father and they
spoke to him kindled with wrath, saying, “Indeed death
754

JASHER

is due to this man and to his household, because HWHY
Elohim of the whole earth commanded Noaḥ and his
children that man shall never rob, nor commit adultery!
Now see, Sheḵem has both ravaged and committed
whoring with our sister, and not one of all the people
of the city spoke a word to him!
22 “Indeed you know and understand that the
judgment of death is due to Sheḵem, and to his father,
and to the whole city because of the matter which he
has done.”
23 And while they were speaking before their father in
this matter, see, Ḥamor the father of Sheḵem came to
speak to Ya’aqoḇ the words of his son concerning
Dinah, and he sat before Ya’aqoḇ and before his sons.
24 And Ḥamor spoke to them, saying, “The being of
my son Sheḵem longs for your daughter; I pray you
give her to him for a wife and intermarry with us. Give
us your daughters and we will give you our daughters,
and you shall dwell with us in our land and we will be
as one people in the land,
25 for our land is very large. So dwell and trade therein
and get possessions in it, and do therein as you desire,
and no one shall prevent you by saying a word to you.”
26 And Ḥamor ceased speaking to Ya’aqoḇ and his
sons, and see, Sheḵem his son had come after him,
and he sat before them.
27 And Sheḵem spoke before Ya’aqoḇ and his sons,
saying, “May I find favour in your sight that you will give
me your daughter, and whatever you say to me, that I
will do for her.
28 “Ask me for a large dowry and gift, and I will give it,
and whatever you shall say to me, that I will do, and
whoever it is that will rebel against your orders, he shall
die! Only give me the maiden for a wife.”
29 And Shim’on and Lĕwi answered Ḥamor and
Sheḵem his son deceitfully, saying, “All you spoken to
us we will do for you.
755

YASHAR

“And see, our sister is in your house, but keep away
from her until we send to our father Yitsḥaq concerning
this matter, for we can do nothing without his consent.
31 “For he knows the ways of our father Aḇraham, and
whatever he says to us we will tell you. We will conceal
nothing from you.”
32 And Shim’on and Lĕwi spoke this to Sheḵem and
his father in order to find a pretense, and to seek
counsel what was to be done to Sheḵem and to his city
in this matter.
33 And when Sheḵem and his father heard the words
of Shim’on and Lĕwi, it seemed good in their eyes, and
Sheḵem and his father went out to go home.
34 And when they had gone, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
spoke to their father, saying, “Look, we know that
death is due to these wicked ones and to their city,
because they transgressed that which Elohim had
commanded to Noaḥ and his children and his seed
after them.
35 “And also because Sheḵem did this matter to our
sister Dinah in defiling her, for such wickedness shall
never be done among us.
36 “Now therefore know and see what you will do, and
seek counsel and what matter is to be done to them,
in order to kill all the inhabitants of this city.”
37 And Shim’on said to them, “Here is right advice for
you: tell them to circumcise every male among them
as we are circumcised, and if they do not want to do
this, we shall take our daughter from them and go
away.
38 “And if they consent to do this and will do it, then
when they are weakened with pain, we will attack them
with our swords, as upon one who is quiet and
peaceable, and we will slay every male among them.”
39 And Shim’on’s advice pleased them, and Shim’on
and Lĕwi resolved to do to them as it was proposed.
30

756

JASHER

And on the next morning Sheḵem and Ḥamor his
father came again to Ya’aqoḇ and his sons, to speak
concerning Dinah, and to hear what answer the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ would give to their words.
41 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ spoke deceitfully to them,
saying, “We told our father Yitsḥaq all your words, and
your words pleased him.
42 “But he spoke to us, saying, ‘Thus did Aḇraham his
father command him from Elohim, Aḏon of the whole
earth, that any man who is not of his descendants that
should want to take one of his daughters, shall cause
every male belonging to him to be circumcised, as we
are circumcised, and then we may give him our
daughter for a wife.’
43 “Now we have made known to you all our ways that
our father spoke to us, for we cannot do this of which
you spoke unto us, to give our daughter to an
uncircumcised man, for it is a disgrace to us.
44 “But hereby will we consent to you, to give you our
daughter, and we will also take unto ourselves your
daughters, and will dwell among you and be one
people as you have spoken, if you will listen to us, and
consent to be like us, to circumcise every male
belonging to you, as we are circumcised.
45 “And if you will not listen to us, to have every male
circumcised as we are circumcised, as we have
commanded, then we will come to you, and take our
daughter from you and go away.”
46 And Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor heard the words
of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they pleased them
exceedingly, and Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor
hastened to do the request of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, for
Sheḵem exceedingly loved Dinah, and his being was
fixed on her.
47 And Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor hurried to the
gate of the city, and they assembled all the men of their
40

757

YASHAR

city and spoke to them the words of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, saying,
48 “We came to these men, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and
we spoke to them concerning their daughter, and
these men will consent to do according to our wishes,
and see, our land is of great size for them, and they
will dwell in it, and trade in it, and we shall be one
people. We will take their daughters, and our
daughters we will give to them for wives.
49 “But only on this condition will these men consent
to do this matter, that every male among us be
circumcised as they are circumcised, as their Elohim
commanded them. And when we have done according
to their instructions to be circumcised, then they will
dwell among us, together with their cattle and
possessions, and we shall be as one people with
them.”
50 And when all the men of the city heard the words of
Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor, then all the men of their
city were agreeable to this proposal, and they obeyed
to be circumcised, for Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor
were greatly esteemed by them, being the princes of
the land.
51 And on the next day, Sheḵem and Ḥamor his father
rose early in the morning, and they assembled all the
men of their city into the middle of the city, and they
called for the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, who circumcised every
male belonging to them on that day and the next.
52 And they circumcised Sheḵem and Ḥamor his
father, and the five brothers of Sheḵem, and then every
one rose up and went home, for this matter was from
HWHY against the city of Sheḵem, and Shim’on’s
counsel was from HWHY in this matter, in order that
HWHY might deliver the city of Sheḵem into the hands
of Ya’aqoḇ’s two sons.

758

JASHER

34 And the number of all the males that were
circumcised, were six hundred and forty-five men, and
two hundred and forty-six children.
2 But Ḥiddeqem, son of Pereḏ, the father of Ḥamor,
and his six brothers, would not listen to Sheḵem and
his father Ḥamor, and they would not be circumcised,
for the proposal of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ was loathsome
in their sight, and their wrath was greatly roused at this,
that the people of the city had not listened to them.
3 And in the evening of the second day, they found
eight small children who had not been circumcised, for
their mothers had concealed them from Sheḵem and
his father Ḥamor, and from the men of the city.
4 And Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor sent to have
them brought before them to be circumcised, then
Ḥiddeqem and his six brothers sprang at them with
their swords, and sought to slay them.
5 And they sought to slay also Sheḵem and his father
Ḥamor and they sought to slay Dinah with them
because of this matter.
6 And they said to them, “What is this matter that you
have done? Are there no women among the daughters
of your brothers the Kena’anites, that you want to take
for yourselves daughters of the Iḇrim, whom you did
not know before, and will do this deed which your
fathers never commanded you?
7 “Do you think that you will succeed through this
deed which you have done? And what will you answer
in this matter to your brothers the Kena’anites, who will
come tomorrow and ask you concerning this matter?
8 “And if your deed shall not appear right and good in
their eyes, what will you do for your lives, and I for our
lives, in your not having listened to our voices?
9 “And if the inhabitants of the land and all your
brothers, the children of Ḥam shall hear of your deed,
saying,
759

YASHAR

‘Because of an Iḇri woman Sheḵem and Ḥamor his
father, and all the inhabitants of their city, did that
which they did not know and which their ancestors
never commanded them.’ Where then will you flee or
where conceal your shame, all your days before your
brothers, the inhabitants of the land of Kena’an?
11 “Now therefore we cannot bear up against this
matter which you have done, neither can we be
burdened with this yoke upon us, which our ancestors
did not command us.
12 “See, tomorrow we will go and assemble all our
brothers, the Kena’anite brothers who dwell in the
land, and we will all come and smite you and all those
who trust in you, that there shall not be a remnant left
from you or them.”
13 And when Ḥamor and his son Sheḵem and all the
people of the city heard the words of Ḥiddeqem and
his brothers, they were terribly afraid for their lives at
their words, and they repented of what they had done.
14 And Sheḵem and his father Ḥamor answered their
father Ḥiddeqem and his brothers, and they said to
them, “All the words which you spoke to us are true.
15 “Now do not say, nor think in your hearts that
because of the love of the Iḇrim we did this matter that
our ancestors did not command us.
16 “But because we saw that it was not their intention
and desire to do according to our wishes concerning
their daughter as to our taking her, except on this
condition, so we listened to their voices and did this
deed which you saw, in order to obtain our desire from
them.
17 “And when we shall have obtained our request from
them, we will then return to them and do to them that
which you say to us.
18 “We ask you then to wait and stay until our flesh
shall be healed and we again become strong, and we
10

760

JASHER

will then go together against them, and do to them that
which is in your hearts and in ours.”
19 And Dinah the daughter of Ya’aqoḇ heard all these
words which Ḥiddeqem and his brothers had spoken,
and what Ḥamor and his son Sheḵem and the people
of their city had answered them.
20 And she hurried and sent one of her female
servants, that her father had sent to take care of her in
the house of Sheḵem, to Ya’aqoḇ her father and to her
brothers, saying:
21 “Thus did Ḥiddeqem and his brothers advise
concerning you, and thus did Ḥamor and Sheḵem and
the people of the city answer them.”
22 And when Ya’aqoḇ heard these words he was filled
with wrath, and he was wroth at them, and his wrath
was kindled against them.
23 And Shim’on and Lĕwi swore and said, “As HWHY
lives - the Elohim of the whole earth - by this time
tomorrow, there shall not be a remnant left in the whole
city!”
24 And twenty young men had concealed themselves
who were not circumcised, and these young men
fought against Shim’on and Lĕwi. And Shim’on and
Lĕwi killed eighteen of them, and two fled from them
and escaped to some tar pits that were in the city. And
Shim’on and Lĕwi sought for them, but could not find
them.
25 And Shim’on and Lĕwi continued to go about in the
city, and they killed all the people of the city with the
edge of the sword, and they left none remaining.
26 And there was a great fear in the midst of the city,
and the cry of the people of the city ascended to the
shamayim, and all the women and children cried
aloud.
27 And Shim’on and Lĕwi slew all the city; they left not
a male remaining in the whole city.
761

YASHAR

And they slew Ḥamor and Sheḵem his son with the
edge of the sword, and they brought away Dinah from
the house of Sheḵem and they went from there.
29 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went and returned, and
came upon the slain, and plundered all their property
which was in the city and the field.
30 And while they were taking the spoil, three hundred
men stood up and threw dust at them and struck them
with stones. Then Shim’on turned to them and he slew
them all with the edge of the sword, and Shim’on
turned before Lĕwi, and came into the city.
31 And they took away their sheep and their oxen and
their cattle, and also the remainder of the women and
little ones, and they led all these away. And they
opened a gate and went out and came to their father
Ya’aqoḇ with might.
32 And when Ya’aqoḇ saw all that they had done to
the city, and saw the spoil that they took from them,
Ya’aqoḇ was very wroth at them, and Ya’aqoḇ said to
them, “What is this that you have done to me? See, I
obtained rest among the Kena’anite inhabitants of the
land, and none of them broke out against me.
33 “And now you have acted to make me a stench to
the inhabitants of the land, among the Kena’anites and
the Perizzites! And I am but small in number, and they
will all assemble against me and slay me when they
hear of your work with their brothers, and I and my
household will be destroyed.”
34 And Shim’on and Lĕwi and all their brothers with
them answered their father Ya’aqoḇ and said to him,
“See, we live in the land, and shall Sheḵem do this to
our sister? Why are you silent at all that Sheḵem has
done, and shall he deal with our sister as with a whore
in the streets?”
35 And the number of women whom Shim’on and Lĕwi
took captive from the city of Sheḵem, whom they did
not slay, was eighty-five who had not known a man.
28

762

JASHER

And among them was a young maiden of goodlooking appearance and well favoured, whose name
was Bunah, and Shim’on took her for a wife. And the
number of the males which they took captive and did
not slay, was forty-seven men, but the rest they slew.
37 And all the young men and women that Shim’on
and Lĕwi had taken captive from the city of Sheḵem,
were servants to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and to their
children after them, until the day of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
going out from the land of Mitsrayim.
38 And when Shim’on and Lĕwi had gone out from the
city, the two young men that were left, who had
concealed themselves in the city, and did not die
among the people of the city, rose up, and these young
men went into the city and walked about in it, and
found the city lay waste without man, and only women
weeping. And these young men cried out and said,
“See, this is the evil which the sons of Ya’aqoḇ the Iḇri
did to this city in their having this day destroyed one of
the Kena’anite cities, and were not afraid for their lives
of all the land of Kena’an!”
39 And these men left the city and went to the city of
Taphnaḵ, and they came there and told the inhabitants
of Taphnaḵ all that had befallen them, and all that the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ had done to the city of Sheḵem.
40 And the news reached Yashuḇ sovereign of
Taphnaḵ, and he sent men to the city of Sheḵem to
see those young men, for the sovereign did not believe
them in this account, saying, “How could two men lay
waste such a large city as Sheḵem?”
41 And the messengers of Yashuḇ came back and told
him, saying, “We came to the city, and it is destroyed!
There is not a man there, only weeping women.
Neither is any flock or cattle there, for all that was in
the city the sons of Ya’aqoḇ took away.”
36

763

YASHAR

And Yashuḇ wondered at this, saying, “How could
two men do this matter, to destroy so large a city, and
not one man able to stand against them?
43 “For the like has not been from the days of Nimroḏ,
and not even from the earliest time, has the like come
to pass.” And Yashuḇ, sovereign of Taphnaḵ, said to
his people, “Be courageous and we will go and fight
against these Iḇrim, and do to them as they did to the
city, and we will avenge the cause of the people of the
city!”
44 And Yashuḇ, sovereign of Taphnaḵ, consulted with
his counsellors about this matter, and his counsellors
said to him, “Alone you will not prevail over the Iḇrim,
for they must be powerful to do this work to the whole
city.
45 “If two of them laid waste the whole city, and no one
stood against them, indeed if you go against them,
they will all rise against us and destroy us also.
46 “But if you would send to all the sovereigns that
surround us, and let them come together, then we will
go with them and fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ;
then you will prevail against them.”
47 And Yashuḇ heard the words of his counsellors,
and their words pleased him and his people, and he
did so. And Yashuḇ sovereign of Taphnaḵ sent to all
the sovereigns of the Amorites that surrounded
Sheḵem and Taphnaḵ, saying,
48 “Go up with me and assist me, and we will smite
Ya’aqoḇ the Iḇri and all his sons, and destroy them
from the earth, for thus did he do to the city of Sheḵem,
and do you not know of it?”
49 And all the sovereigns of the Amorites heard of the
evil that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had done to the city of
Sheḵem, and they were greatly astonished at them.
50 And the seven sovereigns of the Amorites
assembled with all their armies - about ten thousand
men with drawn swords - and they came to fight
42

764

JASHER

against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ. And Ya’aqoḇ heard that
the sovereigns of the Amorites had assembled to fight
against his sons, and Ya’aqoḇ was greatly afraid, and
it distressed him.
51 And Ya’aqoḇ cried out against Shim’on and Lĕwi,
saying, “What is this deed that you did? Why have you
injured me, to bring against me all the children of
Kena’an to destroy me and my household? For I was
at rest, even I and my household, and you have done
this matter to me, and provoked the inhabitants of the
land against me by your doings!”
52 And Yahuḏah answered his father, saying, “Was it
for naught my brothers Shim’on and Lĕwi killed all the
inhabitants of Sheḵem? Indeed it was because
Sheḵem had humbled our sister, and transgressed the
command of our Elohim to Noaḥ and his children, for
Sheḵem took our sister away by force, and committed
adultery with her.
53 “And Sheḵem did all this evil and not one of the
inhabitants of his city stopped him, to say, ‘Why would
you do this?’ Only for this my brothers went and smote
the city, and HWHY delivered it into their hands,
because its inhabitants had transgressed the
Commands of our Elohim. Is it then for naught that they
have done all this?
54 “And now why are you afraid or distressed, and why
are you displeased at my brothers, and why is your
wrath kindled against them?
55 “Indeed our Elohim who delivered the city of
Sheḵem and its people into their hand, He will also
deliver into our hands all the Kena’anite sovereigns
who are coming against us, and we will do to them as
my brothers did to Sheḵem.
56 “Now be at peace about them and cast away your
fears, but trust in HWHY our Elohim, and pray to Him to
assist us and deliver us, and deliver our enemies into
our hands.”
765

YASHAR

And Yahuḏah called to one of his father’s servants,
“Go now and see where those sovereigns, who are
coming against us, are positioned with their armies.”
58 And the servant went and looked far off, and went
up opposite Mount Siḥon, and saw all the armies of the
sovereigns standing in the fields. And he returned to
Yahuḏah and said, “See, the sovereigns are
positioned in the field with all their armies, a people
exceedingly numerous, like the sand on the sea
shore.”
59 And Yahuḏah said to Shim’on and Lĕwi, and to all
his brothers, “Strengthen yourselves and be sons of
might, for HWHY our Elohim is with us. Do not fear them.
60 “Stand each man, girded with his weapons of
battle, his bow and his sword, and we will go and fight
against these uncircumcised men. HWHY is our Elohim.
He will save us!”
61 And they rose up, and each girded on his weapons
of battle, great and small, eleven sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and
all the servants of Ya’aqoḇ with them.
62 And all the servants of Yitsḥaq who were with
Yitsḥaq in Ḥeḇron, all came to them equipped with all
kinds of weapons. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and their
servants, being one hundred and twelve men, went
toward these sovereigns, and Ya’aqoḇ also went with
them.
63 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ sent to their father Yitsḥaq
son of Aḇraham to Ḥeḇron - the same is Qiryath Arba
- saying,
64 “We ask you to pray for us to HWHY our Elohim, to
protect us from the hands of the Kena’anites who are
coming against us, and to deliver them into our hands.”
65 And Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham prayed to HWHY for his
sons, and he said, “O HWHY Elohim, You promised my
father, saying, ‘I will multiply your seed as the stars of
the shamayim, and You also promised me, and
established Your word. Now the sovereigns of Kena’an
57

766

JASHER

are coming together, to fight against my children
because they committed no violence.
66 “Now therefore, O HWHY Elohim, Elohim of the
whole earth, overthrow, I pray, the counsel of these
sovereigns that they may not fight against my sons.
67 “And impress the hearts of these sovereigns and
their people with the fear of my sons and bring down
their pride, and that they would turn away from my
sons.
68 “And with Your strong hand and outstretched arm
deliver my sons and their servants from them, for
power and might are in Your hands to do all this.”
69 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and their servants went
toward these sovereigns, and they trusted in HWHY
their Elohim. And while they were going, Ya’aqoḇ their
father also prayed to HWHY and said, “O HWHY Elohim,
powerful and exalted Ĕl, who has reigned from days of
old, from then till now and forever;
70 “You are He who stirs up wars and causes them to
cease. In Your hand are power and might to exalt and
to bring down. O may my prayer be acceptable before
You that You may turn to me with Your compassions,
to impress the hearts of these sovereigns and their
people with the fear of my sons, and frighten them and
their armies, and with Your great kindness deliver all
those that trust in You, for it is You who can bring
people under us and reduce nations under our power.”

35 And all the sovereigns of the Amorites came and
took their stand in the field to consult with their
counsellors what was to be done with the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, for they were still afraid of them, saying,
“See, two of them slew the whole of the city of
Sheḵem.”
2 And HWHY heard the prayers of Yitsḥaq and
Ya’aqoḇ, and he filled the hearts of all these
767

YASHAR

sovereigns’ advisers with great fear and dread that
they altogether exclaimed,
3 “Are you simple this day, or is there no
understanding in you, that you will fight against the
Iḇrim? And why will you take a delight in your own
destruction this day?
4 “Look, two of them came to the city of Sheḵem
without fear or dread, and they killed all the inhabitants
of the city! No man stood up against them, and how
will you be able to fight against them all?
5 “Only you know that their Elohim exceedingly loves
them, and has done mighty deeds for them, such as
have not been done from days of old, and among all
the mighty ones of nations, there is none that can do
like His mighty deeds.
6 “Indeed He delivered their father Aḇraham, the Iḇri,
from the hand of Nimroḏ, and from the hand of all his
people who had many times sought to slay him.
7 “He delivered him also from the fire in which
sovereign Nimroḏ had thrown him, and his Elohim
delivered him from it.
8 “And who else can do like this? Indeed it was
Aḇraham who slew the five sovereigns of Ĕylam, when
they had touched his brother’s son who in those days
dwelt in Seḏom.
9 “And took his servant that was trustworthy in his
house and a few of his men, and they pursued the
sovereigns of Ĕylam in one night and killed them, and
restored to his brother’s son all his property which they
had taken from him.
10 “And indeed you know the Elohim of these Iḇrim is
much delighted with them, and they are also delighted
with Him, for they know that He delivered them from all
their enemies.
11 “And see, through his love toward his Elohim,
Aḇraham took his only and precious son and intended
to offer him as a burnt offering to his Elohim, and had
768

JASHER

it not been for Elohim who prevented him from doing
this, he would then have done it through his love for
his Elohim.
12 “And Elohim saw all his works, and swore to him,
and promised him that He would deliver his sons and
all his seed from every trouble that would befall them,
because he had done this matter, and through his love
for his Elohim restrained his compassion for his child.
13 “And have you not heard what their Elohim did to
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, and to Aḇimeleḵ
sovereign of Gerar, through taking Aḇraham’s wife,
who said of her, ‘She is my sister,’ lest they should slay
him because of her, and think of taking her for a wife?
And Elohim did to them and their people all that you
heard of.
14 “And look, we ourselves saw with our eyes that
Ĕsaw, the brother of Ya’aqoḇ, came to him with four
hundred men, with the intention of slaying him, for he
called to mind that he had taken away from him his
father’s beraḵah.
15 “And he went to meet him when he came from
Aram, to smite the mother with the children, and who
delivered him from his hands but his Elohim in whom
he trusted? He delivered him from the hand of his
brother and also from the hands of his enemies, and
indeed He will again protect them.
16 “Who does not know that it was their Elohim who
inspired them with strength to do to the city of Sheḵem
the evil which you heard of?
17 “Could it then be with their own strength that two
men could destroy such a large city as Sheḵem had it
not been for their Elohim in whom they trusted? He
said and did to them all this to slay the inhabitants of
the city in their city.
18 “And can you then prevail over them who have
come out together from your city to fight against the
769

YASHAR

whole of them, even if a thousand times as many more
should come to your assistance?
19 “Only you know and understand that you do not
come to fight against them, but you come to fight
against their Elohim who made choice of them, and
you have therefore all come today to be destroyed.
20 “Now therefore refrain from this evil which you are
endeavouring to bring upon yourselves, and it will be
better for you not to go to battle with them, although
they are but few in numbers, because their Elohim is
with them.”
21 And when the sovereigns of the Amorites heard all
the words of their advisers, their hearts were filled with
fear, and they were afraid of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and
would not fight against them.
22 And they inclined their ears to the words of their
advisers, and they listened to all their words. And the
words of the counsellors greatly pleased the
sovereigns, and they did so.
23 And the sovereigns turned and refrained from the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ, for they dared not approach them to
fight against them, for they were greatly afraid of them,
and their hearts melted within them from their fear of
them.
24 For this came from HWHY to them, for He heard the
prayers of His servants Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ, for they
trusted in Him. And all these sovereigns returned with
their camps on that day, each to his own city, and they
did not fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ at that time.
25 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ kept their guard that day
till evening opposite mount Siḥon, and seeing that
these sovereigns did not come to fight against them,
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ returned home.

36 At that time HWHY appeared to Ya’aqoḇ saying,
“Arise, go to Bĕyth Ĕl and remain there, and make an
770

JASHER

altar there to HWHY who appeared to you, who
delivered you and your sons from affliction.”
2 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up with his sons and all
belonging to him, and they went and came to Bĕyth Ĕl
according to the word of HWHY.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ was ninety-nine years old when he
went up to Bĕyth Ĕl. And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons and all
the people that were with him, remained in Bĕyth Ĕl in
Luz, and he built an altar there to HWHY who appeared
to him. And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons remained in Bĕyth
Ĕl six months.
4 At that time Deḇorah the daughter of Uts died, the
nurse of Riḇqah, who had been with Ya’aqoḇ. And
Ya’aqoḇ buried her beneath Bĕyth Ĕl under a terebinth
that was there.
5 And Riḇqah the daughter of Bethu’ĕl, the mother of
Ya’aqoḇ, also died at that time in Ḥeḇron - the same is
Qiryath Arba. And she was buried in the cave of
Maḵpĕlah which Aḇraham had bought from the
children of Ḥĕth.
6 And the life of Riḇqah was one hundred and thirtythree years, and she died. And when Ya’aqoḇ heard
that his mother Riḇqah was dead he wept bitterly for
his mother, and made a great mourning for her, and for
Deḇorah her nurse beneath the terebinth. And he
called the name of that place Allon Baḵuth.
7 And Laḇan the Aramean died in those days, for
Elohim smote him because he transgressed the
covenant that existed between him and Ya’aqoḇ.
8 And Ya’aqoḇ was a hundred years old when HWHY
appeared to him, and baraḵ him and called his name
Yisra’ĕl. And Raḥĕl the wife of Ya’aqoḇ conceived in
those days.
9 And at that time Ya’aqoḇ and all belonging to him
journeyed from Bĕyth Ĕl to go to his father’s house, to
Ḥeḇron.
771

YASHAR

And while they were going on the way, and there
was yet but a little way to come to Ephrath, Raḥĕl bore
a son and she had hard labour and she died.
11 And Ya’aqoḇ buried her on the way to Ephrath,
which is Bĕyth Leḥem, and he put a standing column
upon her grave, which is there to this day. And the
days of Raḥĕl were forty-five years and she died.
12 And Ya’aqoḇ called the name of his son that was
born to him, which Raḥĕl bore unto him: Binyamin, for
he was born to him in the land on the right hand.
13 And it came to be after the death of Raḥĕl, that
Ya’aqoḇ pitched his tent in the tent of her female
servant Bilhah.
14 And Re’uḇĕn was jealous for his mother Lĕ’ah
because of this, and he was filled with wrath, and he
rose up in his wrath and went and entered the tent of
Bilhah and there he removed his father’s bed.
15 At that time the portion of birthright, together with
the sovereignty and kehunnah, were removed from the
sons of Re’uḇĕn, for he had profaned his father’s bed,
and the birthright was given to Yosĕph, the sovereignty
to Yahuḏah, and the kehunnah unto Lĕwi, because
Re’uḇĕn had defiled his father’s bed.
16 And these are the generations of Ya’aqoḇ who
were born to him in Paddan Aram, and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ were twelve.
17 The sons of Lĕ’ah: Re’uḇĕn the first-born, and
Shim’on, Lĕwi, Yahuḏah, Yissasḵar, Zeḇulun, and
their sister Dinah. And the sons of Raḥĕl were: Yosĕph
and Binyamin.
18 The sons of Zilpah, Lĕ’ah’s female servant: Gaḏ
and Ashĕr. And the sons of Bilhah, Raḥĕl’s female
servant: Dan and Naphtali. These are the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ which were born to him in Paddan Aram.
19 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons and all belonging to him
journeyed and came to Mamrĕ - which is Qiryath Arba
- that is in Ḥeḇron, where Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq
10

772

JASHER

sojourned. And Ya’aqoḇ with his sons and all
belonging to him, dwelt with his father in Ḥeḇron.
20 And his brother Ĕsaw and his sons, and all
belonging to him went to the land of Sĕ’ir and dwelt
there, and had possessions in the land of Sĕ’ir, and the
children of Ĕsaw were fruitful and multiplied
exceedingly in the land of Sĕ’ir.
21 And these are the generations of Ĕsaw that were
born to him in the land of Kena’an, and the sons of
Ĕsaw were five.
22 And Aḏah bore to Ĕsaw his first-born Eliphaz, and
she also bore unto him Re’uw’ĕl, and Oholiḇamah bore
unto him Ye’ush, Ya’lam and Qoraḥ.
23 These are the children of Ĕsaw who were born to
him in the land of Kena’an. And the sons of Eliphaz
son of Ĕsaw: Tĕman, Omar, Tsepho, Gatam, Qenaz
and Amalĕq, and the sons of Re’uw’ĕl: Naḥath, Zeraḥ,
Shammah and Mizzah.
24 And the sons of Ye’ush: Timnah, Alwah, Yethĕth.
And the sons of Ya’lam: Allah, Phinor and Qenaz.
25 And the sons of Qoraḥ: Tĕman, Miḇtsar, Maḡdi’ĕl
and Iram. These are the clans of the sons of Ĕsaw
according to their reigns in the land of Sĕ’ir.
26 And these are the names of the sons of Sĕ’ir the
Ḥorite, inhabitants of the land of Sĕ’ir: Lotan, Shoḇal,
Tsiḇ’on, Anah, Dishan, Ezer and Dishon, being seven
sons.
27 And the children of Lotan: Ḥori, Hĕman and their
sister Timna. That is Timna who came to Ya’aqoḇ and
his sons, and they would not give ear to her. And she
went and became a concubine to Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw,
and she bore to him Amalĕq.
28 And the sons of Shobal: Alwan, Manaḥath, Ĕyḇal,
Shepho, and Onam, and the sons of Tsiḇ’on: Ayyah,
and Anah. This was that Anah who found the springs
in the wilderness when he fed the donkeys of Tsiḇ’on
his father.
773

YASHAR

And while he was feeding his father’s donkeys he
led them to the wilderness at different times to feed
them.
30 And there was a day that he brought them to one
of the deserts on the sea shore, opposite the
wilderness of the people, and while he was feeding
them, see, a very heavy storm came from the other
side of the sea and rested upon the donkeys that were
feeding there, and they all stood still.
31 And afterward about one hundred and twenty great
and terrible animals came out from the wilderness at
the other side of the sea, and they all came to the place
where the donkeys were, and they placed themselves
there.
32 And those animals, from their middle downward,
were in the shape of the children of men, and from their
middle upward, some had the likeness of bears, and
some the likeness of the lions, with tails behind them
from between their shoulders reaching down to the
earth, like the tails of the lions. And these animals
came and mounted and rode upon these donkeys, and
led them away, and they went away unto this day.
33 And one of these animals approached Anah and
smote him with his tail, and then fled from that place.
34 And when he saw this work he was exceedingly
afraid for his life, and he fled and escaped to the city.
35 And he related to his sons and brothers all that had
befallen him, and many men went to seek the donkeys
but could not find them. And Anah and his brothers
went to that place no more from that day following, for
they were greatly afraid for their lives.
36 And the children of Anah son of Sĕ’ir: Dishon and
his sister Oholiḇamah. And the children of Dishon:
Ḥemdan, Eshban, Yithran and Ḥaran. And the children
of Ezer: Bilhan, Za’awan and Akan. And the children
of Dishon: Uts and Aran.
29

774

JASHER

These are the clans of the children of Sĕ’ir the
Ḥorite, according to their reigns in the land of Sĕ’ir.
38 And Ĕsaw and his children dwelt in the land of Sĕ’ir
the Ḥorite, the inhabitant of the land, and they had
possessions in it and were fruitful and multiplied
exceedingly. And Ya’aqoḇ and his children and all
belonging to them, dwelt with their father Yitsḥaq in the
land of Kena’an, as HWHY had commanded Aḇraham
their father.
37

37 And in the one hundred and fifth year of the life of
Ya’aqoḇ, that is the ninth year of Ya’aqoḇ’s dwelling
with his children in the land of Kena’an, he came from
Paddan Aram.
2 And in those days Ya’aqoḇ journeyed with his
children from Ḥeḇron, and they went and returned to
the city of Sheḵem, they and all belonging to them, and
they dwelt there, for the children of Ya’aqoḇ obtained
good and fat pasture land for their cattle in the city of
Sheḵem, the city of Sheḵem having then been rebuilt,
and there were in it about three hundred men and
women.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ and his children and all belonging to
him dwelt in the part of the field which Ya’aqoḇ had
bought from Ḥamor the father of Sheḵem, when he
came from Paddan Aram before Shim’on and Lĕwi had
smitten the city.
4 And all those sovereigns of the Kena’anites and
Amorites that surrounded the city of Sheḵem, heard
that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had again come to Sheḵem
and dwelt there.
5 And they said, “Shall the sons of Ya’aqoḇ the Iḇri
again come to the city and dwell in it, after they have
smitten its inhabitants and driven them out? Shall they
now return and also drive out those who are dwelling
in the city or slay them?”
775

YASHAR

And all the sovereigns of Kena’an again
assembled, and they came together to fight against
Ya’aqoḇ and his sons.
7 And Yashuḇ sovereign of Taphnaḵ also sent to all
his neighbouring sovereigns, to Elan sovereign of
Ga’ash, and to Ihuri sovereign of Shiloh, and to
Parathon sovereign of Ḥatsar, and to Susi sovereign
of Sarton, and to Laḇan sovereign of Bĕyth Ḥoron, and
to Shaḇir sovereign of Othnai-Mah, saying,
8 “Come up to me and assist me, and let us smite
Ya’aqoḇ the Iḇri and his sons, and all belonging to him,
for they have again come to Sheḵem to possess it and
to slay its inhabitants as before.”
9 And all these sovereigns assembled together and
came with all their armies, a people exceedingly
numerous like the sand on the seashore, and they
were all opposite to Taphnaḵ.
10 And Yashuḇ sovereign of Taphnaḵ went out to
them with all his army, and he encamped with them
opposite to Taphnaḵ outside the city, and all these
sovereigns they divided into seven divisions, being
seven camps against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
11 And they sent a declaration to Ya’aqoḇ and his son,
saying, “Come out all of you to us that we may have a
word together in the plain, and avenge the cause of the
men of Sheḵem whom you slew in their city. And you
will now again return to the city of Sheḵem and dwell
therein, and slay its inhabitants as before.”
12 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard this and their wrath
was kindled exceedingly at the words of the
sovereigns of Kena’an, and ten of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
hastened and rose up, and each of them girded on his
weapons of battle. And there were one hundred and
two of their servants with them equipped in battle
array.
13 And all these men, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ with their
servants, went toward these sovereigns, and Ya’aqoḇ
6

776

JASHER

their father was with them, and they all stood upon the
heap of Sheḵem.
14 And Ya’aqoḇ prayed to HWHY for his sons, and he
spread out his hands to HWHY and he said, “O Elohim,
You are an Almighty Elohim! You are our Father. You
formed us and we are the works of Your hands. Please
deliver my sons through Your favour from the hand of
their enemies, who are this day coming to fight against
them, and save them from their hand, for in Your hand
is power and might, to save the few from the many.
15 “And give to my sons, Your servants, strength of
heart and might to fight against their enemies, to
subdue them, and make their enemies fall before
them. And let not my sons and their servants die
through the hands of the children of Kena’an.
16 “But if it seems good in Your eyes to take away the
lives of my sons and their servants, take them in Your
great favour through the hands of Your servants, that
they may not perish this day by the hands of the
sovereigns of the Amorites.”
17 And when Ya’aqoḇ ceased praying to HWHY the
earth shook from its place, and the sun darkened, and
all these sovereigns were afraid and a great fear
seized them.
18 And HWHY listened to the prayer of Ya’aqoḇ, and
HWHY impressed the hearts of all the sovereigns and
their armies with the fear and awe of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ.
19 For HWHY caused them to hear the sound of
chariots, and the sound of mighty horses from the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ, and the sound of a great army
accompanying them.
20 And these sovereigns were seized with great fear
at the sons of Ya’aqoḇ. And while they were standing
in their borders, see, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ advanced
upon them with one hundred and twelve men, with a
great and mighty shouting.
777

YASHAR

And when the sovereigns saw the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
advancing toward them, they were even more struck
with fear, and they were inclined to retreat from before
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ as at first, and not to fight against
them.
22 But they did not retreat, saying, “It would be a
disgrace to us even twice to retreat from before the
Iḇrim.”
23 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came near and advanced
against all these sovereigns and their armies, and they
looked, and see, it was a very mighty people,
numerous as the sand of the sea.
24 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ called to HWHY and said,
“Help us O HWHY! Help us and answer us, for we trust
in You, and let us not die by the hands of these
uncircumcised men, who have come against us this
day.”
25 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ girded on their weapons
of battle, and they took in their hands each man his
shield and his spear, and they approached to battle.
26 And Yahuḏah, son of Ya’aqoḇ, ran first before his
brothers, and ten of his servants with him, and he went
toward these sovereigns.
27 And Yashuḇ, sovereign of Taphnaḵ, also came out
first with his army before Yahuḏah. And Yahuḏah saw
Yashuḇ and his army coming toward him, and
Yahuḏah’s wrath was kindled, and his wrath burned
within him, and he approached to battle in which
Yahuḏah risked his life.
28 And Yashuḇ and all his army were advancing
toward Yahuḏah, and he was riding upon a very strong
and powerful horse. And Yashuḇ was a very mighty
man, and covered from head to foot with iron and
brass.
29 And while he was upon the horse, he shot arrows
with both hands from before and behind, as was his
21

778

JASHER

manner in all his battles, and he never missed the
place at which he aimed his arrows.
30 And when Yashuḇ came to fight against Yahuḏah,
and was shooting many arrows against Yahuḏah,
HWHY bound the hand of Yashuḇ, and all the arrows
that he shot rebounded upon his own men.
31 But however, Yashuḇ kept advancing toward
Yahuḏah, to challenge him with the arrows, but the
distance between them was about thirty ammah, and
when Yahuḏah saw Yashuḇ shooting out his arrows
against him, he ran toward him with his fierce might.
32 And Yahuḏah took up a large stone from the
ground, and its weight was sixty sheqels. And
Yahuḏah ran toward Yashuḇ, and struck him with the
stone on his shield, so Yashuḇ was stunned with the
blow, and fell from off his horse to the ground.
33 And the shield split in two out of the hand of
Yashuḇ, and through the force of the blow sprang to
the distance of about fifteen ammah, and the shield fell
before the second army.
34 And the sovereigns that came with Yashuḇ saw at
a distance the strength of Yahuḏah, son of Ya’aqoḇ,
and what he had done to Yashuḇ, and they were
greatly afraid of Yahuḏah.
35 And they assembled near Yashub’s army, seeing
his confusion, and Yahuḏah drew his sword and smote
forty-two men of the army of Yashuḇ. And the whole of
Yashub’s army fled before Yahuḏah, and no man
stood against him, and they left Yashuḇ and fled from
him, and Yashuḇ was still face down on the ground.
36 And Yashuḇ seeing that all the men of his camp
had fled from him, hastened and rose up with fear
against Yahuḏah, and stood up on his feet opposite
Yahuḏah.
37 And Yashuḇ had a one-on-one battle with
Yahuḏah, placing shield toward shield, and Yashuḇ’s
men all fled, for they were greatly afraid of Yahuḏah.
779

YASHAR

And Yashuḇ took his spear in his hand to strike
Yahuḏah on his head, but Yahuḏah had quickly placed
his shield to his head against Yashuḇ’s spear, so that
the shield of Yahuḏah took the blow from Yashuḇ’s
spear, and the shield was split in two.
39 And when Yahuḏah saw that his shield was split,
he hastily drew his sword and smote Yashuḇ at his
ankles, and cut off his feet so that Yashuḇ fell upon the
ground, and the spear fell from his hand.
40 And Yahuḏah hastily picked up Yashuḇ’s spear,
with which he cut off his head and threw it next to his
feet.
41 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw what Yahuḏah
had done to Yashuḇ, they all ran into the ranks of the
other sovereigns, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ fought with
the army of Yashuḇ, and the armies of all the
sovereigns that were there.
42 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ caused fifteen thousand
of their men to fall, and they smote them as if smiting
at gourds, and the rest fled for their lives.
43 And Yahuḏah was still standing by the body of
Yashuḇ, and stripped Yashuḇ of his coat of armour.
44 And Yahuḏah also took off the iron and brass that
was about Yashuḇ, and see, nine men of the captains
of Yashuḇ approached to fight against Yahuḏah.
45 And Yahuḏah hurried and took up a stone from the
ground, and with it smote one of them on the head, and
split his skull, and the body also fell from the horse to
the ground.
46 And the eight captains that remained, seeing the
strength of Yahuḏah, were greatly afraid and they fled.
And Yahuḏah with his ten men pursued them, and they
overtook them and slew them.
47 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were still smiting the
armies of the sovereigns, and they slew many of them.
But those sovereigns boldly kept their stand with their
captains, and did not retreat from their places, and they
38

780

JASHER

shouted against those of their armies that fled from
before the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, but none would listen to
them, for they were afraid for their lives lest they should
die.
48 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, after having smitten
the armies of the sovereigns, returned and came
before Yahuḏah. And Yahuḏah was still slaying the
eight captains of Yashuḇ, and stripping off their
garments.
49 And Lĕwi saw Ĕylon, sovereign of Ga’ash,
advancing toward him, with his fourteen captains to
smite him, but Lĕwi did not know it for certain.
50 And Ĕylon with his captains approached nearer,
and Lĕwi looked back and saw that battle was given
him behind. And Lĕwi ran with twelve of his servants,
and they went and slew Ĕylon and his captains with
the edge of the sword.

38 And Ihuri sovereign of Shiloh came up to assist
Ĕylon. And he approached Ya’aqoḇ, when Ya’aqoḇ
drew his bow that was in his hand and smote Ihuri with
an arrow which caused his death.
2 And when Ihuri sovereign of Shiloh was dead, the
four remaining sovereigns fled from their place with the
rest of the captains, and they endeavoured to retreat,
saying, “We have no more strength with the Iḇrim after
their having killed the three sovereigns and their
captains who were more powerful than we are.”
3 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw that the
remaining sovereigns had turned back from their
station, they pursued them, and Ya’aqoḇ also came
from the heap of Sheḵem from the place where he was
standing, and they went after the sovereigns and they
approached them with their servants.
4 And the sovereigns and the captains with the rest
of their armies, seeing that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
781

YASHAR

approached them, were afraid for their lives and fled
till they reached the city of Ḥatsar.
5 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ pursued them to the gate
of the city of Ḥatsar, and they smote a great smiting
among the sovereigns and their armies - about four
thousand men. And while they were smiting the army
of the sovereigns, Ya’aqoḇ was occupied with his bow
confining himself to smiting the sovereigns, and he
slew them all.
6 And he slew Parathon sovereign of Ḥatsar at the
gate of the city of Ḥatsar, and afterward he smote Susi
sovereign of Sarton, and Laḇan sovereign of Bĕyth
Ḥoron, and Shabir sovereign of Maḵnaymah. And he
slew them all with arrows, an arrow to each of them,
and they died.
7 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, seeing that all the
sovereigns were dead and that they were disbanded
and retreating, continued to carry on the battle with the
armies of the sovereigns opposite the gate of Ḥatsar,
and they even smote about four hundred of their men.
8 And three men of the servants of Ya’aqoḇ fell in that
battle, and when Yahuḏah saw that three of his
servants had died, it grieved him greatly, and his wrath
burned within him against the Amorites.
9 And all the men that remained of the armies of the
sovereigns were greatly afraid for their lives, and they
ran and broke the gate of the walls of the city of Ḥatsar,
and they all entered the city for safety.
10 And they concealed themselves in the midst of the
city of Ḥatsar, for the city of Ḥatsar was very large and
extensive. And when all these armies had entered the
city, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ ran after them to the city.
11 And four mighty men, experienced in battle, went
out from the city and stood against the entrance of the
city, with drawn swords and spears in their hands, and
they placed themselves opposite the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and would not allow them to enter the city.
782

JASHER

And Naphtali ran and came between them and with
his sword smote two of them, and cut off their heads
with one stroke.
13 And he turned to the other two, and see, they had
fled, and he pursued them, overtook them, smote them
and slew them.
14 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came to the city and
looked, and see, there was another wall to the city, and
they sought for the gate of the wall and could not find
it. And Yahuḏah leaped on the top of the wall, and
Shim’on and Lĕwi followed him, and they all three
came down from the wall into the city.
15 And Shim’on and Lĕwi slew all the men who ran for
safety into the city, and also the inhabitants of the city
with their wives and little ones they slew with the edge
of the sword. And the cries of the city ascended up to
the shamayim.
16 And Dan and Naphtali leaped upon the wall to see
what caused the noise of lamentation, for the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ felt anxious about their brothers. And they
heard the inhabitants of the city speaking with weeping
and supplications, saying, “Take all that we possess in
the city and go away, only do not put us to death!”
17 And when Yahuḏah, Shim’on, and Lĕwi had
ceased smiting the inhabitants of the city, they went up
the wall and called to Dan and Naphtali, who were
upon the wall, and to the rest of their brothers. And
Shim’on and Lĕwi informed them of the entrance into
the city, and all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came to take the
spoil.
18 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ took the spoil of the city of
Ḥatsar, the flocks and herds, and the property. And
they took all that could be captured, and went away
that day from the city.
19 And on the next day the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went to
Sarton, for they hear that the men of Sarton who had
remained in the city were assembling to fight against
12

783

YASHAR

them for having slain their sovereign. And Sarton was
a very high and fortified city, and it had a wide rampart
surrounding the city.
20 And the column of the rampart was about fifty
ammah and its breadth forty ammah, and there was no
place for a man to enter the city because of the
rampart. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw the rampart of
the city, and they sought an entrance in it but could not
find it.
21 For the entrance to the city was at the rear, and
every man that wanted to come into the city came by
that way and went around the whole city, and he
afterwards entered the city.
22 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ seeing they could not find
the way into the city, their wrath was kindled greatly,
and the inhabitants of the city seeing that the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ were coming to them were greatly afraid of
them, for they had heard of their strength and what
they had done to Ḥatsar.
23 And the inhabitants of the city of Sarton could not
go out toward the sons of Ya’aqoḇ after having
assembled in the city to fight against them, lest they
might thereby get into the city. But when they saw that
they were coming toward them, they were greatly
afraid of them, for they had heard of their strength and
what they had done to Ḥatsar.
24 So the inhabitants of Sarton hastily took away the
bridge of the way of the city from its place, before the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ came, and they brought it into the city.
25 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came and sought the way
into the city, but could not find it. And the inhabitants
of the city went up to the top of the wall, and looked,
and see, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were seeking an
entrance into the city.
26 And the inhabitants of the city reproached the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ from the top of the wall, and they cursed
them, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard the reproaches,
784

JASHER

and they were greatly incensed, and their wrath
burned within them.
27 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were provoked at them,
and they all rose and leaped over the rampart with the
force of their strength, and through their might passed
the forty ammah breadth of the rampart.
28 And when they had passed the rampart they stood
under the wall of the city, and they found all the gates
of the city enclosed with iron doors.
29 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came near to break open
the doors of the gates of the city, but the inhabitants
did not let them, for from the top of the wall they were
throwing stones and arrows on them.
30 And the number of the people that were on the wall
was about four hundred men, and when the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ saw that the men of the city would not let them
open the gates of the city, they leaped and went up to
the top of the wall. And Yahuḏah went up first to the
east part of the city,
31 and Gaḏ and Ashĕr went up after him to the west
corner of the city, and Shim’on and Lĕwi to the north,
and Dan and Re’uḇĕn to the south.
32 And the men who were on the top of the wall, the
inhabitants of the city, seeing that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
were coming up to them, they all fled from the wall,
came down into the city, and concealed themselves in
the midst of the city.
33 And Yissasḵar and Naphtali that remained under
the wall approached and broke the gates of the city,
and kindled a fire at the gates of the city, that melted
the iron. And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came into the city,
they and all their men, and they fought with the
inhabitants of the city of Sarton, and smote them with
the edge of the sword, and no man stood before them.
34 And about two hundred men fled from the city, and
they all went and hid themselves in a certain tower in
the city. And Yahuḏah pursued them to the tower and
785

YASHAR

he broke down the tower, which fell upon the men, and
they all died.
35 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went up the way of the
roof of that tower, and they looked, and see, there was
another strong and high tower at a distance in the city,
and the top of it reached to the shamayim. And the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ hurried and came down, and went
with all their men to the tower, and found it filled with
about three hundred men, women and little ones.
36 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ smote a great smiting
among those men in the tower and they ran away and
fled from them.
37 And Shim’on and Lĕwi pursued them, then twelve
strong and mighty men came out to them from the
place where they had concealed themselves.
38 And those twelve men maintained a strong battle
against Shim’on and Lĕwi, and Shim’on and Lĕwi
could not prevail over them. And those mighty men
broke the shields of Shim’on and Lĕwi, and one of
them struck at Lĕwi’s head with his sword, then Lĕwi
hastily placed his hand to his head, for he was afraid
of the sword. And the sword struck Lĕwi’s hand, and it
was just short of the hand of Lĕwi being cut off.
39 And Lĕwi seized the sword of the mighty man in his
hand, and took it forcibly from the man, and with it he
struck at the head of the powerful man, and he cut off
his head.
40 And eleven men approached to fight against Lĕwi,
for they saw that one of them was killed, and the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ fought, but the sons of Ya’aqoḇ could not
prevail over them, for those men were very powerful.
41 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ seeing that they could not
prevail over them, Shim’on gave a loud and mighty
shout, and the eleven powerful men were stunned at
the voice of Shim’on’s shouting.
42 And Yahuḏah at a distance knew the voice of
Shim’on’s shouting, and Naphtali and Yahuḏah ran
786

JASHER

with their shields to Shim’on and Lĕwi, and found them
fighting with those powerful men, unable to prevail
over them as their shields were broken.
43 And Naphtali saw that the shields of Shim’on and
Lĕwi were broken, and he took two shields from his
servants and brought them to Shim’on and Lĕwi.
44 And Shim’on, Lĕwi and Yahuḏah, all three on that
day fought against the eleven mighty men until the time
of sunset, but they could not prevail over them.
45 And this was told to Ya’aqoḇ, and he was bitterly
grieved, and he prayed to HWHY, and he and Naphtali
his son went against these mighty men.
46 And Ya’aqoḇ approached and drew his bow, and
came near to the mighty men, and slew three of their
men with the bow. And the remaining eight turned
back, and see, the battle waged against them in the
front and rear, and they were greatly afraid for their
lives, and could not stand before the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and they fled from before them.
47 And in their flight they met Dan and Ashĕr coming
toward them, and they suddenly fell upon them, and
fought with them, and slew two of them. And Yahuḏah
and his brothers pursued them, and smote the
remainder of them, and slew them.
48 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ returned and walked
about the city, searching if they could find any men.
And they found about twenty young men in a cave in
the city, and Gaḏ and Ashĕr smote them all. And Dan
and Naphtali fell upon the rest of the men who had fled
and escaped from the second tower, and they smote
them all.
49 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ smote all the inhabitants
of the city of Sarton, but the women and little ones they
left in the city and did not slay them.
50 And all the inhabitants of the city of Sarton were
powerful men, one of them would pursue a thousand,
787

YASHAR

and two of them would not flee from ten thousand of
the rest of men.
51 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slew all the inhabitants of
the city of Sarton with the edge of the sword, so that
no man stood against them, and they left the women
in the city.
52 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ took all the spoil of the
city, and captured what they desired, and they took
flocks and herds and property from the city. And the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ did to Sarton and its inhabitants as
they had done to Ḥatsar and its inhabitants, and they
turned and went away.

39 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went from the city
of Sarton, they had gone about two hundred ammah
when they met the inhabitants of Taphnaḵ coming
toward them, for they went out to fight against them,
because they had smitten the sovereign of Taphnaḵ
and all his men.
2 So all who remained in the city of Taphnaḵ came
out to fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they
intended to retake from them the booty and the spoil
which they had captured from Ḥatsar and Sarton.
3 And the rest of the men of Taphnaḵ fought against
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ in that place. And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ smote them, and they fled before them, and
they pursued them to the city of Arbĕlan, and they all
fell before the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
4 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ returned and came to
Taphnaḵ, to take away the spoil of Taphnaḵ, but when
they came to Taphnaḵ they heard that the people of
Arbĕlan had gone out to meet them to save the spoil
of their brothers. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ left ten of
their men in Taphnaḵ to plunder the city, and they went
toward the people of Arbĕlan.
5 And the men of Arbĕlan went out with their wives to
fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, for their wives were
788

JASHER

experienced in battle, and they went out, about four
hundred men and women.
6 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ shouted with a loud
voice, and they all ran toward the inhabitants of
Arbĕlan, and with a great and mighty voice.
7 And the inhabitants of Arbĕlan heard the noise of
the shouting of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and their roaring
like the noise of lions and like the roaring of the sea
and its waves.
8 And fear and dread possessed their hearts
because of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they were terribly
afraid of them, and they retreated and fled before them
into the city. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ pursued them to
the gate of the city, and they came upon them in the
city.
9 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ fought with them in the
city, and all their women were engaged in slinging
against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and the combat was very
severe among them the whole of that day till evening.
10 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ could not prevail over
them, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had almost perished in
that battle. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ cried to HWHY and
greatly gained strength toward evening, and the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ smote all the inhabitants of Arbĕlan with the
edge of the sword; men, women and little ones.
11 And also the remainder of the people who had fled
from Sarton, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ smote them in
Arbĕlan. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ did to Arbĕlan and
Taphnaḵ as they had done to Ḥatsar and Sarton. And
when the women saw that all the men were dead, they
went up onto the roofs of the city and struck the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ by showering down stones like rain.
12 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ hastened and came into
the city and seized all the women and smote them with
the edge of the sword, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
captured all the spoil and booty, flocks and herds and
cattle.
789

YASHAR

And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ did to as they had done to
Taphnaḵ, to Ḥatsar and to Shiloh, and they turned from
there and went away.
14 And on the fifth day the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard that
the people of Ga’ash had gathered against them to
battle, because they had slain their sovereign and their
captains, for there had been fourteen captains in the
city of Ga’ash, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had slain them
all in the first battle.
15 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ girded on their weapons
of battle that day, and they marched to battle against
the inhabitants of Ga’ash. And in Ga’ash there was a
strong and mighty people of the people of the
Amorites, and Ga’ash was the strongest and best
fortified city of all the cities of the Amorites, and it had
three walls.
16 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came to Ga’ash and they
found the gates of the city locked, and about five
hundred men standing at the top of the outermost wall,
and a people numerous as the sand upon the sea
shore were in ambush for the sons of Ya’aqoḇ outside
the city at the rear of it.
17 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ approached to open the
gates of the city, but while they were drawing near,
see, those who were in ambush at the rear of the city
came out from their places and surrounded the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ.
18 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were enclosed between
the people of Ga’ash, and the battle was both to their
front and rear. And all the men that were on the wall,
were shooting arrows and stones from the wall upon
them.
19 And Yahuḏah, seeing that the men of Ga’ash were
getting too numerous for them, gave a most piercing
and mighty cry and all the men of Ga’ash were afraid
at the voice of Yahuḏah’s cry, and men fell from the
wall at his powerful shout. And all those that were from
13

790

JASHER

without and within the city were greatly afraid for their
lives.
20 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ still came near to break
the doors of the city, when the men of Ga’ash shot
stones and arrows upon them from the top of the wall,
and made them flee from the gate.
21 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ returned against the men
of Ga’ash who were with them from outside the city,
and they smote them terribly, as striking against
gourds. And they could not stand against the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, for fear and dread had seized them at the cry
of Yahuḏah.
22 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slew all those men who
were outside the city, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ still
drew near to make a way into the city, and to fight
under the city walls, but they could not for all the
inhabitants of Ga’ash who remained in the city had
surrounded the walls of Ga’ash in every direction, so
that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were unable to approach the
city to fight against them.
23 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ drew near to one corner
to fight under the wall. The inhabitants of Ga’ash shot
arrows and stones upon them like showers of rain, and
they fled from under the wall.
24 And the people of Ga’ash who were on the wall,
seeing that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ could not prevail over
them from under the wall, reproached the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ with these words, saying,
25 “What is the matter with you in the battle that you
cannot prevail? Can you then do to the mighty city of
Ga’ash and its inhabitants as you did to the cities of
the Amorites that were not so powerful? Only to those
weak ones among us you did those matters, and slew
them in the entrance of the city, for they had no
strength when they were afraid at the sound of your
shouting.
791

YASHAR

“And will you now then be able to fight in this place?
Only here you will all die, and we will avenge the cause
of those cities that you have laid waste!”
27 And the inhabitants of Ga’ash greatly reproached
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and reviled them with their mighty
ones, and continued to shoot arrows and stones upon
them from the wall.
28 And Yahuḏah and his brothers heard the words of
the inhabitants of Ga’ash and their wrath was greatly
roused, and Yahuḏah was jealous of his Elohim in this
matter, and he called out and said, “O HWHY, help!
Send help to us and our brothers!”
29 And he ran at a distance with all his might, with his
drawn sword in his hand, and he leaped from the earth
and by means of his strength, climbed the wall, but his
sword fell from his hand.
30 And Yahuḏah shouted on the wall, and all the men
that were on the wall were afraid, and some of them
fell from the wall into the city and died. And those who
were still on the wall, when they saw Yahuḏah’s
strength, were greatly afraid and fled for their lives into
the city for safety.
31 And some were emboldened to fight against
Yahuḏah on the wall, and they came near to slay him
when they saw there was no sword in Yahuḏah’s hand.
And they thought of casting him from the wall to his
brothers, and twenty men of the city came up to assist
them. And they surrounded Yahuḏah and they all
shouted over him, and approached him with drawn
swords, and they frightened Yahuḏah, and Yahuḏah
cried out to his brothers from the wall.
32 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons drew the bow from under
the wall, and smote three of the men that were upon
the top of the wall, and Yahuḏah continued to cry and
he exclaimed, “O HWHY help us! O HWHY deliver us!”
And he cried out with a loud voice on the wall, and the
cry was heard at a great distance.
26

792

JASHER

And after this cry he again repeated to shout, and
all the men who surrounded Yahuḏah on the top of the
wall were afraid, and they each threw his sword from
his hand at the sound of Yahuḏah’s shouting and his
shaking, and fled.
34 And Yahuḏah took the swords which had fallen
from their hands, and Yahuḏah fought with them and
slew twenty of their men on the wall.
35 And about eighty men and women still went up the
wall from the city and they all surrounded Yahuḏah, but
HWHY impressed the fear of Yahuḏah in their hearts,
that they were unable to approach him.
36 And Ya’aqoḇ and all who were with him drew the
bow from under the wall, and they slew ten men on the
wall, and they fell below the wall, before Ya’aqoḇ and
his sons.
37 And the people on the wall seeing that twenty of
their men had fallen, still ran toward Yahuḏah with
drawn swords, but they could not approach him for
they were greatly afraid of Yahuḏah’s strength.
38 And one of their mighty men whose name was Aroḏ
approached to strike Yahuḏah on the head with his
sword, then Yahuḏah hastily put his shield to his head,
and the sword hit the shield, and it was split in two.
39 And this mighty man, after he had struck Yahuḏah,
ran for his life at the fear of Yahuḏah, but his feet
slipped on the wall and he fell among the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ who were below the wall, and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ smote him and slew him.
40 And Yahuḏah’s head pained him from the blow of
the powerful man, and Yahuḏah had nearly died from
it.
41 And Yahuḏah cried out on the wall because of the
pain made by the blow, when Dan heard him, and his
wrath burned within him. And he also rose up and went
at a distance and ran and leaped from the earth and
climbed the wall with his fierce strength.
33

793

YASHAR

And when Dan came upon the wall near to
Yahuḏah, all the men on the wall who had stood
against Yahuḏah fled, and they went up to the second
wall, and they shot arrows and stones upon Dan and
Yahuḏah from the second wall, and strove to drive
them from the wall.
43 And the arrows and stones struck Dan and
Yahuḏah, and they had nearly been killed on the wall,
but wherever Dan and Yahuḏah fled from the wall, they
were attacked with arrows and stones from the second
wall.
44 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons were still at the entrance
of the city below the first wall, but they were not able
to draw their bow against the inhabitants of the city, as
they could not be seen by them, being on the second
wall.
45 And when Dan and Yahuḏah could no longer bear
the stones and arrows that fell on them from the
second wall, both leaped upon the second wall near
the people of the city. And when the people of the city
who were on the second wall saw that Dan and
Yahuḏah had come to them on the second wall, they
all cried out and came down below between the walls.
46 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons heard the noise of the
shouting from the people of the city, but they were still
at the entrance of the city. And they were anxious
about Dan and Yahuḏah who were not seen by them,
being on the second wall.
47 And Naphtali went up with his fierce might and
leaped upon the first wall to see what caused the noise
of shouting which they had heard in the city. And
Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun drew near to break down the
doors of the city, and they opened the gates of the city
and came into the city.
48 And Naphtali leaped from the first wall to the
second, and came to assist his brothers. And the
inhabitants of Ga’ash who were on the wall, seeing that
42

794

JASHER

Naphtali was the third who had come up to assist his
brothers, all fled and went down into the city. And
Ya’aqoḇ and all his sons and all their young men came
into the city to them.
49 And Yahuḏah and Dan and Naphtali came down
from the wall into the city and pursued the inhabitants
of the city, but Shim’on and Lĕwi were outside the city
and did not know that the gate was opened. And they
went up from there to the wall and came down to their
brothers into the city.
50 And the inhabitants of the city had all come down
into the city, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came to them in
different directions, and the battle waged against them
from the front and the rear. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
smote them terribly, and slew about twenty thousand
of them; men and women. Not one of them could stand
up against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
51 And the blood flowed plentifully in the city, and it
was like a stream of water. And the blood flowed like a
stream to the outer part of the city, and reached the
desert of Bĕyth Ḥoron.
52 And the people of Bĕyth Ḥoron saw the blood at a
distance flowing from the city of Ga’ash, and about
seventy men from among them ran to see the blood,
and they came to the place where the blood was.
53 And they followed the path of the blood and came
to the wall of the city of Ga’ash. And they saw the blood
issue from the city, and they heard the voice of crying
from the inhabitants of Ga’ash, for it ascended to the
shamayim, and the blood continued to flow abundantly
like a stream of water.
54 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were still smiting the
inhabitants of Ga’ash, and were engaged in slaying
them till evening, about twenty thousand men and
women. And the people of Ḥoron said, “Indeed this is
the work of the Iḇrim, for they are still continuing to fight
in all the cities of the Amorites.”
795

YASHAR

And those people hastened and ran to Bĕyth
Ḥoron, and each took his weapons of battle, and they
cried out to all the inhabitants of Bĕyth Ḥoron, who also
girded on their weapons of battle to go and fight
against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
56 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had finished smiting
the inhabitants of Ga’ash, they walked about the city
to strip all the slain. And coming in the innermost part
of the city and farther on they met three very powerful
men, and there was no sword in their hand.
57 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came up to the place
where they were, and the powerful men ran away. But
one of them had taken Zeḇulun, who he saw was a
young man and of short stature, and with his might
dashed him to the ground.
58 And Ya’aqoḇ ran to him with his sword and Ya’aqoḇ
smote him below his loins with the sword, and cut him
in two, and the body fell upon Zeḇulun.
59 And the second one approached and seized
Ya’aqoḇ to cut him to the ground, but Ya’aqoḇ turned
to him and shouted at him, while Shim’on and Lĕwi ran
and smote him on the hips with the sword and cut him
to the ground.
60 And the powerful man rose up from the ground with
fierce might, and Yahuḏah came to him before he had
gained his footing, and struck him on the head with the
sword, and his head was split and he died.
61 And the third powerful man, seeing that his
companions were killed, ran from before the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ pursued him in the
city. And while the powerful man was fleeing, he found
one of the swords of the inhabitants of the city, and he
picked it up and turned to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and
fought them with the sword.
62 And the powerful man ran at Yahuḏah to strike him
on the head with the sword, but there was no shield in
the hand of Yahuḏah. And while he was aiming to
55

796

JASHER

strike him, Naphtali hastily took his shield and put it to
Yahuḏah’s head, and the sword of the powerful man
hit the shield of Naphtali and Yahuḏah escaped the
sword.
63 And Shim’on and Lĕwi ran at the powerful man with
their swords and struck at him mightily with their
swords, and the two swords entered the body of the
powerful man and divided it in two, length-wise.
64 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ smote the three mighty
men at that time, together with all the inhabitants of
Ga’ash, and the day was about to decline.
65 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ walked about Ga’ash and
took all the spoil of the city, even the little ones and
women they did not allow to live. And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ did to Ga’ash as they had done to Sarton and
Shiloh.

40 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ led away all the spoil of
Ga’ash, and went out of the city by night.
2 They were going out marching toward the
stronghold of Bĕyth Ḥoron, but the inhabitants of Bĕyth
Ḥoron were going to the stronghold to meet them. And
on that night the sons of Ya’aqoḇ fought with the
inhabitants of Bĕyth Ḥoron, in the stronghold of Bĕyth
Ḥoron.
3 And all the inhabitants of Bĕyth Ḥoron were mighty
men, one of them would not flee from before a
thousand men. And they fought on that night at the
stronghold, and their shouts were heard on that night
from afar, and the earth quaked at their shouting.
4 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were afraid of those
men, as they were not accustomed to fighting in the
dark, and they were greatly put to shame. And the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ cried out to HWHY, saying, “Give help to us
O HWHY! Deliver us that we may not die by the hands
of these uncircumcised men.”
797

YASHAR

And HWHY listened to the voice of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, and HWHY caused great fear and confusion
to seize the people of Bĕyth Ḥoron, and they fought
among themselves, one with the other in the darkness
of night, and smote each other in great numbers.
6 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, knowing that HWHY had
brought a spirit of confusion among those men, and
that they fought each man with his neighbour, went
forth from among the bands of the people of Bĕyth
Ḥoron and went as far as the descent of the stronghold
of Bĕyth Ḥoron, and farther. And they waited there
safely with their young men on that night.
7 And the people of Bĕyth Ḥoron fought the whole
night, one man with his brother, and the other with his
neighbour, and they cried out in every direction at the
stronghold. And their cry was heard at a distance, and
the whole earth shook at their voice, for they were
mighty, above all the people of the earth.
8 And all the inhabitants of the cities of the
Kena’anites, the Ḥittites, the Amorites, the Ḥiwwites
and all the sovereigns of Kena’an, and also those who
were on the other side of the Yardĕn, heard the noise
of the shouting on that night.
9 And they said, “Indeed these are the battles of the
Iḇrim who are fighting against the seven cities, who
came near to them; and who can stand against those
Iḇrim?”
10 And all the inhabitants of the cities of the
Kena’anites, and all those who were on the other side
of the Yardĕn, were greatly afraid of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, for they said, “See, the same will be done to
us as was done to those cities, for who can stand
against their mighty strength?”
11 And the cries of the Ḥoronites were very great on
that night, and continued to increase; and they smote
each other till morning, and many of them were killed.
5

798

JASHER

And the morning appeared, and all the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ rose up at daybreak and went up to the
stronghold, and they smote those who remained of the
Ḥoronites in a fearful manner, and they were all killed
in the stronghold.
13 And the sixth day appeared, and all the inhabitants
of Kena’an saw at a distance all the people of Bĕyth
Ḥoron lying dead in the stronghold of Bĕyth Ḥoron, and
strewn about as the carcasses of lambs and goats.
14 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ led all the spoil which they
had captured from Ga’ash and went to Bĕyth Ḥoron.
And they found the city full of people like the sand of
the sea, and they fought with them, and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ smote them there till evening.
15 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ did to Bĕyth Ḥoron as they
had done to Ga’ash and Taphnaḵ, and as they had
done to Ḥatsar, to Sarton and to Shiloh.
16 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ took with them the spoil of
Bĕyth Ḥoron and all the spoil of the cities, and on that
day they went home to Sheḵem.
17 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came home to the city of
Sheḵem, and they remained outside the city, and they
rested there from the battle, and stayed there all night.
18 And all their servants together with all the spoil that
they had taken from the cities, they left outside the city,
and they did not enter the city, for they said, “Maybe
there may be yet more fighting against us, and they
may come to besiege us in Sheḵem.”
19 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons and their servants
remained on that night and the next day in the portion
of the field which Ya’aqoḇ had purchased from Ḥamor
for five sheqels, and all that they had captured was
with them.
20 And all the booty which the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had
captured, was in the portion of the field, as great as the
sand on the sea shore.
12

799

YASHAR

And the inhabitants of the land watched them from
afar, and all the inhabitants of the land were afraid of
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ who had done this matter, for no
sovereign from the days of old had ever done so.
22 And the seven sovereigns of the Kena’anites
resolved to make peace with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, for
they were greatly afraid for their lives, because of the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
23 And on that day, being the seventh day, Yaphiya
sovereign of Ḥeḇron sent secretly to the sovereign of
Ai, and to the sovereign of Giḇ’on, and to the sovereign
of Shalĕm, and to the sovereign of Aḏullam, and to the
sovereign of Laḵish, and to the sovereign of Ḥatsar,
and to all the Kena’anite sovereigns who were under
their subjection, saying,
24 “Go up with me, and come to me that we may go to
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and I will make peace with them,
and make a covenant with them, lest all your lands be
destroyed by the swords of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, as
they did to Sheḵem and the cities around it, as you
have heard and seen.
25 “And when you come to me, do not come with many
men, but let every sovereign bring his three chief
officers, and every officer bring three of his captains.
26 “And all of you come to Ḥeḇron, and we will go
together to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and request of them
that they would make a covenant of peace with us.”
27 And all those sovereigns did as the sovereign of
Ḥeḇron had sent to them, for they were all under his
counsel and command. And all the sovereigns of
Kena’an assembled to go to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, to
make peace with them. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
returned and went to the portion of the field that was in
Sheḵem, for they did not trust the sovereigns of the
land.
21

800

JASHER

And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ returned and remained in
the portion of the field ten days, and no one came to
fight against them.
29 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw that there was
no sign of battle, they all assembled and went to the
city of Sheḵem, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ remained in
Sheḵem.
30 And at the passing of forty days, all the sovereigns
of the Amorites assembled from all their places and
came to Ḥeḇron, to Yaphiya, sovereign of Ḥeḇron.
31 And the number of sovereigns that came to
Ḥeḇron, to make peace with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, was
twenty-one sovereigns, and the number of officers that
came with them was sixty-nine, and their men were
one hundred and eighty-nine. And all these sovereigns
and their men rested by Mount Ḥeḇron.
32 And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron went out with his three
officers and nine men, and these sovereigns resolved
to go to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ to make peace.
33 And they said to the sovereign of Ḥeḇron, “Go
before us with your men, and speak for us to the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ, and we will come after you and confirm
your words.” And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron did so.
34 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard that all the
sovereigns of Kena’an had gathered together and
rested in Ḥeḇron, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ sent four of
their servants as spies, saying, “Go and spy these
sovereigns, and search and examine their men
whether they are few or many. And if they are but few
in number, count them all and come back.”
35 And the servants of Ya’aqoḇ went secretly to these
sovereigns, and did as the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had
commanded them. And on that day they came back to
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and said to them, “We came to
those sovereigns, and they are but few in number, and
we counted them all, and see, they were two hundred
and eighty-eight, sovereigns and men.”
28

801

YASHAR

And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ said, “They are but few in
number, therefore we will not all go out to them.” And
in the morning the sons of Ya’aqoḇ rose up and chose
sixty-two of their men, and ten of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
went with them. And they girded on their weapons of
battle, for they said, “They are coming to fight against
us.” For they did not know that they were coming to
make peace with them.
37 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went with their servants to
the gate of Sheḵem, toward those sovereigns, and
their father Ya’aqoḇ was with them.
38 And when they had come out, see, the sovereign of
Ḥeḇron and his three officers and nine men with him
were coming along the way toward the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ lifted up their eyes,
and saw at a distance Yaphiya, sovereign of Ḥeḇron,
with his officers, coming toward them. And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ took their stand at the place of the gate of
Sheḵem, and did not proceed.
39 And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron continued to advance,
he and his officers, until he came near to the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ. And he and his officers bowed down to them
to the ground, and the sovereign of Ḥeḇron sat with his
officers before Ya’aqoḇ and his sons.
40 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ said to him, “What has
befallen you, O sovereign of Ḥeḇron? Why have you
come to us this day? What do you require from us?”
And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron said to Ya’aqoḇ, “I ask
you my master, all the sovereigns of the Kena’anites
have come this day to make peace with you.”
41 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard the words of the
sovereign of Ḥeḇron, and they would not agree to his
proposals, for the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had no trust in him,
for they thought that the sovereign of Ḥeḇron had
spoken deceitfully to them.
42 And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron knew from the words
of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, that they did not believe his
36

802

JASHER

words. And the sovereign of Ḥeḇron approached
nearer to Ya’aqoḇ, and said to him, “I ask you, my
master, to be assured that all these sovereigns have
come to you on peaceable terms, for they have not
come with all their men, neither did they bring their
weapons of battle with them, for they have come to
seek peace from my master and his sons.”
43 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ answered the sovereign
of Ḥeḇron, saying, “Send to all these sovereigns, and
if you speak truth to us, let them each come individually
before us. And if they come to us unarmed, we shall
then know that they seek peace from us.”
44 And Yaphiya, sovereign of Ḥeḇron, sent one of his
men to the sovereigns, and they all came before the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and bowed down to them to the
ground. And these sovereigns sat before Ya’aqoḇ and
his sons, and they spoke to them, saying,
45 “We have heard all that you did to the sovereigns
of the Amorites with your sword and exceedingly
mighty arm, so that no man could stand up before you,
and we were afraid of you for the sake of our lives, lest
it should befall us as it did to them.
46 “So we have come to you to make a covenant of
peace between us. And now therefore make a
covenant of peace and truth with us, that you will not
strive with us, inasmuch as we have not striven with
you.”
47 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ knew that they had indeed
come to seek peace from them, and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ listened to them, and made a covenant with
them.
48 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ swore to them that they
would not strive with them, and all the sovereigns of
the Kena’anites also swore to them. And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ made them serve compulsorily from then
onward.
803

YASHAR

And after this all the officers of these sovereigns
came with their men before Ya’aqoḇ, with presents in
their hands for Ya’aqoḇ and his sons, and they bowed
down to him to the ground.
50 And these sovereigns then urged the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ and begged of them to return all the spoil they
had captured from the seven cities of the Amorites.
And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ did so, and they returned all
that they had captured, the women, the little ones, the
cattle and all the spoil which they had taken. And they
sent them off, and they went away each to his city.
51 And all these sovereigns again bowed down to the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they sent or brought them many
gifts in those days. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ sent off
these sovereigns and their men, and they went
peaceably away from them to their cities, and the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ also returned to their home, to Sheḵem.
52 And there was peace from then onward between
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and the sovereigns of the
Kena’anites, until the children of Yisra’ĕl came to
inherit the land of Kena’an.
49

41 And at the turn of the year, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
journeyed from Sheḵem and they came to Ḥeḇron, to
their father Yitsḥaq, and they dwelt there. But their
flocks and herds they fed daily in Sheḵem, for there
was in those days good and rich pasture there, and
Ya’aqoḇ and his sons and all their household dwelt in
the valley of Ḥeḇron.
2 And it came to be in those days, in that year, being
the hundred and sixth year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ, in the
tenth year of Ya’aqoḇ’s coming from Paddan Aram,
that Lĕ’ah the wife of Ya’aqoḇ died. She was fifty-one
years old when she died in Ḥeḇron.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons buried her in the cave of
the field of Maḵpĕlah, which is in Ḥeḇron, which
804

JASHER

Aḇraham had bought from the children of Ḥĕth, for the
possession of a burial place.
4 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ dwelt with their father in
the valley of Ḥeḇron, and all the inhabitants of the land
knew their strength and the report of them went
throughout the land.
5 And Yosĕph son of Ya’aqoḇ, and his brother
Binyamin, the sons of Raḥĕl, the wife of Ya’aqoḇ, were
still young in those days, and did not go out with their
brothers during their battles in all the cities of the
Amorites.
6 And when Yosĕph saw the strength of his brothers,
and their might, he praised them and exalted them, but
he ranked himself greater than them, and exalted
himself above them. And Ya’aqoḇ, his father, also
loved him more than any of his sons, for he was a son
of his old age, and through his love toward him, he
made him a long robe.
7 And when Yosĕph saw that his father loved him
more than his brothers, he continued to exalt himself
above his brothers, and he brought evil reports to his
father concerning them.
8 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ seeing the whole of
Yosĕph’s conduct toward them, and that their father
loved him more than any of them, hated him and could
not speak peaceably to him all the days.
9 And Yosĕph was seventeen years old, and he was
still extolling himself above his brothers, and thought
of raising himself above them.
10 At that time he dreamed a dream, and he came to
his brothers and told them his dream. And he said to
them, “I dreamed a dream, and see, we were all
binding sheaves in the field, and my sheaf rose and
placed itself on the ground, and your sheaves
surrounded it and bowed down to it.”

805

YASHAR

And his brothers answered him and said to him,
“What does this dream mean that you dreamed? Do
you think in your heart to reign or rule over us?”
12 And he even came, and told the matter to his father
Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ kissed Yosĕph when he heard
these words from his mouth, and Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ
Yosĕph.
13 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw that their father
had baraḵ Yosĕph and had kissed him, and that he
loved him exceedingly, they became jealous of him
and hated him the more.
14 And after this Yosĕph dreamed another dream and
related the dream to his father in the presence of his
brothers. And Yosĕph said to his father and brothers,
“Look, I have again dreamed a dream, and see, the
sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowed down
to me.”
15 And his father heard the words of Yosĕph and his
dream, and seeing that his brothers hated Yosĕph
because of this matter, Ya’aqoḇ therefore rebuked
Yosĕph before his brothers because of this matter,
saying, “What does this dream mean which you have
dreamed, and this magnifying of yourself before your
brothers who are older than you?
16 “Do you think in your heart that I and your mother
and your eleven brothers will come and bow down to
you, that you speak these words?”
17 And his brothers were jealous of him because of his
words and dreams, and they continued to hate him, but
Ya’aqoḇ kept the dreams in his heart.
18 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went one day to feed their
father’s flock in Sheḵem, for they were still herdsmen
in those days. And while the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were
feeding in Sheḵem that day they delayed, and the time
of gathering in the cattle was passed, and they had not
arrived.
11

806

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ saw that his sons were delayed in
Sheḵem, and Ya’aqoḇ said within himself, “Maybe the
people of Sheḵem have risen up to fight against them,
therefore they have delayed coming this day.”
20 And Ya’aqoḇ called Yosĕph his son and
commanded him, saying, “Look, your brothers are
feeding in Sheḵem this day, and see, they have not yet
come back. Go now therefore and see where they are,
and bring me word back concerning the welfare of your
brothers and the welfare of the flock.”
21 And Ya’aqoḇ sent his son Yosĕph to the valley of
Ḥeḇron, and Yosĕph came for his brothers to Sheḵem,
and could not find them. And Yosĕph went about the
field which was near Sheḵem, to see where his
brothers had turned, and he lost his way in the
wilderness, and did not know which way he should go.
22 And a messenger of HWHY found him wandering in
the way toward the field, and Yosĕph said to the
messenger of HWHY, “I seek my brothers; have you not
heard where they are feeding?” And the messenger of
HWHY said to Yosĕph, “I saw your brothers feeding
here, and I heard them say they would go to feed in
Dothan.”
23 And Yosĕph listened to the voice of the messenger
of HWHY, and he went to his brothers in Dothan, and he
found them in Dothan feeding the flock.
24 And Yosĕph advanced to his brothers, but before
he had come near to them, they had resolved to slay
him.
25 And Shim’on said to his brothers, “Look, the man of
dreams is coming to us this day. And now therefore
come and let us kill him and throw him into one of the
pits that are in the wilderness, and when his father
shall seek him from us, we will say an evil beast has
devoured him.”
26 And Re’uḇĕn heard the words of his brothers
concerning Yosĕph, and he said to them, “You should
19

807

YASHAR

not do this matter, for how can we look up to our father
Ya’aqoḇ? Throw him into this pit to die there, but do
not stretch out a hand on him to spill his blood!” And
Re’uḇĕn said this in order to deliver him from their
hand, to bring him back to his father.
27 And when Yosĕph came to his brothers he sat
before them, and they rose upon him and seized him
and struck him to the earth, and stripped the long robe
which he had on.
28 And they took him and cast him into a pit. And in
the pit there was no water, but serpents and scorpions,
and Yosĕph was afraid of the serpents and scorpions
that were in the pit. And Yosĕph cried out with a loud
voice, and HWHY hid the serpents and scorpions in the
sides of the pit, and they did no harm to Yosĕph.
29 And Yosĕph called out from the pit to his brothers,
and said to them, “What have I done to you, and in
what have I sinned? Why do you not fear HWHY
concerning me? Am I not of your flesh and bones, and
is not Ya’aqoḇ your father, my father? Why do you do
this matter to me this day, and how will you be able to
look up to our father Ya’aqoḇ?”
30 And he continued to cry out and call to his brothers
from the pit, and he said, “O Yahuḏah, Shim’on, and
Lĕwi, my brothers, lift me up from the place of
darkness in which you have put me, and come this day
to have compassion on me, you children of HWHY, and
sons of Ya’aqoḇ my father. And if I have sinned toward
you, are you not the sons of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ? If they saw an orphan they had compassion
on him, or one that was hungry, they gave him bread
to eat, or one that was thirsty, they gave him water to
drink, or one that was naked, they covered him with
garments!
31 “And how then will you withhold your pity from your
brother, for I am of your flesh and bones, and if I have
808

JASHER

sinned toward you, indeed will you do this because of
my father?”
32 And Yosĕph spoke these words from the pit, but his
brothers would not listen to him, nor incline their ears
to the words of Yosĕph. And Yosĕph was crying and
weeping in the pit.
33 And Yosĕph said, “O that my father knew, this day,
the deed which my brothers have done to me, and the
words which they have spoken to me this day.”
34 And all his brothers heard his cries and weeping in
the pit, and his brothers went and removed themselves
from the pit, so that they might not hear the cries of
Yosĕph and his weeping in the pit.

42 And they went and sat on the opposite side, about
the distance of a bow-shot, and they sat there to eat
bread. And while they were eating, they consulted
together what was to be done with him, whether to slay
him or to bring him back to his father.
2 They were consulting, when they lifted their eyes,
and looked, and see, there was a company of
Yishma’ĕlites coming at a distance by the way of
Gil’aḏ, going down to Mitsrayim.
3 And Yahuḏah said to them, “What gain will it be to
us if we slay our brother? Maybe Elohim will require
him from us? This then is the counsel proposed
concerning him, which you shall do to him: See this
company of Yishma’ĕlites going down to Mitsrayim.
4 “Now therefore, come let us dispose of him to them,
and let our hand not be upon him, and they will lead
him along with them, and he will be lost among the
people of the land, but we will not put him to death with
our own hands.” And the proposal pleased his brothers
and they did according to the word of Yahuḏah.
5 And while they were speaking about this matter,
and before the company of Yishma’ĕlites had come up
to them, seven trading men of Miḏyan passed by them.
809

YASHAR

And as they passed they were thirsty, and they lifted
up their eyes and saw the pit in which Yosĕph was
confined, and they looked, and see, every species of
bird was upon it.
6 And these Miḏyanites ran to the pit to drink water,
for they thought that it contained water, and on coming
before the pit they heard the voice of Yosĕph crying
and weeping in the pit. And they looked down into the
pit, and they looked and see, there was a youth
handsome in form and appearance.
7 And they called to him and said, “Who are you and
who brought you here, and who placed you in this pit,
in the wilderness?” And they all assisted to raise
Yosĕph up and they drew him out, and brought him up
from the pit, and took him and went away on their
journey and passed by his brothers.
8 And they said to them, “Why do you do this, to take
our servant from us and to go away? Indeed we placed
this youth in the pit because he rebelled against us,
and you come and bring him up and lead him away!
Now then give us back our servant.”
9 And the Miḏyanites answered and said to the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ, “Is this your servant, or does this man
attend you? Maybe you are all his servants, for he is
more handsome in form and appearance than any of
you! And why do you all speak falsely to us?
10 “Now therefore we will not listen to your words, nor
attend to you, for we found the youth in the pit in the
wilderness, and we took him. We will therefore go on.”
11 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ approached them and
stood up to them and said to them, “Give us back our
servant, and why should you all die with the edge of
the sword?” And the Miḏyanites cried out against
them, and they drew their swords, and approached to
fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
12 And see, Shim’on rose up from his place against
them, and leaped on the ground and drew his sword
810

JASHER

and approached the Miḏyanites. And he gave a terrible
shout before them, so that his shouting was heard at a
distance, and the earth shook at Shim’on’s shouting.
13 And the Miḏyanites were afraid because of Shim’on
and the noise of his shouting, and they fell upon their
faces, and were exceedingly alarmed.
14 And Shim’on said to them, “Truly I am Shim’on, son
of Ya’aqoḇ the Iḇri, who have, only with my brother,
destroyed the city of Sheḵem and the cities of the
Amorites! So shall Elohim also do that to me if all your
brothers, the people of Miḏyan, and also the
sovereigns of Kena’an, were to come with you, they
could not fight against me.
15 “Now therefore give us back the youth whom you
have taken, lest I give your flesh to the birds of the
skies and the beasts of the earth!”
16 And the Miḏyanites were more afraid of Shim’on,
and they approached the sons of Ya’aqoḇ with dread
and fear, and with humble words, saying,
17 “Indeed you have said that the young man is your
servant, and that he rebelled against you, and
therefore you placed him in the pit. What then will you
do with a servant who rebels against his master? Now
therefore sell him to us, and we will give you all that
you require for him.” And HWHY was pleased to do this
in order that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ should not slay their
brother.
18 And the Miḏyanites, seeing that Yosĕph was
handsome in form and appearance, desired him in
their hearts and were urged to purchase him from his
brothers.
19 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ listened to the Miḏyanites
and they sold their brother Yosĕph to them for twenty
pieces of silver, but Re’uḇĕn their brother was not with
them. And the Miḏyanites took Yosĕph and continued
their journey to Gil’aḏ.
811

YASHAR

They were going along the way, but the Miḏyanites
repented of what they had done, in having purchased
the young man, and one said to the other, “What is this
matter that we have done, in taking this youth from the
Iḇrim, who is handsome in form and appearance?
21 “Maybe this youth is stolen from the land of the
Iḇrim, and why then have we done this matter? And if
he should be sought for and found in our hands we
shall die through him.
22 “Now indeed strong and mighty men have sold him
to us, the strength of one of whom you saw this day.
Maybe they stole him from his land with their might and
with their powerful arm, and have therefore sold him to
us for the small value which we gave to them.”
23 And while they were so speaking together, they
looked, and see, company of Yishma’ĕlites which was
coming at first, and which the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw,
was advancing toward the Miḏyanites. And the
Miḏyanites said to each other, “Come let us sell this
youth to the company of Yishma’ĕlites who are coming
toward us, and we will take for him the little that we
gave for him, and we will be delivered from this evil.”
24 And they did so, and they reached the
Yishma’ĕlites, and the Miḏyanites sold Yosĕph to the
Yishma’ĕlites for twenty pieces of silver which they had
given for him to his brothers.
25 And the Miḏyanites went on their way to Gil’aḏ. And
the Yishma’ĕlites took Yosĕph and they let him ride
upon one of the camels, and they were leading him to
Mitsrayim.
26 And Yosĕph heard that the Yishma’ĕlites were
proceeding to Mitsrayim, and Yosĕph lamented and
wept at this matter that he was to be so far removed
from the land of Kena’an, from his father, and he wept
bitterly while he was riding upon the camel. And one of
their men observed him, and made him go down from
the camel and walk on foot. Nevertheless Yosĕph
20

812

JASHER

continued to cry and weep, and he said, “O my father,
my father!”
27 And one of the Yishma’ĕlites rose up and struck
Yosĕph on the cheek, but he still continued to weep.
And Yosĕph was tired on the way, and was unable to
continue because of the bitterness of his being, and
they all struck him and afflicted him on the way, and
they frightened him in order that he might stop
weeping.
28 And HWHY saw the desire of Yosĕph and his
trouble, and HWHY brought down upon those men
darkness and confusion, and the hand of every one
that struck him became withered.
29 And they said to each other, “What is this matter
that Elohim has done to us on the way?” and they did
not know that this befell them because of Yosĕph. And
the men continued on the way, and they passed along
the way of Ephrath where Raḥĕl was buried.
30 And Yosĕph reached his mother’s grave, and
Yosĕph hastened and ran to his mother’s grave, and
fell upon the grave and wept.
31 And Yosĕph cried aloud upon his mother’s grave,
and he said, “O my mother, my mother! O you who
brought me forth, awake now, and rise and see your
son, how he has been sold for a slave, and no one to
pity him!
32 “O rise and see your son, weep with me because of
my troubles, and see the heart of my brothers.
33 “Arise my mother, arise! Awake from your sleep for
me, and direct your battles against my brothers. O how
have they stripped me of my robe, and already sold me
twice for a slave, and separated me from my father,
and there is no one to pity me?
34 “Arise and lay your cause against them before
Elohim, and see whom Elohim will justify in the
judgment, and whom He will condemn.
813

YASHAR

“Arise, O my mother, arise. Awake from your sleep
and see my father how his being is with me this day,
and comfort him and ease his heart.”
36 And Yosĕph continued to speak these words, and
Yosĕph cried aloud and wept bitterly upon his mother’s
grave. And he ceased speaking, and from bitterness of
heart he became still as a stone upon the grave.
37 And Yosĕph heard a voice speaking to him from
beneath the ground, which answered him with
bitterness of heart, and with a voice of weeping and
praying in these words:
38 “My son, my son Yosĕph, I have heard the voice of
your weeping and the voice of your lamentation. I have
seen your tears. I know your troubles, my son, and it
grieves me for your sake, and abundant grief is added
to my grief.
39 “Now therefore my son, Yosĕph my son, hope to
HWHY, and wait for Him and do not fear, for HWHY is
with you, He will deliver you from all trouble.
40 “Rise my son, go down to Mitsrayim with your
masters, and do not fear, for HWHY is with you, my son.”
And she continued to speak similar words to Yosĕph,
and she was still.
41 And Yosĕph heard this, and he wondered greatly at
this, but he continued to weep. And after this one of
the Yishma’ĕlites observed him crying and weeping on
the grave, and his wrath was kindled against him, and
he drove him from there, and he struck him and cursed
him.
42 And Yosĕph said to the men, “May I find favour in
your sight to take me back to my father’s house, and
he will give you abundant riches.”
43 And they answered him, saying, “Are you not a
slave, and where is your father? And if you had a father
you would not already twice have been sold for a slave
for so little value!” And their wrath was still roused
35

814

JASHER

against him, and they continued to strike him and to
chastise him, and Yosĕph wept bitterly.
44 And HWHY saw Yosĕph’s affliction, and HWHY again
smote these men, and chastised them, and HWHY
caused darkness to envelope them upon the earth.
And the lightning flashed and the thunder roared, and
the earth shook at the sound of the thunder and of the
mighty wind, and the men were afraid and did not know
where they should go.
45 And the beasts and camels stood still, and they led
them, but they would not go. They struck them, and
they crouched upon the ground, and the men said to
each other, “What is this that Elohim has done to us?
What are our transgressions, and what are our sins
that this matter has so befallen us?”
46 And one of them answered and said to them,
“Maybe because of the sin of afflicting this slave has
this matter befallen us today. Now therefore implore
him strongly to forgive us, and then we shall know for
whose sake this evil befalls us. And if Elohim shall
have compassion over us, then we shall know that all
this came upon us because of the sin of afflicting this
slave.”
47 And the men did so, and they begged Yosĕph and
pressed him to forgive them. And they said, “We have
sinned to HWHY and to you, now therefore promise to
request of your Elohim that He shall put away this
death from among us, for we have sinned against
Him!”
48 And Yosĕph did according to their words, and HWHY
listened to Yosĕph, and HWHY put away the plague
which He had inflicted upon those men because of
Yosĕph. And the beasts rose up from the ground and
they led them, and they went on. And the raging storm
abated and the earth became quiet, and the men
continued on their journey to go down to Mitsrayim.
815

YASHAR

And the men knew that this evil had befallen them
because of Yosĕph.
49 And they said to each other, “Look we know that it
was because of his affliction that this evil befell us.
Now therefore why shall we bring this death upon our
beings? Let us hold counsel what to do to this slave.”
50 And one answered and said, “Indeed he told us to
bring him back to his father. Now therefore come, let
us take him back and we will go to the place that he
will tell us, and take from his clan the price that we
gave for him and we will then go away.”
51 And one answered again and said, “Look this
counsel is very good, but we cannot do so for the way
is very far from us, and we cannot go out of our way.”
52 And one more answered and said to them, “This is
the counsel to be taken, we will not swerve from it.
See, we are this day going to Mitsrayim, and when we
have come to Mitsrayim, we will sell him there at a high
price, and we will be delivered from his evil.”
53 And this word pleased the men and they did so, and
they continued their journey to Mitsrayim with Yosĕph.

43 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had sold their
brother Yosĕph to the Miḏyanites, their hearts were
smitten because of him, and they repented of their
acts, and they sought for him to bring him back, but
could not find him.
2 And Re’uḇĕn returned to the pit in which Yosĕph
had been put, in order to lift him out, and restore him
to his father. And Re’uḇĕn stood by the pit, but he
heard not a word, and he called out, “Yosĕph!
Yosĕph!” But no one answered or uttered a word.
3 And Re’uḇĕn said, “Yosĕph has died through fright,
or some serpent has caused his death!” And Re’uḇĕn
went down into the pit, and he searched for Yosĕph
but could not find him in the pit, and he came out again.
816

JASHER

And Re’uḇĕn tore his garments and he said, “The
youth is not there, and how shall I reconcile my father
about him if he be dead?” And he went to his brothers
and found them grieving because of Yosĕph, and
consulting together how to appease their father about
him. And Re’uḇĕn said to his brothers, “I came to the
pit and see, Yosĕph was not there! What then shall we
say to our father, for my father will indeed seek the boy
from me?”
5 And his brothers answered him saying, “Thus and
thus we did, and our hearts afterward smote us
because of this deed, and we now sit to seek an
excuse how we shall appease our father toward it.”
6 And Re’uḇĕn said to them, “What is this you have
done to bring down the grey hairs of our father in
sorrow to the grave? The matter is not good, that you
have done!”
7 And Re’uḇĕn sat with them, and they all rose up
and swore to each other not to tell this matter to
Ya’aqoḇ. And they all said, “The man who will tell this
to our father or his household, or who will report this to
any of the children of the land, we will all rise up
against him and slay him with the sword.”
8 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ feared each other in this
matter, from the youngest to the oldest, and no one
spoke a word, and they concealed the matter in their
hearts.
9 And afterward they sat down to determine and plan
something to say to their father Ya’aqoḇ concerning all
these matters.
10 And Yissasḵar said to them, “Here is advice for you
if it seems good in your eyes to do this matter: take the
coat which belongs to Yosĕph and tear it, and kill a kid
of the goats and dip it in its blood.
11 “And send it to our father and when he sees it he
will say an evil beast has devoured him. Therefore tear
his coat and see, his blood will be upon his coat, and
4

817

YASHAR

by your doing this we shall be free of our father’s
grumblings.”
12 And Yissasḵar’s advice pleased them, and they
listened to him and they did according to the word of
Yissasḵar which he had advised them.
13 And they hurried and took Yosĕph’s coat and tore
it, and they killed a kid of the goats and dipped the coat
in the blood of the kid, and then trampled it in the dust.
And they sent the coat to their father Ya’aqoḇ by the
hand of Naphtali, and they commanded him to say
these words:
14 “We had gathered in the cattle and had come as far
as the way to Sheḵem and farther, when we found this
robe on the way in the wilderness soaked in blood and
in dust. Now therefore know whether it be your son’s
robe or not.”
15 And Naphtali went and he came to his father and
he gave him the coat, and he spoke to him all the
words which his brothers had commanded him.
16 And Ya’aqoḇ saw Yosĕph’s coat and he knew it and
he fell on his face to the ground, and became as still
as a stone. And afterward he rose up and cried out with
a loud and weeping voice and said, “It is the robe of
my son Yosĕph!”
17 And Ya’aqoḇ hastened and sent one of his servants
to his sons, who went to them and found them coming
along the way with the flock.
18 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came to their father about
evening, and see, their garments were torn and dust
was on their heads, and they found their father crying
out and weeping with a loud voice.
19 And Ya’aqoḇ said to his sons, “Tell me truly what
evil have you suddenly brought upon me this day?”
and they answered their father Ya’aqoḇ, saying, “We
were coming along this day after the flock had been
gathered in, and we came as far as the city of Sheḵem
by the way in the wilderness, and we found this robe
818

JASHER

soaked with blood the ground. And we knew it and sent
to you if you could know it.”
20 And Ya’aqoḇ heard the words of his sons and he
cried out with a loud voice, and he said, “It is the robe
of my son! An evil beast has devoured him! Yosĕph is
torn in pieces, for I sent him this day to see whether it
was well with you and well with the flocks and to bring
me word again from you. And he went as I commanded
him, and this has befallen him this day while I thought
my son was with you.”
21 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ answered and said, “He
did not come to us, neither have we seen him from the
time of our going out from you until now.”
22 And when Ya’aqoḇ heard their words he again
cried out aloud, and he rose up and tore his garments,
and he put sackcloth upon his loins, and wept bitterly.
And he mourned and lifted up his voice in weeping and
exclaimed and spoke these words:
23 “Yosĕph my son, O my son Yosĕph! I sent you this
day after the welfare of your brothers, and see, you
have been torn in pieces. Through my hand has this
befallen my son.
24 “It grieves me for you Yosĕph my son, it grieves me
for you! How sweet were you to me during life, and now
how exceedingly bitter is your death to me.
25 “O that I had died in your place Yosĕph my son, for
it grieves me sadly for you my son. O my son, my son,
Yosĕph my son! Where are you, and where have you
been taken? Arise, arise from your place, and come
and see my grief for you, O my son Yosĕph!
26 “Come now and number the tears gushing from my
eyes down my cheeks, and bring them up before
HWHY, that his wrath may turn from me.
27 “O Yosĕph my son, how did you fall? By the hand
of one whom no one had fallen from the beginning of
the world to this day. For you have been put to death
by the smiting of an enemy, inflicted with cruelty, but
819

YASHAR

indeed I know that this has befallen you, because of
the multitude of my sins.
28 “Arise now and see how bitter my trouble is for you
my son. Although I did not raise you, nor form you, nor
give you breath and being, but it was Elohim who
formed you and built your bones and covered them
with flesh, and breathed in your nostrils the breath of
life, and then He gave you to me.
29 “Now truly Elohim who gave you to me, He has
taken you from me, and this has befallen you.”
30 And Ya’aqoḇ continued to speak such words
concerning Yosĕph, and he wept bitterly, fell to the
ground and became still.
31 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ seeing their father’s
trouble, repented of what they had done, and they also
wept bitterly.
32 And Yahuḏah rose up and lifted his father’s head
from the ground, and placed it upon his lap, and he
wiped his father’s tears from his cheeks. And Yahuḏah
wept an exceedingly great weeping, while his father’s
head was resting on his lap, still as a stone.
33 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw their father’s trouble,
and they lifted up their voices and continued to weep,
but Ya’aqoḇ was still lying on the ground still as a
stone.
34 And all his sons and his servants and his servant’s
children rose up and stood round him to comfort him,
but he refused to be comforted.
35 And the whole household of Ya’aqoḇ rose up and
mourned a great mourning for the sake of Yosĕph and
their father’s trouble. And the news reached Yitsḥaq,
son of Aḇraham, the father of Ya’aqoḇ, and he wept
bitterly for the sake of Yosĕph, he and all his
household. And he went from the place where he dwelt
in Ḥeḇron, and his men with him, and he comforted
Ya’aqoḇ his son, but he refused to be comforted.
820

JASHER

And after this, Ya’aqoḇ rose up from the ground,
and his tears were running down his cheeks. And he
said to his sons, “Rise up and take your swords and
your bows, and go out into the field, and seek whether
you can find my son’s body and bring it to me that I
may bury it.
37 “Seek also please, among the beasts and hunt
them, and that which shall come the first before you,
seize and bring it to me. Maybe HWHY will pity my
affliction this day, and prepare before you that which
tore my son in pieces. And bring it to me, and I will
avenge the cause of my son.”
38 And his sons did as their father had commanded
them, and they rose early in the morning, and each
took his sword and his bow in his hand, and they went
out into the field to hunt the beasts.
39 And Ya’aqoḇ was still crying aloud and weeping
and walking to and fro in the house, and smiting his
hands together, saying, “Yosĕph my son, Yosĕph my
son!”
40 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went into the wilderness
to seize the beasts, and see, a wolf came toward them.
And they seized it, and brought it to their father, and
they said to him, “This is the first we have found, and
we have brought it to you as you commanded us, but
your son’s body we could not find.”
41 And Ya’aqoḇ took the beast from the hands of his
sons, and he cried out with a loud and weeping voice,
holding the beast in his hand. And he spoke with a
bitter heart to the beast, “Why did you devour my son
Yosĕph, and how did you have no fear of the Elohim
of the earth, or of my trouble for my son Yosĕph?
42 “And you devoured my son for naught, for he
committed no violence, and by this I bear the blame for
his sake, therefore Elohim will require him that is
persecuted.”
36

821

YASHAR

And HWHY opened the mouth of the beast in order
to comfort Ya’aqoḇ with its words, and it answered
Ya’aqoḇ and spoke these words to him,
44 “As Elohim lives who created us in the earth, and
as your being lives, my master, I did not see your son,
neither did I tear him to pieces. But I also came from a
distant land to seek my son who went from me this day,
and I do not know whether he is alive or dead.
45 “And I came this day into the field to seek my son,
and your sons found me, and seized me and increased
my grief, and have this day brought me before you, and
I have now spoken all my words to you.
46 “And now therefore, O son of man, I am in your
hands, and do to me this day as it seems good in your
eyes, but by the Ḥai of Elohim who created me, I did
not see your son, nor did I tear him to pieces, neither
has the flesh of man entered my mouth all the days of
my life.”
47 And when Ya’aqoḇ heard the words of the beast he
was greatly astonished, and released the beast from
his hand, and she went her way.
48 And Ya’aqoḇ was still crying aloud and weeping for
Yosĕph day after day, and he mourned for his son
many days.
43

44 And the sons of Yishma’ĕl who had bought
Yosĕph from the Miḏyanites, who had bought him from
his brothers, went to Mitsrayim with Yosĕph, and they
came upon the borders of Mitsrayim. And when they
came near to Mitsrayim, they met four men of the sons
of Meḏan son of Aḇraham, who had gone out from the
land of Mitsrayim on their journey.
2 And the Yishma’ĕlites said to them, “Do you desire
to purchase this slave from us?” and they said, “Give
him over to us.” And they gave Yosĕph over to them,
and they saw him, that he was a very handsome youth
and they purchased him for twenty sheqels.
822

JASHER

And the Yishma’ĕlites continued their journey to
Mitsrayim, and the Meḏanites also returned that day to
Mitsrayim. And the Meḏanites said to each other,
“Look we have heard that Potiphar, an officer of
Pharaoh, captain of the guard, seeks a good servant
who shall stand before him to attend him, and to make
him overseer over his house and all belonging to him.
4 “Now therefore, come let us sell him to him for what
we may desire, if he is able to give to us that which we
shall require for him.”
5 And these Meḏanites went and came to the house
of Potiphar, and said to him, “We have heard that you
seek a good servant to attend you. Look, we have a
servant that will please you, if you can give to us that
which we may desire, and we will sell him to you.”
6 And Potiphar said, “Bring him before me, and I will
see him, and if he pleases me I will give to you that
which you may require for him.”
7 And the Meḏanites went and brought Yosĕph and
placed him before Potiphar. And he saw him, and he
pleased him exceedingly, and Potiphar said to them,
“Tell me what you require for this youth?”
8 And they said, “Four hundred pieces of silver we
desire for him.” And Potiphar said, “I will give it to you
if you bring me the record of his sale to you, and will
tell me his history, for maybe he is stolen. For this
youth is neither a slave, nor the son of a slave, but I
observe in him the appearance of a pleasant and
handsome person.”
9 And the Meḏanites went and brought to him the
Yishma’ĕlites who had sold him to them, and they told
him, saying, “He is a slave and we sold him to them.”
10 And Potiphar heard the words of the Yishma’ĕlites
in his giving the silver to the Meḏanites. And the
Meḏanites took the silver and went on their journey,
and the Yishma’ĕlites also returned home.
3

823

YASHAR

And Potiphar took Yosĕph and brought him to his
house that he might serve him. And Yosĕph found
favour in the sight of Potiphar, and he placed trust in
him, and made him overseer over his house, and all
that belonged to him he delivered over into his hand.
12 And HWHY was with Yosĕph and he became a
prosperous man, and HWHY baraḵ the house of
Potiphar for the sake of Yosĕph.
13 And Potiphar left all that he had in the hand of
Yosĕph, and Yosĕph caused matters to come in and
go out, and everything was regulated by his word in
the house of Potiphar.
14 And Yosĕph was eighteen years old, a youth with
good-looking eyes and of handsome appearance, and
none like him was in the whole land of Mitsrayim.
15 At that time while he was in his master’s house,
going in and out of the house and attending his master,
Tseliqah, his master’s wife, lifted up her eyes toward
Yosĕph and she looked at him, and see, he was a
youth handsome in form and appearance.
16 And she coveted his good looks in her heart, and
her being was fixed upon Yosĕph, and she enticed him
day after day. And Tseliqah pressed Yosĕph daily, but
Yosĕph did not lift up his eyes to look upon his
master’s wife.
17 And Tseliqah said to him, “How handsome is your
appearance and form. Indeed I have looked at all the
slaves, and have not seen such a good-looking slave
as you are.” And Yosĕph said to her, “Certainly He who
created me in my mother’s womb created all mankind.”
18 And she said to him, “How good-looking are your
eyes, with which you have dazzled all the inhabitants
of Mitsrayim - men and women.” And he said to her,
“How good-looking they are while we are alive, but
should you see them in the grave, indeed you would
move away from them.”
11

824

JASHER

And she said to him, “How fair and pleasing are all
your words. Please take the harp which is in the house,
and play with your hands and let us hear your words.”
20 And he said to her, “How fair and pleasing are my
words when I speak the praise of my Elohim and His
esteem.” And she said to him, “How very good-looking
is the hair of your head. See, the golden comb which
is in the house, please take it and curl the hair of your
head.”
21 And he said to her, “How long will you speak these
words? Cease speaking these words to me, and rise
and attend to your household matters.”
22 And she said to him, “There is no one in my house,
and there is nothing to attend to but to your words and
to your desire.” Yet despite all this, she could not bring
Yosĕph to her, neither did he place his eye upon her,
but directed his eyes below to the ground.
23 And Tseliqah desired Yosĕph in her heart, that he
should lie with her. And at the time that Yosĕph was
sitting in the house doing his work, Tseliqah came and
sat before him, and she enticed him daily with her
words to lie with her, or ever to look at her, but Yosĕph
would not listen to her.
24 And she said to him, “If you will not do according to
my words, I will punish you with the punishment of
death, and put an iron yoke upon you.”
25 And Yosĕph said to her, “Indeed Elohim who
created man loosens the shackles of prisoners, and it
is He who will deliver me from your prison and from
your judgment.”
26 And when she could not overcome him, to
persuade him, and her soul being still fixed upon him,
her desire threw her into a grievous sickness.
27 And all the women of Mitsrayim came to visit her,
and they said to her, “Why are you in this declining
state? You that lack nothing! Indeed your husband is a
great and esteemed prince in the sight of the
19

825

YASHAR

sovereign. Should you lack anything of what your heart
desires?”
28 And Tseliqah answered them, saying, “This day it
shall be made known to you, where this unrest arises
in which you see me.” And she commanded her female
servants to prepare food for all the women, and she
made a banquet for them, and all the women ate in the
house of Tseliqah.
29 And she gave them knives to peel the oranges to
eat them, and she commanded that they should dress
Yosĕph in costly garments, and that he should appear
before them. And Yosĕph came before their eyes and
all the women looked on Yosĕph, and could not take
their eyes from him, and they all cut their hands with
the knives that they had in their hands, and all the
oranges that were in their hands were filled with blood.
30 And they did not know what they had done but they
continued to look at the good looks of Yosĕph, and did
not turn their eyelids from him.
31 And Tseliqah saw what they had done, and she
said to them, “What is this matter that you have done?
Look, I gave you oranges to eat and you have all cut
your hands.”
32 And all the women looked at their hands, and see,
they were full of blood, and their blood flowed down on
their garments. And they said to her, “This slave in your
house has overcome us, and we could not turn our
eyelids from him because of his good looks.”
33 And she said to them, “Indeed this came to be the
moment that you looked at him, and you could not
contain yourselves from him. How then can I refrain
when he is constantly in my house, and I see him day
after day going in and out of my house? How then can
I keep from declining or even from perishing because
of this?”
34 And they said to her, “The words are true, for who
can see this good-looking form in the house and refrain
826

JASHER

from him? But is he not your slave and attendant in
your house, and why do you not tell him that which is
in your heart, but allow your being to perish through
this matter?”
35 And she said to them, “I am daily endeavouring to
persuade him, but he will not consent to my wishes.
And I promised him everything that is good, and yet I
could meet with no return from him. I am therefore in a
declining state as you see.”
36 And Tseliqah became very ill because of her desire
toward Yosĕph, and she was desperately lovesick
because of him. And all the people of the house of
Tseliqah and her husband knew nothing of this matter,
that Tseliqah was ill because of her love toward
Yosĕph.
37 And all the people of her house asked her, saying,
“Why are you ill and declining, yet lack naught?” and
she said to them, “I do not know this matter which is
daily increasing upon me.”
38 And all the women and her friends came daily to
see her, and they spoke with her, and she said to them,
“This can only be through the love of Yosĕph.” And
they said to her, “Entice him and seize him secretly.
Maybe he may listen to you, and put off this death from
you.”
39 And Tseliqah became worse from her love toward
Yosĕph, and she continued to decline, till she scarcely
had strength to stand.
40 And on a certain day Yosĕph was doing his
master’s work in the house, and Tseliqah came
secretly and fell suddenly upon him. And Yosĕph rose
up against her, and he was more powerful than she,
and he brought her down to the ground.
41 And Tseliqah wept because of the desire of her
heart toward him, and she begged him with weeping.
And her tears flowed down her cheeks, and she spoke
827

YASHAR

to him in a voice of pleading and in bitterness of being,
saying,
42 “Have you ever heard, seen or known of so goodlooking a woman as I am, or better than myself, who
speaks daily to you, fall into a decline through love for
you, lay all this honour upon you, and still you will not
listen to my voice?
43 “And if it is through fear of your master lest he
punish you, as the sovereign lives no harm shall come
to you from your master through this matter. Now,
therefore please listen to me, and consent for the sake
of the honour which I have laid upon you, and put off
this death from me, for why should I die for your sake?”
And she ceased to speak.
44 And Yosĕph answered her, saying, “Refrain from
me, and leave this matter to my master. Look, my
master does not know what there is with me in the
house, for all that belongs to him he has delivered into
my hand. And how shall I do these matters in my
master’s house?
45 “For he has also greatly honoured me in his house,
and he has also made me overseer over his house,
and he has exalted me, and there is no one greater in
this house than I am, and my master has kept nothing
from me, except you who are his wife. How then can
you speak these words to me, and how can I do this
great evil and sin against Elohim and against your
husband?”
46 “Now therefore refrain from me, and speak such
words as these no more, for I will not listen to your
words.” But Tseliqah would not listen to Yosĕph when
he spoke these words to her, and she daily enticed him
to listen to her.
47 And it came to be after this that the river of
Mitsrayim was filled above all its sides, and all the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim went out. And the sovereign
and princes also went out with timbrels and dances, for
828

JASHER

it was a great rejoicing in Mitsrayim, and a holiday at
the time of the flooding of the sea Shiḥor, and they
went there to rejoice all the day.
48 And when the Mitsrites went out to the river to
rejoice, as was their custom, all the people of the
house of Potiphar went with them. But Tseliqah would
not go with them, for she said, “I am sick.” And she
remained alone in the house, and no other person was
with her in the house.
49 And she rose up and went up to her palace in the
house, and dressed herself in princely garments, and
she placed precious shoham stones upon her head,
inlaid with silver and gold, and she adorned her face
and skin with all kinds of women’s purifying liquids.
And she perfumed the palace and the house with
cassia and frankincense, and she spread myrrh and
aloes, and afterward she sat in the entrance of the
palace, in the passage of the house, through which
Yosĕph passed to do his work. And see, Yosĕph came
from the field, and entered the house to do his master’s
work.
50 And he came to the place through which he had to
pass, but he saw all Tseliqah had done, and he turned
back.
51 And Tseliqah saw Yosĕph turning back from her,
and she called out to him, saying, “What troubles you
Yosĕph? Come to your work, and see, I will make room
for you until you shall have passed to your seat.”
52 And Yosĕph returned and came to the house, and
passed from there to the place of his seat, and he sat
down to do his master’s work as usual. And see,
Tseliqah came to him and stood before him in regal
garments, and the scent from her clothes was spread
to a distance.
53 And she hastened and caught hold of Yosĕph and
his garments, and she said to him, “As the sovereign
lives if you will not perform my request you shall die
829

YASHAR

today!” And she hastened and stretched out her other
hand and drew a sword from beneath her garments,
and she placed it on Yosĕph’s neck, and she said,
“Rise and perform my request, and if not you die
today!”
54 And Yosĕph was afraid of her at her doing this
matter, and he rose up to flee from her. But she seized
the front of his garments, and in the fear of his flight
the garment which Tseliqah seized was torn, and
Yosĕph left the garment in the hand of Tseliqah, and
he fled and got out, for he was fearful.
55 And when Tseliqah saw that Yosĕph’s garment
was torn, and that he had left it in her hand, and had
fled, she was afraid for her life, lest the report should
spread concerning her. And she rose up and acted
with cunning, and took off the garments in which she
was dressed, and she put on her other garments.
56 And she took Yosĕph’s garment, and she laid it
beside her, and she went and seated herself in the
place where she had sat in her illness, before the
people of her house had gone out to the river. And she
called a young man who was then in the house, and
she ordered him to call the people of the house to her.
57 And when she saw them she said to them with a
loud voice and lamentation, “See what sort of Iḇri your
master has brought to me in the house, for he came
this day to lie with me!
58 “For when you had gone out, he came to the house,
and seeing that there was no person in the house, he
came toward me, and caught hold of me, with intent to
lie with me.
59 “And I seized his garments and tore them and
called out against him with a loud voice, and when I
had lifted up my voice he was afraid for his life and left
his garment before me, and fled.”
60 And the people of her house spoke nothing, but
their wrath was very much kindled against Yosĕph,
830

JASHER

and they went to his master and told him the words of
his wife.
61 And Potiphar came home enraged, and his wife
cried out to him, saying, “What is this matter that you
have done to me in bringing an Iḇri servant into my
house? For he came to me today to mock me as he
did so to me today!”
62 And Potiphar heard the words of his wife, and he
ordered Yosĕph to be punished with severe blows, and
they did so to him.
63 And while they were striking him, Yosĕph called out
with a loud voice, and he lifted up his eyes to the
shamayim, and he said, “O HWHY Elohim, You know
that I am innocent of all these matters! And why shall I
die this day through falsehood, by the hand of these
uncircumcised wicked men, whom You know?”
64 And while Potiphar’s men were beating Yosĕph, he
continued to cry out and weep. And there was a child
there eleven months old, and HWHY opened the mouth
of the child, and he spoke these words before
Potiphar’s men, who were striking Yosĕph, saying,
65 “What do you want of this man, and why do you do
this evil to him? My mother speaks falsely and speaks
lies; such was the matter.”
66 And the child told them rightly all that came to pass,
and he told to them all the words of Tseliqah to Yosĕph
day after day.
67 And all the men heard the words of the child and
they wondered greatly at the child’s words, and the
child ceased to speak and became still.
68 And Potiphar was very much ashamed at the words
of his son, and he commanded his men not to beat
Yosĕph any more, and the men ceased beating
Yosĕph.
69 And Potiphar took Yosĕph and ordered him to be
brought to justice before the priests, who were judges
831

YASHAR

belonging to the sovereign, in order to judge him
concerning this matter.
70 And Potiphar and Yosĕph came before the priests
who were the sovereign’s judges, and he said to them,
“Please decide what judgment is due to a servant, for
what he has done.”
71 And the priests said to Yosĕph, “Why did you do
this matter to your master?” And Yosĕph answered
them, saying, “Not so my masters, this was the matter.”
And Potiphar said to Yosĕph, “Indeed I entrusted all
that belonged to me into your hands, and I withheld
nothing from you but my wife, and how could you do
this evil?”
72 And Yosĕph answered saying, “Not so my master,
as HWHY lives, and as your being lives, my master, the
word which you heard from your wife is untrue, for this
was the matter this day.
73 “A year has passed by me since I have been in your
house. Have you seen any wickedness in me, or any
matter which might cause you to demand my life?”
74 And the priests said to Potiphar, “Please send, and
let them bring before us Yosĕph’s torn garment, and
let us see the tear in it, and if it shall be that the tear is
in front of the garment, then his face must have been
opposite to her and she must have caught hold of him,
to come to her, and your wife has done all that she has
spoken with deceit.”
75 And they brought Yosĕph’s garment before the
priests who were judges, and they looked and see, the
tear was in front of Yosĕph, and all the judging priests
knew that she had pressed him. And they said, “The
judgment of death is not due to this slave for he has
done nothing, but his judgment is that he be placed in
the prison house because of the report, which through
him has gone out against your wife.”
76 And Potiphar listened to their words, and he placed
him in the prison, the place where the sovereign’s
832

JASHER

prisoners are imprisoned. And Yosĕph was in the
prison twelve years.
77 And nevertheless, his master’s wife did not turn
from him, and she did not cease from speaking to him
day after day to listen to her. And at the end of three
months Tseliqah continued going to Yosĕph to the
prison day by day, and she enticed him to listen to her.
And Tseliqah said to Yosĕph, “How long will you
remain in this house? But listen now to my voice, and
I will bring you out of this house.”
78 And Yosĕph answered her, saying, “It is better for
me to remain in this house than to listen to your words,
to sin against Elohim.” And she said to him, “If you will
not perform my desire, I will pluck out your eyes, add
shackles to your feet, and deliver you into the hands of
them whom you did not know before.”
79 And Yosĕph answered her and said, “See, the
Elohim of the whole earth is able to deliver me from all
that you can do to me, for He opens the eyes of the
blind, and looses those that are bound, and watches
over all strangers who are unknown in the land.”
80 And when Tseliqah was unable to persuade
Yosĕph to listen to her, she ceased going to entice
him, but Yosĕph was still confined in the prison. And
Ya’aqoḇ the father of Yosĕph, and all his brothers who
were in the land of Kena’an still mourned and wept in
those days for the sake of Yosĕph, for Ya’aqoḇ refused
to be comforted for his son Yosĕph. And Ya’aqoḇ cried
aloud, and wept and mourned all those days.

45 And it came to be at that time in that year, which
is the year of Yosĕph’s going down to Mitsrayim after
his brothers had sold him, that Re’uḇĕn son of Ya’aqoḇ
went to Timnah and took for himself a wife - Eliyoram,
the daughter of Aḇi the Kena’anite, and he came to
her.
833

YASHAR

And Eliyoram the wife of Re’uḇĕn conceived and
bore him Ḥanoḵ, Pallu, Ḥetsron and Karmi - four sons.
And Shim’on his brother took his sister Dinah for a
wife, and she bore him Memu’ĕl, Yamin, Ohaḇ, Yaḵin
and Tsoḥar - five sons.
3 And afterward he came to Bunah the Kena’anite
woman, the same is Bunah whom Shim’on took
captive from the city of Sheḵem. And Bunah was
before Dinah and attended to her, and Shim’on came
to her, and she bore him Sha’ul.
4 And at that time Yahuḏah went to Aḏullam, and he
came to a man of Aḏullam, and his name was Ḥirah.
And Yahuḏah saw there the daughter of a man from
Kena’an, and her name was Aliyath, the daughter of
Shuwa, and he took her, and came to her. And Aliyath
bore to Yahuḏah: Ĕr, Onan and Shĕlah - three sons.
5 And Lĕwi and Yissasḵar went to the land of the
East, and they took for themselves as wives the
daughters of Yoḇaḇ son of Yoqtan, son of Ĕḇer. And
Yoḇaḇ son of Yoqtan had two daughters; the name of
the elder was Aḏina, and the name of the younger was
Ariḏah.
6 And Lĕwi took Aḏina, and Yissasḵar took Ariḏah,
and they came to the land of Kena’an, to their father’s
house. And Aḏina bore to Lĕwi: Gĕreshon, Qehath and
Merari - three sons.
7 And Ariḏah bore to Yissasḵar: Tola, Puw’ah, lyoḇ
and Shimron - four sons. And Dan went to the land of
Mo’aḇ and took for a wife Aphlaleth, the daughter of
Ḥamudan the Mo’aḇite, and he brought her to the land
of Kena’an.
8 And Aphlaleth was barren, she had no offspring.
And afterward Elohim remembered Aphlaleth the wife
of Dan, and she conceived and bore a son, and she
called his name Ḥushim.
2

834

JASHER

And Gaḏ and Naphtali went to Ḥaran and took from
there the daughters of Amuram son of Uts, son of
Naḥor, for wives.
10 And these are the names of the daughters of
Amuram: the name of the elder was Merimah, and the
name of the younger Uzith. And Naphtali took
Merimah, and Gaḏ took Uzith, and brought them to the
land of Kena’an, to their father’s house.
11 And Merimah bore to Naphtali: Yaḥtsi’ĕl, Guni,
Yĕtser and Shallum - four sons. And Uzith bore to Gaḏ:
Tsiphyon, Ḥaggi, Shuni, Etsbon, Ĕri, Aroḏi, and Arĕli seven sons.
12 And Ashĕr went out and took Addon the daughter
of Ephlal, son of Haḏaḏ, son of Yishma’ĕl, for a wife,
and he brought her to the land of Kena’an.
13 And Addon the wife of Ashĕr died in those days;
she had no offspring. And it came to be after the death
of Addon that Ashĕr went to the other side of the river
and took for a wife Haḏurah the daughter of Aḇima’ĕl,
son of Ĕḇer, son of Shĕm.
14 And the young woman was of lovely appearance,
and a woman of sense, and she had been the wife of
Malki’ĕl son of Ĕylam, son of Shĕm.
15 And Haḏurah bore a daughter to Malki’ĕl, and he
called her name Seraḥ. And Malki’ĕl died after this,
and Haḏurah went and remained in her father’s house.
16 And after the death of the wife of Ashĕr he went and
took Haḏurah for a wife, and brought her to the land of
Kena’an, and Seraḥ her daughter he also brought with
them. And she was three years old, and the maiden
was brought up in Ya’aqoḇ’s house.
17 And the maiden was of lovely appearance, and she
went in the qadosh Ways of the children of Ya’aqoḇ;
she lacked nothing, and HWHY gave her wisdom and
understanding.
9

835

YASHAR

And Haḏurah the wife of Ashĕr conceived and bore
to him Yimnah, Yishwah, Yishwi and Beri’ah - four
sons.
19 And Zeḇulun went to Miḏyan, and took for a wife:
Merishah the daughter of Molad, son of Aḇiḏa, son of
Miḏyan, and brought her to the land of Kena’an.
20 And Merushah bore to Zeḇulun: Sereḏ, Ĕylon and
Yaḥle’ĕl - three sons.
21 And Ya’aqoḇ sent to Aram, son of Tsoḇa, son of
Teraḥ, and he took for his son Binyamin: Meḥolyah the
daughter of Aram, and she came to the land of
Kena’an to the house of Ya’aqoḇ. And Binyamin was
ten years old when he took Meḥolyah the daughter of
Aram for a wife.
22 And Meḥolyah conceived and bore to Binyamin:
Bela, Beḵer, Ashbĕl, Gĕra and Na’aman - five sons.
And afterward Binyamin went and took for a wife:
Aribath, the daughter of Shimron, son of Aḇraham, in
addition to his first wife. And he was eighteen years
old, and Aribath bore to Binyamin: Ĕḥi, Rosh, Muppim,
Ḥuppim, and Ard - five sons.
23 And in those days Yahuḏah went to the house of
Shĕm and took Tamar the daughter of Ĕylam, son of
Shĕm, as a wife for his first-born Ĕr.
24 And Ĕr came to his wife Tamar, and she became
his wife. And when he came to her he outwardly
destroyed his seed, and his work was evil in the eyes
of HWHY, and HWHY slew him.
25 And it came to be after the death of Ĕr, Yahuḏah’s
first-born, that Yahuḏah said to Onan, “Go to your
brother’s wife and marry her as the next of kin, and
raise up seed to your brother.”
26 And Onan took Tamar for a wife and he came to
her, and Onan also did like the deed of his brother. And
what he did was evil in the eyes of HWHY, and He slew
him also.
18

836

JASHER

And when Onan died, Yahuḏah said to Tamar,
“Remain in your father’s house until my son Shĕlah
has grown up.” And Yahuḏah no longer delighted in
Tamar, to give her to Shĕlah, for he said, “Maybe he
will also die like his brothers.”
28 And Tamar rose up and went and remained in her
father’s house, and Tamar was in her father’s house
for some time.
29 And at the turn of the year, Aliyath the wife of
Yahuḏah died, and Yahuḏah was comforted for his
wife. And after the death of Aliyath, Yahuḏah went up
with his friend Ḥirah to Timnah to shear their sheep.
30 And Tamar heard that Yahuḏah had gone up to
Timnah to shear the sheep, and that Shĕlah was
grown up, and Yahuḏah did not delight in her.
31 And Tamar rose up and put off the garments of her
widowhood, and she put a veil on herself, and entirely
covered herself. And she went and sat on the way,
which is on the way to Timnah.
32 And Yahuḏah passed and saw her and took her
and he came to her, and she conceived by him. And at
the time of being delivered, see, there were twins in
her womb, and he called the name of the first Perez,
and the name of the second Zeraḥ.
27

46 In those days Yosĕph was still confined in the
prison in the land of Mitsrayim.
2 At that time the attendants of Pharaoh were
standing before him - the chief cupbearer and the chief
baker - which belonged to the sovereign of Mitsrayim.
3 And the cupbearer took wine and placed it before
the sovereign to drink, and the baker placed bread
before the sovereign to eat. And the sovereign drank
of the wine and ate of the bread - he and his servants
and attendants that ate at the sovereign’s table.
4 And while they were eating and drinking, the
cupbearer and the baker remained there, and
837

YASHAR

Pharaoh’s attendants found many flies in the wine,
which the cupbearer had brought, and soda stones
were found in the baker’s bread.
5 And the captain of the guard placed Yosĕph as an
attendant on Pharaoh’s officers, and Pharaoh’s
officers were in confinement one year.
6 And at the end of the year, they both dreamed
dreams in one night, in the prison where they were.
And in the morning Yosĕph came to them to attend to
them as usual, and he looked at them, and see, their
appearances were troubled and sad.
7 And Yosĕph asked them, “Why do you look sad and
troubled today?” and they said to him, “We dreamed a
dream, but there is no one to interpret it.” And Yosĕph
said to them, “Please relate your dream to me, and
Elohim shall give you an answer of peace as you
desire.”
8 And the cupbearer related his dream to Yosĕph,
and he said, “I looked in my dream, and see, a large
vine was before me, and on that vine I saw three
branches. And the vine speedily blossomed and
reached a great height, and its clusters were ripened
and became grapes.
9 And I took the grapes and pressed them into a cup,
and placed it into Pharaoh’s hand and he drank.” And
Yosĕph said to him, “The three branches that were on
the vine are three days.
10 “Yet within three days, the sovereign will order you
to be brought out and he will restore you to your office,
and you shall give the sovereign his wine to drink as at
first when you were his cupbearer. But let me find
favour in your sight, that you shall remember me to
Pharaoh when it will be well with you, and do kindness
unto me, and get me brought out from this prison. For
I was stolen away from the land of Kena’an and was
sold for a slave in this place.
838

JASHER

“And also that which was told you concerning my
master’s wife is false, for they placed me in this
dungeon for naught.” And the cupbearer answered
Yosĕph, saying, “If the sovereign deals well with me as
at first, as you last interpreted to me, I will do all that
you desire, and get you brought out of this dungeon.”
12 And the baker, seeing that Yosĕph had accurately
interpreted the cupbearer’s dream, also approached,
and related the whole of his dream to Yosĕph.
13 And he said to him, “In my dream I looked and see,
three white baskets on my head. And I looked, and
see, there were in the upper-most basket all manner of
baked goods for Pharaoh, and see, the birds were
eating them from off my head.”
14 And Yosĕph said to him, “The three baskets which
you saw are three days. Yet within three days,
Pharaoh will take off your head, and hang you upon a
tree, and the birds will eat your flesh from off you, as
you saw in your dream.”
15 In those days the sovereigness was about to give
birth, and on that day she bore a son to the sovereign
of Mitsrayim. And they proclaimed that the sovereign
had brought forth his first-born son and all the people
of Mitsrayim, together with the officers and servants of
Pharaoh rejoiced greatly.
16 And on the third day of his birth, Pharaoh made a
feast for his officers and servants, for the hosts of the
land of Tso’ar and of the land of Mitsrayim.
17 And all the people of Mitsrayim and the servants of
Pharaoh came to eat and drink with the sovereign at
the feast of his son, and to rejoice at the sovereign’s
rejoicing.
18 And all the officers of the sovereign and his
servants were rejoicing at that time for eight days of
the feast, and they rejoiced with all kinds of musical
instruments, with timbrels and with dances in the
sovereign’s house for eight days.
11

839

YASHAR

And the cupbearer, to whom Yosĕph had
interpreted his dream, forgot Yosĕph, and he did not
mention him to the sovereign as he had promised, for
this matter was from HWHY in order to punish Yosĕph
because he had trusted in man.
20 And after this Yosĕph remained in the prison two
years, until he had completed twelve years.
19

47 And Yitsḥaq son of Aḇraham was still living in the
land of Kena’an in those days. He was very aged - one
hundred and eighty years old. And Ĕsaw his son, the
brother of Ya’aqoḇ, was in the land of Eḏom, and he
and his sons had possessions in it among the children
of Sĕ’ir.
2 And Ĕsaw heard that his father’s time was drawing
near to die, and he and his sons and household came
to the land of Kena’an, to his father’s house. And
Ya’aqoḇ and his sons went out from the place where
they dwelt in Ḥeḇron, and they all came to their father
Yitsḥaq, and they found Ĕsaw and his sons in the tent.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons sat before his father
Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ was still mourning for his son
Yosĕph.
4 And Yitsḥaq said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Bring me your sons
here and I will baraḵ them.” And Ya’aqoḇ brought his
eleven children before his father Yitsḥaq.
5 And Yitsḥaq placed his hands on all the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, and he took hold of them and embraced
them, and kissed them one by one. And Yitsḥaq baraḵ
them on that day, and he said to them, “May the Elohim
of your fathers baraḵ you and increase your seed like
the stars of the shamayim for number.”
6 And Yitsḥaq also baraḵ the sons of Ĕsaw, saying,
“May Elohim cause you to be a dread and a fear to all
that will see you, and to all your enemies.”
7 And Yitsḥaq called Ya’aqoḇ and his sons, and they
all came and sat before Yitsḥaq. And Yitsḥaq said to
840

JASHER

Ya’aqoḇ, “HWHY Elohim of the whole earth said to me,
‘To your seed I will give this land for an inheritance if
your children keep My Laws and My Ways, and I will
establish unto them the oath which I swore to your
father Aḇraham.’
8 “Now therefore my son, teach your children and
your children’s children to revere HWHY, and to go in
the good Way which will please HWHY your Elohim. For
if you keep the Ways of HWHY and His Laws, HWHY will
also guard to you His Covenant with Aḇraham, and will
do well with you and your seed all the days.”
9 And when Yitsḥaq had finished commanding
Ya’aqoḇ and his children, he breathed his last and
died, and was gathered to his people.
10 And Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw fell on the face of their
father Yitsḥaq, and they wept. And Yitsḥaq was one
hundred and eighty years old when he died in the land
of Kena’an, in Ḥeḇron, and his sons carried him to the
cave of Maḵpĕlah, which Aḇraham had bought from
the children of Ḥĕth for a possession as a burial place.
11 And all the sovereigns of the land of Kena’an went
with Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw to bury Yitsḥaq, and all the
sovereigns of Kena’an showed Yitsḥaq great honour
at his death.
12 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and the sons of Ĕsaw
went barefoot round about, walking and lamenting until
they reached Qiryath Arba.
13 And Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw buried their father Yitsḥaq
in the cave of Maḵpĕlah, which is in Qiryath Arba in
Ḥeḇron, and they buried him with very great honour,
as at the burial of sovereigns.
14 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons, and Ĕsaw and his sons,
and all the sovereigns of Kena’an made a great and
heavy lamentation, and they buried him and mourned
for him many days.
15 And at the death of Yitsḥaq, he left his cattle and
his possessions and all belonging to him to his sons.
841

YASHAR

And Ĕsaw said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Please see, all that our
father has left we will divide in two parts, and I will have
the choice.” And Ya’aqoḇ said, “We will do so.”
16 And Ya’aqoḇ took all that Yitsḥaq had left in the
land of Kena’an - the cattle and the property - and he
placed them in two parts before Ĕsaw and his sons.
And he said to Ĕsaw, “See, all this is before you,
choose for yourself the half which you will take.”
17 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Ĕsaw, “Please hear what I will
speak to you,” saying, “HWHY Elohim of the shamayim
and earth spoke to our fathers Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq,
saying, ‘To your seed I will give this land as an
inheritance forever.’
18 “Now therefore, all that our father has left is before
you, and see, all the land is before you. Choose from
them what you desire.
19 “If you desire the whole land, take it for you and
your children forever, and I will take this wealth. But if
you desire the wealth, take it for yourself, and I will take
this land for me and for my children to inherit it forever.”
20 And Neḇayoth, son of Yishma’ĕl, was then in the
land with his children, and Ĕsaw went on that day and
consulted with him, saying,
21 “Thus has Ya’aqoḇ spoken to me, and thus he has
answered me. Now give your advice and we will hear.”
22 And Neḇayoth said, “What is this that Ya’aqoḇ has
spoken to you? See, all the children of Kena’an are
dwelling safely in their land, and Ya’aqoḇ says he will
inherit it with his seed all the days.
23 “Go now therefore and take all your father’s wealth
and leave Ya’aqoḇ your brother in the land, as he has
spoken.”
24 And Ĕsaw rose up and returned to Ya’aqoḇ, and did
all that Neḇayoth son of Yishma’ĕl had advised. And
Ĕsaw took all the riches that Yitsḥaq had left - the
beings, the beasts, the cattle and the property, and all
the wealth; he gave nothing to his brother Ya’aqoḇ.
842

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ took all the land of Kena’an, from the
wadi of Mitsrayim to the river Perath, and he took it for
an everlasting possession, and for his children and for
his seed after him forever.
25 Ya’aqoḇ also took from his brother Ĕsaw the cave
of Maḵpĕlah, which is in Ḥeḇron, which Aḇraham had
bought from Ephron for a possession as a burial place
for him and his seed forever.
26 And Ya’aqoḇ wrote all these matters in the book of
purchase, and he signed it, and he witnessed all this
with four trustworthy witnesses.
27 And these are the words which Ya’aqoḇ wrote in
the book, saying: The land of Kena’an and all the cities
of the Ḥittites, the Ḥiwwites, the Yeḇusites, the
Amorites, the Perizzites, and the Girgashites - all the
seven nations from the river of Mitsrayim to the river
Perath –
28 and the city of Ḥeḇron, Qiryath Arba, and the cave
which is in it, the whole Ya’aqoḇ bought from his
brother Ĕsaw for value, for a possession and as an
inheritance for his seed after him forever.
29 And Ya’aqoḇ took the book of purchase and the
signature, the Command and the Laws and the
revealed Book, and he placed them in an earthen
vessel in order that they should remain for a long time.
And he delivered them into the hands of his children.
30 Ĕsaw took all that his father had left him after his
death from his brother Ya’aqoḇ, and he took all the
property, from man and beast, camel and donkey, ox
and lamb, silver and gold, stones and bdellium, and all
the wealth which had belonged to Yitsḥaq son of
Aḇraham. There was nothing left which Ĕsaw did not
take for himself, from all that Yitsḥaq had left after his
death.
31 And Ĕsaw took all this, and he and his children went
home to the land of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite, away from his
brother Ya’aqoḇ and his children.
843

YASHAR

And Ĕsaw had possessions among the children of
Sĕ’ir, and Ĕsaw did not return to the land of Kena’an
from that day onward.
33 And the whole land of Kena’an became an
inheritance to the children of Yisra’ĕl as an everlasting
inheritance, and Ĕsaw with all his children inherited the
mountain of Sĕ’ir.
32

48 In those days, after the death of Yitsḥaq, HWHY
commanded and caused a scarcity of food on the
whole earth.
2 At that time Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim was
sitting on his throne in the land of Mitsrayim, and lay in
his bed and dreamed dreams. And Pharaoh saw in his
dream that he was standing by the bank of the river of
Mitsrayim.
3 And while he was standing he looked and see,
seven fat and fine looking cows came up out of the
river.
4 And seven other cows, lean of flesh and ugly, came
up after them, and the seven ugly ones swallowed up
the fine looking ones, but their appearance was still
ugly as at first.
5 And he awoke, and he slept again and he dreamed
a second time. And he looked and see, seven heads
of grain came up on one stalk, complete and good, and
seven lean heads scorched by the east wind sprang
up after them, and the lean heads swallowed up the
full ones. And Pharaoh awoke out of his dream.
6 And in the morning the sovereign remembered his
dreams, and his spirit was sadly troubled because of
his dreams. And the sovereign hastened and sent and
called for all the magicians of Mitsrayim, and the wise
men, and they came and stood before Pharaoh.
7 And the sovereign said to them, “I have dreamed
dreams, and there is none to interpret them.” And they
844

JASHER

said to the sovereign, “Relate your dreams to your
servants and let us hear them.”
8 And the sovereign related his dreams to them, and
they all answered and said with one voice to the
sovereign, “May the sovereign live forever! And this is
the interpretation of your dreams:
9 “The seven good cows which you saw signify seven
daughters that will be born to you in the latter days,
and the seven cows which you saw come up after
them, and swallowed them up, are for a sign that the
daughters which will be born to you will all die in the
lifetime of the sovereign.
10 “And that which you saw in the second dream of
seven complete good heads of grain coming up on one
stalk, this is their interpretation: that you will build for
yourself in the latter days seven cities throughout the
land of Mitsrayim. And that which you saw of the seven
blasted heads of grain springing up after them and
swallowing them up while you saw them with your
eyes, is for a sign that the cities which you will build will
all be destroyed in the latter days, in the lifetime of the
sovereign.”
11 And when they spoke these words the sovereign
did not incline his ear to their words, neither did he fix
his heart on them, for the sovereign knew in his
wisdom that they did not give a proper interpretation of
the dreams. And when they had finished speaking
before the sovereign, the sovereign answered them,
saying, “What is this matter that you have spoken to
me? Indeed you have spoken falsehood and spoken
lies! Now therefore, give the proper interpretation of
my dreams, that you may not die.”
12 And the sovereign commanded after this, and he
sent and called again for other wise men, and they
came and stood before the sovereign. And the
sovereign related his dreams to them, and they all
answered him according to the first interpretation. And
845

YASHAR

the sovereign’s wrath was kindled and he was very
wroth, and the sovereign said to them, “Indeed you
speak lies and speak falsehood in what you have
said!”
13 And the sovereign commanded that a decree
should be made throughout the land of Mitsrayim,
saying, “It is determined by the sovereign and his great
men, that any wise man who knows and understands
the interpretation of dreams, and will not come before
the sovereign this day shall die.
14 “And to the man that will declare to the sovereign
the proper interpretation of his dreams, there shall be
given him all that he will require from the sovereign.”
And all the wise men of the land of Mitsrayim came
before the sovereign, together with all the magicians
and sorcerers that were in Mitsrayim and in Goshen,
in Ra’meses, in Taḥpanḥes, in Tso’ar, and in all the
places on the borders of Mitsrayim, and they all stood
before the sovereign.
15 And all the nobles and the princes, and the
attendants belonging to the sovereign, came together
from all the cities of Mitsrayim, and they all sat before
the sovereign. And the sovereign related his dreams
before the wise men, and the princes, and all that sat
before the sovereign were astonished at the vision.
16 And all the wise men who were before the
sovereign were greatly divided in their interpretation of
his dreams; some of them interpreted them to the
sovereign, saying, “The seven good cows are seven
sovereigns, who from the sovereign’s issue will be
raised over Mitsrayim.
17 “And the seven ugly cows are seven princes, who
will stand up against them in the latter days and
destroy them. And the seven heads of grain are the
seven great princes belonging to Mitsrayim, who will
fall into the hands of the seven less powerful princes
846

JASHER

of their enemies, in the battles of our master the
sovereign.”
18 And some of them interpreted to the sovereign in
this manner, saying, “The seven good cows are the
strong cities of Mitsrayim, and the seven ugly cows are
the seven nations of the land of Kena’an, who will
come against the seven cities of Mitsrayim in the latter
days and destroy them.
19 “And that which you saw in the second dream, of
seven good and bad heads of grain, is a sign that the
reign of Mitsrayim will again return to your seed as at
first.
20 “And in his reign the people of the cities of
Mitsrayim will turn against the seven cities of Kena’an
who are stronger than they are, and will destroy them,
and the reign of Mitsrayim will return to your seed.”
21 And some of them said to the sovereign, “This is
the interpretation of your dreams: the seven good
cows are seven sovereignesses, whom you will take
for wives in the latter days, and the seven ugly cows
signify that those women will all die in the lifetime of
the sovereign.
22 “And the seven good and bad heads of grain which
you saw in the second dream are fourteen children.
And it will be in the latter days that they will stand up
and fight among themselves, and seven of them will
smite the seven that are more powerful.”
23 And some of them spoke these words to the
sovereign, saying, “The seven good cows signify that
seven children will be born to you, but they will slay
seven of your children’s children in the latter days. And
the seven good heads of grain which you saw in the
second dream, are those princes against whom seven
other less powerful princes will fight and destroy them
in the latter days, and avenge your children’s cause,
and the reign will again return to your seed.”
847

YASHAR

And the sovereign heard all the words of the wise
men of Mitsrayim and their interpretation of his
dreams, but none of them pleased the sovereign.
25 And the sovereign knew in his wisdom that they did
not altogether speak rightly in all these words, for this
was from HWHY to overturn the words of the wise men
of Mitsrayim, in order that Yosĕph might go out from
the prison, and in order that he should become great
in Mitsrayim.
26 And the sovereign saw that none among all the
wise men and magicians of Mitsrayim spoke rightly to
him, and the sovereign’s wrath was kindled, and his
wrath burned within him.
27 And the sovereign commanded that all the wise
men and magicians should go out from before him.
And they all went out from before the sovereign with
shame and disgrace.
28 And the sovereign commanded that a decree be
sent throughout Mitsrayim to slay all the magicians that
were in Mitsrayim, and not one of them should be
allowed to live.
29 And the captains of the guards belonging to the
sovereign rose up, and each man drew his sword, and
they began to smite the magicians of Mitsrayim, and
the wise men.
30 And after this Meroḏ, chief cupbearer to the
sovereign, came and bowed down before the
sovereign and sat before him.
31 And the cupbearer said to the sovereign, “May the
sovereign live forever, and his reign be exalted in the
land!
32 “You were wroth with your servant in those days,
now two years past, and placed me in confinement,
and I was for some time in confinement, the chief baker
and I.
33 “And there was with us an Iḇri servant belonging to
the captain of the guard - his name was Yosĕph - for
24

848

JASHER

his master had been wroth with him and placed him in
the prison, and he attended us there.
34 “And in some time after when we were in
confinement, we dreamed dreams in one night, the
chief baker and I. We dreamed, each man according
to the interpretation of his dream.
35 “And we came in the morning and told them to that
servant, and he interpreted to us our dreams. To each
man according to his dream, he rightly interpreted.
36 “And it came to be as he interpreted to us, so was
the event; there were not any of his words that fell to
the ground.
37 “And now therefore my master and sovereign, do
not slay the people of Mitsrayim for naught. See, that
slave is still imprisoned in the house by the captain of
the guard, his master in the prison.
38 “If it pleases the sovereign let him send for him that
he may come before you, and he will make known to
you the right interpretation of the dream which you
dreamed.”
39 And the sovereign heard the words of the chief
cupbearer, and the sovereign ordered that the wise
men of Mitsrayim should not be slain.
40 And the sovereign ordered his servants to bring
Yosĕph before him, and the sovereign said to them,
“Go to him and do not frighten him lest he be confused
and will not know to speak properly.”
41 And the servants of the sovereign went to Yosĕph,
and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon. And
the sovereign’s servants shaved him, and he changed
his prison garment and he came before the sovereign.
42 And the sovereign was sitting on his royal throne in
a princely dress girded around with a golden shoulder
garment. And the fine gold which was on it sparkled,
and the emerald and the ruby and the turquoise,
together with all the precious stones that were on the
849

YASHAR

sovereign’s head, dazzled the eye. And Yosĕph
wondered greatly at the sovereign.
43 And the throne on which the sovereign sat was
covered with gold and silver, and with shoham stones,
and it had seventy steps.
44 And it was their custom throughout the land of
Mitsrayim, that every man who came to speak to the
sovereign, if he was a prince or one that was esteemed
in the sight of the sovereign, he went up to the
sovereign’s throne as far as the thirty-first step, and the
sovereign would go down to the thirty-sixth step, and
speak with him.
45 If he was one of the common people, he went up to
the third step, and the sovereign would go down to the
fourth and speak to him. And their custom was,
moreover, that any man who understood to speak in
all the seventy languages, he went up the seventy
steps, and went up till he reached the sovereign and
spoke.
46 And any man who could not complete the seventy,
he went up as many steps as the languages which he
knew to speak in.
47 And it was customary in those days in Mitsrayim
that no one should reign over them, but one who
understood to speak in the seventy languages.
48 And when Yosĕph came before the sovereign he
bowed down to the ground before the sovereign, and
he went up to the third step, and the sovereign sat on
the fourth step and spoke with Yosĕph.
49 And the sovereign said to Yosĕph, “I dreamed a
dream, and there is no interpreter to interpret it
properly, and I commanded this day that all the
magicians of Mitsrayim and the wise men thereof,
should come before me, and I related my dreams to
them, and no one has properly interpreted them to me.

850

JASHER

“And after this, I heard this day concerning you, that
you are a wise man, and can rightly interpret every
dream that you hear.”
51 And Yosĕph answered Pharaoh, saying, “Let
Pharaoh relate his dreams that he dreamed; indeed
the interpretations belong to Elohim.” And Pharaoh
related his dreams to Yosĕph, the dream of the cows,
and the dream of the heads of grain, and the sovereign
said no more.
52 And Yosĕph was then clothed with the Ruaḥ of
Elohim before the sovereign, and he knew all the
matters that would befall the sovereign from that day
on, and he knew the right interpretation of the
sovereign’s dream, and he spoke before the
sovereign.
53 And Yosĕph found favour in the sight of the
sovereign, and the sovereign inclined his ears and his
heart, and he heard all the words of Yosĕph. And
Yosĕph said to the sovereign, “Do not think that they
are two dreams, for it is only one dream. For that which
Elohim has chosen to do throughout the land He has
shown to the sovereign in his dream, and this is the
right interpretation of your dream:
54 “The seven good cows and heads of grain are
seven years, and the seven ugly cows and heads of
grain are also seven years; it is one dream.
55 “See, in the seven years that are coming there will
be a great plenty throughout the land, and after that
the seven years of scarcity of food will follow them, a
very grievous scarcity of food. And all the plenty will be
forgotten from the land, and the scarcity of food will
consume the inhabitants of the land.
56 “The sovereign dreamed one dream, and the
dream was therefore repeated to Pharaoh because the
matter is established by Elohim, and Elohim will shortly
bring it to pass.
50

851

YASHAR

“Now therefore I will give you counsel and deliver
your being and the beings of the inhabitants of the land
from the evil of the scarcity of food: that you seek
throughout your reign for a man very discerning and
wise, who knows all the affairs of a reign, and appoint
him as overseer over the land of Mitsrayim.
58 “And let the man whom you place over Mitsrayim
appoint officers under him, that they gather in all the
food of the good years that are coming, and let them
lay up grain and deposit it in your appointed stores.
59 “And let them keep that food for the seven years of
scarcity of food, that it may be found for you and your
people and your whole land, and that you and your
land not be cut off by the scarcity of food.
60 “Let all the inhabitants of the land, every man, also
be ordered that they gather in the produce of his field,
of all kinds of food during the seven good years, and
that they place it in their stores, that it may be found
for them in the days of the scarcity of food and that
they may live on it.
61 “This is the proper interpretation of your dream, and
this is the counsel given to save your being and the
beings of all your subjects.”
62 And the sovereign answered and said to Yosĕph,
“Who says, and who knows that your words are right?”
And he said to the sovereign, “This shall be a sign for
you regarding all my words, that they are true and that
my advice is good for you:
63 “Behold your wife sits this day upon the birth-stool,
and she will bear you a son and you will rejoice with
him. When your child shall have come out from his
mother’s womb, your first-born son that has been born
two years ago shall die, and you will be comforted in
the child that will be born to you this day.”
64 And Yosĕph finished speaking these words to the
sovereign, and he bowed down to the sovereign and
he went out. And when Yosĕph had gone out from the
57

852

JASHER

sovereign’s presence, the signs which Yosĕph had
spoken to the sovereign came to be on that day.
65 And the sovereigness bore a son on that day, and
the sovereign heard the good news about his son, and
he rejoiced. And when the reporter had gone out from
the sovereign’s presence, the sovereign’s servants
found the first-born son of the sovereign fallen dead on
the ground.
66 And there was great lamentation and noise in the
sovereign’s house, and the sovereign heard it, and he
said, “What is this noise and lamentation that I have
heard in the house?” and they told the sovereign that
his first-born son had died; then the sovereign knew
that all Yosĕph’s words that he had spoken were true,
and the sovereign was comforted for his son by the
child that was born to him on that day as Yosĕph had
spoken.

49 After these matters the sovereign sent and
assembled all his officers and servants, and all the
princes and nobles of the sovereign, and they all came
before the sovereign.
2 And the sovereign said to them, “Look, you have
seen and heard all the words of this Iḇri, and all the
signs which he declared would come to be, and not
any of his words have fallen to the ground.
3 “You know that he has given a right interpretation
of the dream, and it will indeed come to be. Now
therefore take counsel, and know what you will do and
how the land will be delivered from the scarcity of food.
4 “Seek now and see whether the like can be found,
in whose heart there is wisdom and knowledge, and I
will appoint him over the land.
5 “For you have heard with what the Iḇri has advised
concerning this to save the land from the scarcity of
food, and I know that the land will not be delivered from
853

YASHAR

the scarcity of food except by the advice of the Iḇri, him
that advised me.”
6 And they all answered the sovereign and said, “The
counsel which the Iḇri has given concerning this is
good. Now therefore, our master and sovereign, see,
the whole land is in your hand, do that which seems
good in your eyes.
7 “He whom you choose, and whom you in your
wisdom knows to be wise and capable of delivering the
land with his wisdom, him shall the sovereign appoint
to be under him over the land.”
8 And the sovereign said to all the officers, “I have
thought that since Elohim has made known to the Iḇri
all that he has spoken, there is none so discerning and
wise in the whole land as he is. If it seems good in your
eyes, I will place him over the land, for he will save the
land with his wisdom.”
9 And all the officers answered the sovereign and
said, “But indeed it is written in the laws of Mitsrayim,
and it should not be violated, that no man shall reign
over Mitsrayim, nor be the second to the sovereign, but
one who has knowledge in all the languages of the
sons of men.
10 “Now therefore our master and sovereign, see, this
Iḇri can only speak the Iḇri language, and how then
can he be over us, the second under reign, a man who
not even knows our language?
11 “Now please send for him, and let him come before
you, and prove him in all matters, and do as you see
fit.”
12 And the sovereign said, “It shall be done tomorrow,
and the word that you have spoken is good.” And all
the officers came on that day before the sovereign.
13 And on that night HWHY sent one of his ministering
messengers, and he came into the land of Mitsrayim
to Yosĕph. And the messenger of HWHY stood over
Yosĕph, and see, Yosĕph was lying in the bed at night
854

JASHER

in his master’s house in the dungeon, for his master
had put him back into the dungeon because of his wife.
14 And the messenger roused him from his sleep, and
Yosĕph rose up and stood on his feet, and see, the
messenger of HWHY was standing opposite to him. And
the messenger of HWHY spoke with Yosĕph, and he
taught him all the languages of man in that night, and
he called his name Yahosĕph.
15 And the messenger of HWHY went from him, and
Yosĕph returned and lay on his bed, and Yosĕph was
astonished at the vision which he saw.
16 And it came to be in the morning that the sovereign
sent for all his officers and servants, and they all came
and sat before the sovereign. And the sovereign
ordered Yosĕph to be brought, and the sovereign’s
servants went and brought Yosĕph before Pharaoh.
17 And the sovereign came out and went up the steps
of the throne, and Yosĕph spoke to the sovereign in all
languages, and Yosĕph went up to him and spoke to
the sovereign until he arrived before the sovereign on
the seventieth step, and he sat before the sovereign.
18 And the sovereign greatly rejoiced because of
Yosĕph, and all the sovereign’s officers rejoiced
greatly with the sovereign when they heard all the
words of Yosĕph.
19 And the word seemed good in the eyes of the
sovereign and the officers, to appoint Yosĕph to be
second to the sovereign over the whole land of
Mitsrayim, and the sovereign spoke to Yosĕph, saying,
20 “Now you gave me counsel to appoint a wise man
over the land of Mitsrayim, in order with his wisdom to
save the land from the scarcity of food. Now therefore,
since Elohim has made all this known to you, and all
the words which you have spoken, throughout the land
there is not a discerning and wise man like you.
21 “And no more shall your name be called Yosĕph,
but Tsaphnath Pa’nĕaḥ shall be your name. You shall
855

YASHAR

be second to me, and according to your word shall be
all the affairs of my reign, and at your word shall my
people go out and come in.
22 “Also from under your hand shall my servants and
officers receive their salary which is given to them
monthly, and to you shall all the people of the land bow
down; only in my throne will I be greater than you.”
23 And the sovereign took off his ring from his hand
and put it on the hand of Yosĕph, and the sovereign
dressed Yosĕph in a princely garment, and he put a
golden crown on his head, and he put a golden chain
on his neck.
24 And the sovereign commanded his servants, and
they made him ride in the second chariot belonging to
the sovereign, that went opposite to the sovereign’s
chariot. And he caused him to ride upon a great and
strong horse from the sovereign’s horses, and to be
conducted through the streets of the land of Mitsrayim.
25 And the sovereign commanded that all those that
played on timbrels, harps and other musical
instruments should go out with Yosĕph: one thousand
timbrels, one thousand dancers, and one thousand
lyres went after him,
26 and five thousand men, with drawn swords
glittering in their hands. And they went marching and
playing before Yosĕph, and twenty thousand of the
great men of the sovereign girded with girdles of skin
covered with gold marched at the right hand of
Yosĕph, and twenty thousand at his left. And all the
women and maidens went up on the roofs or stood in
the streets playing and rejoicing at Yosĕph, and gazed
at the appearance of Yosĕph and at his good looks.
27 And the sovereign’s people went before him and
behind him, perfuming the way with frankincense and
with cassia, and with all kinds of fine perfume, and
scattered myrrh and aloes along the way. And twenty
856

JASHER

men proclaimed these words before him throughout
the land in a loud voice:
28 “Do you see this man whom the sovereign has
chosen to be his second? All the affairs of the reign
shall be governed by him, and he that transgresses his
orders, or that does not bow down before him to the
ground, shall die, for he rebels against the sovereign
and his second.”
29 And when the heralds had ceased proclaiming, all
the people of Mitsrayim bowed down to the ground
before Yosĕph and said, “May the sovereign live! Also
may his second live!” And all the inhabitants of
Mitsrayim bowed down along the way, and when the
heralds approached them, they bowed down, and they
rejoiced with all kinds of timbrels, flute and lyre before
Yosĕph.
30 And on his horse, Yosĕph lifted up his eyes to the
shamayim, and called out and said, “He raises the poor
man from the dust, He lifts up the needy from the
dunghill. O HWHY of hosts, baruḵ is the man who trusts
in You.”
31 And Yosĕph passed throughout the land of
Mitsrayim with Pharaoh’s servants and officers, and
they showed him the whole land of Mitsrayim and all
the sovereign’s treasures.
32 And Yosĕph returned and came on that day before
Pharaoh, and the sovereign gave to Yosĕph a
possession in the land of Mitsrayim; a possession of
fields and vineyards. And the sovereign gave to
Yosĕph three thousand kiḵars of silver and one
thousand kiḵars of gold, and shoham stones and
bdellium and many gifts.
33 And on the next day the sovereign commanded all
the people of Mitsrayim to bring to Yosĕph offerings
and gifts, and that he that violated the command of the
sovereign should die. And they made a high place in
the street of the city, and they spread out garments
857

YASHAR

there, and whoever brought anything to Yosĕph put it
onto the high place.
34 And all the people of Mitsrayim threw something
onto the high place, one man a golden earring, and the
other rings and amulets, and different vessels of gold
and silver work, and shoham stones and bdellium he
cast upon the high place; every one gave something
of what he possessed.
35 And Yosĕph took all these and placed them in his
treasuries, and all the officers and nobles belonging to
the sovereign exalted Yosĕph, and they gave him
many gifts, seeing that the sovereign had chosen him
to be his second.
36 And the sovereign sent to Poti-Phera, son of
Aḥiram priest of On, and he took his young daughter
Asenath and gave her to Yosĕph for a wife.
37 And the maiden was very lovely - a maiden - one
whom man had not known, and Yosĕph took her for a
wife. And the sovereign said to Yosĕph, “I am Pharaoh,
and beside you none shall dare to lift up his hand or
his foot to govern my people throughout the land of
Mitsrayim.”
38 And Yosĕph was thirty years old when he stood
before Pharaoh, and Yosĕph went out from before the
sovereign, and he became the sovereign’s second in
Mitsrayim.
39 And the sovereign gave Yosĕph a hundred
servants to attend him in his house, and Yosĕph also
sent and purchased many servants and they remained
in the house of Yosĕph.
40 Yosĕph then built for himself a very magnificent
house like the houses of sovereigns, before the court
of the sovereign’s palace. And he made in the house a
large palace, very elegant in appearance and spacious
for his dwelling. Yosĕph was three years in building his
house.
858

JASHER

And Yosĕph made for himself a very elegant throne
of a great amount of gold and silver, and he covered it
with shoham stones and bdellium. And he made on it
the likeness of the whole land of Mitsrayim, and the
likeness of the river of Mitsrayim that waters the whole
land of Mitsrayim. And Yosĕph sat safely upon his
throne in his house and HWHY increased Yosĕph’s
wisdom.
42 And all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim and Pharaoh’s
servants and his princes loved Yosĕph exceedingly,
for this matter was from HWHY to Yosĕph.
43 And Yosĕph had an army that fought, going out in
companies and divisions to the number of forty
thousand six hundred men, capable of bearing arms to
assist the sovereign and Yosĕph against the enemy,
besides the sovereign’s officers and his servants and
inhabitants of Mitsrayim without number.
44 And Yosĕph gave to his mighty men, and to all his
army, shields and spears, and helmets and scaled
armour and stones for slinging.
41

50 At that time the children of Tarshish came against
the sons of Yishma’ĕl, and fought against them, and
the children of Tarshish plundered the Yishma’ĕlites
for a long time.
2 And the children of Yishma’ĕl were small in number
in those days, and they could not prevail over the
children of Tarshish, and they were bitterly oppressed.
3 And the old men of the Yishma’ĕlites sent a record
to the sovereign of Mitsrayim, saying, “Please send to
your servants officers and armies to help us to fight
against the children of Tarshish, for we have been
consuming away for a long time.”
4 And Pharaoh sent Yosĕph with the mighty men and
army which were with him, and also his mighty men
from the sovereign’s house.
859

YASHAR

And they went to the land of Ḥawilah to the children
of Yishma’ĕl, to assist them against the children of
Tarshish. And the children of Yishma’ĕl fought with the
children of Tarshish, and Yosĕph smote the
Tarshishites and he subdued all their land, and the
children of Yishma’ĕl dwell there to this day.
6 And when the land of Tarshish was subdued, all the
Tarshishites ran away, and came to the border of their
brothers the children of Yawan, and Yosĕph with all his
mighty men and army returned to Mitsrayim, not one
man of them missing.
7 And at the turn of the year, in the second year of
Yosĕph’s reigning over Mitsrayim, HWHY gave great
plenty throughout the land for seven years as Yosĕph
had spoken, for HWHY baraḵ all the produce of the
earth in those days for seven years, and they ate and
were greatly satisfied.
8 And Yosĕph at that time had officers under him,
and they collected all the food of the good years, and
heaped grain year by year, and they placed it in the
storehouses of Yosĕph.
9 And at any time when they gathered the food,
Yosĕph commanded that they should bring the grain
in the heads, and also bring with it some of the soil of
the field, that it should not spoil.
10 And Yosĕph did according to this year by year, and
he heaped up large quantities of grain like the sand of
the sea, for his stores were immense and of such great
amount that could not be numbered.
11 And also all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim gathered
all kinds of food in their stores in great quantities during
the seven good years, but they did not do to it as
Yosĕph did.
12 And all the food which Yosĕph and the Mitsrites had
gathered during the seven years of plenty, was
secured for the land in stores for the seven years of
scarcity of food, for the support of the whole land.
5

860

JASHER

And each man of the inhabitants of Mitsrayim filled
his store and his concealed place with grain, to be for
food during the scarcity of food.
14 And Yosĕph placed all the food that he had
gathered in all the cities of Mitsrayim, and he closed all
the stores and placed watchmen over them.
15 And Yosĕph’s wife Asenath the daughter of PotiPhera bore him two sons: Menashsheh and Ephrayim.
And Yosĕph was thirty-four years old when he brought
them forth.
16 And the youths grew up and they went in His Ways
and in His Torot, they did not deviate from the Way
which their father taught them, either to the right or left.
17 And HWHY was with the youths, and they grew up
and had understanding and skill in all wisdom and in
all the affairs of the reign. And all the sovereign’s
officers and his great men of the inhabitants of
Mitsrayim exalted the lads, and they were brought up
among the sovereign’s children.
18 And the seven years of plenty that were throughout
the land were at an end, and the seven years of
scarcity of food came after them as Yosĕph had
spoken, and the scarcity of food was throughout the
land.
19 And all the people of Mitsrayim saw that the scarcity
of food had begun in the land of Mitsrayim, and all the
people of Mitsrayim opened their stores of grain for the
scarcity of food was severe upon them.
20 And they found all the food that was in their stores,
full of rats and not fit to eat. And the scarcity of food
was severe throughout the land, and all the inhabitants
of Mitsrayim came and cried before Pharaoh, for the
scarcity of food was heavy upon them.
21 And they said to Pharaoh, “Give food to your
servants, and why shall we die through hunger before
your eyes, even we and our little ones?”
13

861

YASHAR

And Pharaoh answered them, saying, “And why do
you cry to me? Did Yosĕph not command that the grain
should be laid up during the seven years of plenty for
the years of scarcity of food? And why did you not
listen to his voice?”
23 And the people of Mitsrayim answered the
sovereign, saying, “As your being lives, our master,
your servants have done all that Yosĕph ordered, for
your servants also gathered in all the produce of their
fields during the seven years of plenty and laid it in the
stores to this day.
24 “And when the scarcity of food was severe on your
servants we opened our stores, and look, all our
produce was filled with rats and was not fit for food.”
25 And when the sovereign heard all that had befallen
the inhabitants of Mitsrayim, the sovereign was greatly
afraid because of the scarcity of food, and he feared
greatly. And the sovereign answered the people of
Mitsrayim, saying, “Since all this has come upon you,
go to Yosĕph, do whatever he shall say to you, do not
transgress his commands.”
26 And all the people of Mitsrayim went out and came
to Yosĕph, and said to him, “Give food to us, and why
should we die before you from hunger? For we
gathered in our produce during the seven years as you
commanded, and we put it in store, and thus has it
befallen us.”
27 And when Yosĕph heard all the words of the people
of Mitsrayim and what had befallen them, Yosĕph
opened all his stores of the produce and he sold it to
the people of Mitsrayim.
28 And the scarcity of food was severe throughout the
land, and the scarcity of food was in all countries, but
in the land of Mitsrayim there was produce for sale.
29 And all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim came to
Yosĕph to buy grain, for the scarcity of food was
22

862

JASHER

severe on them, and all their grain was spoiled. And
Yosĕph daily sold it to all the people of Mitsrayim.
30 And all the inhabitants of the land of Kena’an and
the Pelishtites, and those beyond the Yardĕn, and the
children of the East and all the cities of the lands far
and near heard that there was grain in Mitsrayim, and
they all came to Mitsrayim to buy grain, for the scarcity
of food was severe on them.
31 And Yosĕph opened the stores of grain and placed
officers over them, and they stood daily and sold to all
that came.
32 And Yosĕph knew that his brothers would also
come to Mitsrayim to buy grain, for the scarcity of food
was severe throughout the earth. And Yosĕph
commanded all his people that they should cause it to
be proclaimed throughout the land of Mitsrayim,
saying,
33 “It is the pleasure of the sovereign, by his second
and of their great men, that any person who wishes to
buy grain in Mitsrayim shall not send his servants to
Mitsrayim to purchase, but his sons. And also any
Mitsrite or Kena’anite, who shall come from any of the
stores from buying grain in Mitsrayim, and shall go and
sell it throughout the land, he shall die, for no one shall
buy but for the support of his household.
34 “And any man leading two or three beasts shall die,
for a man shall only lead his own beast.”
35 And Yosĕph placed watchmen at the gates of
Mitsrayim, and commanded them, saying, “Any person
who may come to buy grain, do not allow him to enter
until his name, and the name of his father, and the
name of his father’s father be written down. And
whatever is written by day, send their names to me in
the evening that I may know their names.”
36 And Yosĕph placed officers throughout the land of
Mitsrayim, and he commanded them to do all these
matters.
863

YASHAR

And Yosĕph did all these matters, and made these
laws, in order that he might know when his brothers
should come to Mitsrayim to buy grain. And Yosĕph’s
people caused it to be proclaimed daily in Mitsrayim
according to these words and laws which Yosĕph had
commanded.
38 And all the inhabitants of the East and West
country, and of all the earth, heard of the laws and
regulations which Yosĕph had established in
Mitsrayim, and the inhabitants of the ends of the earth
came and they bought grain in Mitsrayim day after day,
and then went away.
39 And all the officers of Mitsrayim did as Yosĕph had
commanded, and all that came to Mitsrayim to buy
grain, the gatekeepers would write their names, and
their fathers’ names, and daily bring them in the
evening before Yosĕph.
37

51 And afterward Ya’aqoḇ heard that there was grain
in Mitsrayim, and he called for his sons to go to
Mitsrayim to buy grain, for the scarcity of food was also
severe on them. And he called to his sons, saying,
2 “Behold I hear that there is grain in Mitsrayim, and
all the people of the earth go there to purchase. Now
therefore why will you show yourselves satisfied
before the whole earth? You also go down to Mitsrayim
and buy us a little grain among those that go there, that
we may not die.”
3 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ listened to the voice of
their father, and they rose up to go down to Mitsrayim
in order to buy grain among the rest that went there.
4 And Ya’aqoḇ their father commanded them, saying,
“When you come into the city do not enter together in
one gate, on account of the inhabitants of the land.”
5 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ went out and they went to
Mitsrayim, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ did all as their
father had commanded them, but Ya’aqoḇ did not
864

JASHER

send Binyamin, for he said, “Lest an accident might
befall him on the way like his brother.” And ten of
Ya’aqoḇ’s sons went out.
6 And while the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were going on the
way, they repented of what they had done to Yosĕph,
and they spoke to each other, saying, “We know that
our brother Yosĕph went down to Mitsrayim, and now
we will seek him where we go. And if we find him we
will take him from his master for a ransom, and if not,
by force, and we will die for him.”
7 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ agreed to this word and
strengthened themselves for the sake of Yosĕph, to
deliver him from the hand of his master. And the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ went to Mitsrayim, and when they came
near to Mitsrayim they separated from each other. And
they came through ten gates of Mitsrayim, and the
gatekeepers wrote their names on that day, and
brought them to Yosĕph in the evening.
8 And Yosĕph read the names from the hand of the
gatekeepers of the city, and he found that his brothers
had entered at the ten gates of the city. And at that
time Yosĕph commanded that it should be proclaimed
throughout the land of Mitsrayim, saying,
9 “Go out all you storekeepers, close all the grain
stores and let only one remain open, that those who
come may purchase from it.”
10 And all the officers of Yosĕph did so at that time,
and they closed all the stores and left only one open.
11 And Yosĕph gave the written names of his brothers
to him that was appointed over the open store, and he
said to him, “Whoever shall come to you to buy grain,
ask his name, and when men of these names shall
come before you, seize them and send them, and they
did so.”
12 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came into the city,
they joined together in the city to seek Yosĕph before
they bought themselves grain.
865

YASHAR

And they went to the walls of the whores, and they
sought Yosĕph in the walls of the whores for three
days, for they thought that Yosĕph would be brought
into the walls of the whores, for Yosĕph was very
handsome in form and appearance. And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ sought Yosĕph for three days, and they could
not find him.
14 And the man who was appointed over the open
store sought for those names which Yosĕph had given
him, and he did not find them.
15 And he sent to Yosĕph, saying, “These three days
have passed, and those men whose names you gave
to me have not come.” And Yosĕph sent servants to
seek the men in all Mitsrayim, and to bring them before
Yosĕph.
16 And Yosĕph’s servants went and came into
Mitsrayim and could not find them, and went to Goshen
and they were not there, and then went to the city of
Ra’meses and could not find them.
17 And Yosĕph continued to send sixteen servants to
seek his brothers, and they went and spread
themselves in the four corners of the city. And four of
the servants went into the house of the whores, and
they found the ten men there seeking their brother.
18 And those four men took them and brought them
before him, and they bowed down to him to the ground.
And Yosĕph was sitting on his throne in his palace,
clothed with princely garments, and on his head was a
large crown of gold, and all the mighty men were sitting
around him.
19 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw Yosĕph, and his form
and appearance and excellency seemed wonderful in
their eyes, and they again bowed down to him to the
ground.
20 And Yosĕph saw his brothers, and he knew them,
but they did not recognise him, for Yosĕph was very
13

866

JASHER

great in their eyes, therefore they did not recognise
him.
21 And Yosĕph spoke to them, saying, “Where have
you come from?” And they all answered and said,
“Your servants have come from the land of Kena’an to
buy grain, for the scarcity of food is severe throughout
the earth. And your servants heard that there was grain
in Mitsrayim, so they have come among the others who
come to buy grain for their support.”
22 And Yosĕph answered them, saying, “If you have
come to purchase as you say, why do you come
through ten gates of the city? It can only be that you
have come to spy throughout the land.”
23 And they all answered Yosĕph together and said,
“Not so my master, we are upright! Your servants are
not spies, but we have come to buy grain, for your
servants are all brothers, the sons of one man in the
land of Kena’an, and our father commanded us,
saying, ‘When you come to the city, do not enter
together at one gate on account of the inhabitants of
the land.’ ”
24 And Yosĕph again answered them and said, “That
is the word which I spoke to you, you have come to spy
throughout the land, therefore you all came through
ten gates of the city. You have come to see the
nakedness of the land!
25 “Even everyone that comes to buy grain goes his
way, and you are already three days in the land, and
what are you doing in the walls of whores in which you
have been for these three days? Indeed spies do such
matters!”
26 And they said to Yosĕph, “Far be it from our master
to speak so, for we are twelve brothers, the sons of our
father Ya’aqoḇ, in the land of Kena’an, son of Yitsḥaq,
son of Aḇraham, the Iḇri. And see, the youngest is with
our father today in the land of Kena’an, and one is not,
for he was lost from us. And we thought maybe he
867

YASHAR

might be in this land, so we are seeking him throughout
the land, and have come even to the houses of whores
to seek him there.”
27 And Yosĕph said to them, “And have you then
sought him throughout the earth, that there only
remained Mitsrayim for you to seek him in? And what
also should your brother do in the houses of whores,
although he were in Mitsrayim? Have you not said that
you are from the sons of Yitsḥaq, son of Aḇraham?
And what shall the sons of Ya’aqoḇ do then in the
houses of whores?”
28 And they said to him, “Because we heard that
Yishma’ĕlites stole him from us, and it was told to us
that they sold him in Mitsrayim. And your servant, our
brother, is very handsome in form and appearance, so
we thought he would indeed be in the houses of
whores, therefore your servants went there to seek
him and give ransom for him.”
29 And Yosĕph still answered them, saying, “Indeed
you speak falsely and speak lies, to say of yourselves
that you are the sons of Aḇraham. As Pharaoh lives
you are spies, therefore have you come to the houses
of whores that you should not be known.”
30 And Yosĕph said to them, “And now if you find him,
and his master requires of you a great price, will you
give it for him?” And they said, “It shall be given.”
31 And he said to them, “And if his master will not
agree to part with him for a great price, what will you
do to him for his sake?” and they answered him,
saying, “If he will not give him to us we will slay him,
and take our brother and go away.”
32 And Yosĕph said to them, “That is the word which I
have spoken to you; you are spies! For you have come
to slay the inhabitants of the land, for we heard that
two of your brothers smote all the inhabitants of
Sheḵem, in the land of Kena’an, because of your
868

JASHER

sister, and you now come to do likewise in Mitsrayim
because of your brother.
33 “Only by this shall I know that you are true men; if
you will send home one from among you to fetch your
youngest brother from your father, and to bring him
here to me. And by doing this word I will know that you
are upright.”
34 And Yosĕph called to seventy of his mighty men,
and he said to them, “Take these men and bring them
into the prison.
35 And the mighty men took the ten men, they laid hold
of them and put them into the prison, and they were in
the prison three days.
36 And on the third day Yosĕph had them brought out
of the prison, and he said to them, “Do this for
yourselves if you are men of truth, so that you may live.
One of your brothers shall be confined in the prison
while you go and take home the grain for your
household to the land of Kena’an, and fetch your
youngest brother, and bring him here to me, that I may
know that you are true men when you do this word.”
37 And Yosĕph went out from them and came into his
room, and wept a great weeping, for his compassion
was moved for them. And he washed his face, and
returned to them again, and he took Shim’on from
them and ordered him to be bound. But Shim’on was
not willing to be done so, for he was a very powerful
man and they could not bind him.
38 And Yosĕph called to his mighty men, and seventy
mighty men came before him with drawn swords in
their hands, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were afraid of
them.
39 And Yosĕph said to them, “Seize this man and
confine him in prison until his brothers come to him.”
And Yosĕph’s mighty men hastened and they all laid
hold of Shim’on to bind him, but Shim’on gave a loud
and fearful shout and the cry was heard at a distance.
869

YASHAR

And all the mighty men of Yosĕph were afraid at the
sound of the shout, that they fell on their faces, and
they were greatly afraid and fled.
41 And all the men that were with Yosĕph fled, for they
were greatly afraid for their lives, and only Yosĕph and
Menashsheh his son remained there. And
Menashsheh son of Yosĕph saw the strength of
Shim’on, and he was exceedingly wroth.
42 And Menashsheh son of Yosĕph rose up to
Shim’on, and Menashsheh smote Shim’on a heavy
blow with his fist against the back of his neck, and
Shim’on was stopped of his rage.
43 And Menashsheh laid hold of Shim’on and he
seized him violently and he bound him and brought him
into the prison house, and all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ were
astonished at the act of the youth.
44 And Shim’on said to his brothers, “None of you
must say that this is the beating of a Mitsrite, but it is
the beating of the house of my father.”
45 And after this Yosĕph ordered him to be called who
was appointed over the storehouse, to fill their sacks
with grain - as much as they could carry - and to
restore every man’s silver into his sack, and to give
them provision for the journey, and so he did to them.
46 And Yosĕph commanded them, saying, “Take heed
lest you transgress my orders to bring your brother as
I have told you. And it shall be when you bring your
brother here to me, then I will know that you are upright
men, and you shall move about in the land, and I will
restore your brother to you, and you shall return in
peace to your father.”
47 And they all answered and said, “According to our
masters words, so we will do.” And they bowed down
to him to the ground,
48 and every man lifted his grain on his donkey, and
they went out to go to the land of Kena’an to their
father. And they came to the inn and Lĕwi spread his
40

870

JASHER

sack to give fodder to his donkey, when he looked and
see, his silver in full weight was still in his sack.
49 And the man was greatly afraid, and he said to his
brothers, “My silver is restored, and look, it is even in
my sack!” And the men were greatly afraid, and they
said, “What is this that Elohim has done to us?”
50 And they all said, “And where is the kindness of
HWHY to our fathers, with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ, that HWHY has delivered us this day into the
hands of the sovereign of Mitsrayim to conspire
against us?”
51 And Yahuḏah said to them, “Indeed we are guilty
sinners before HWHY our Elohim in having sold our
brother, our own flesh, and why do you say, ‘Where is
the kindness of HWHY with our fathers?’ ”
52 And Re’uḇĕn said to them, “Did I not say to you, ‘Do
not sin against the boy,’ and you would not listen to
me? Now Elohim requires him from us, and how dare
you say, ‘Where is the kindness of HWHY with our
fathers,’ while you have sinned against HWHY?”
53 And they spent the night in that place, and they rose
early in the morning and loaded their donkeys with
their grain, and they led them and went on and came
to their father’s house in the land of Kena’an.
54 And Ya’aqoḇ and his household went out to meet
his sons, and Ya’aqoḇ looked and see, their brother
Shim’on was not with them. And Ya’aqoḇ said to his
sons, “Where is your brother Shim’on, whom I do not
see?” And his sons told him all that had befallen them
in Mitsrayim.

52 And they entered their house, and every man
opened his sack and they looked and see, every man’s
bundle of silver was there, at which they and their
father were greatly afraid.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ said to them, “What is this that you
have done to me? I sent your brother Yosĕph to inquire
871

YASHAR

after your welfare and you said to me, ‘A wild beast
devoured him.’
3 “And Shim’on went with you to buy food and you
say, ‘The sovereign of Mitsrayim has confined him in
prison.” And you want to take Binyamin to cause his
death also, and bring down my grey hairs with sorrow
to the grave for the sake of Binyamin and his brother
Yosĕph!
4 “Now therefore, my son shall not go down with you,
for his brother is dead and he alone is left, and harm
may befall him by the way in which you go, as it befell
his brother.
5 And Re’uḇĕn said to his father, “You shall slay my
two sons if I do not bring your son and place him before
you.” And Ya’aqoḇ said to his sons, “Stay here and do
not go down to Mitsrayim, for my son shall not go down
with you to Mitsrayim, nor die like his brother.”
6 And Yahuḏah said to them, “Withhold from him until
the grain is finished, and then he will say, ‘Take down
your brother,’ when he finds his own life and the life of
his household in danger from the scarcity of food.”
7 And in those days the scarcity of food was severe
throughout the land, and all the people of the earth
went and came to Mitsrayim to buy food, for the
scarcity of food was severe among them. And the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ remained in Kena’an a year and two
months until their grain was finished.
8 And it came to be after their grain was finished, the
whole household of Ya’aqoḇ was starving, and all the
infants of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came together and they
approached Ya’aqoḇ, and they all surrounded him,
and they said to him, “Give bread to us, and why shall
we all perish through hunger in your presence?”
9 Ya’aqoḇ heard the words of his son’s children, and
he wept a great weeping, and his compassion was
moved for them, and Ya’aqoḇ called to his sons and
they all came and sat before him.
872

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ said to them, “And have you not seen
how your children have been weeping over me today,
saying, ‘Give bread to us,’ and there is none? Now
therefore return and buy a little food for us.
11 And Yahuḏah answered and said to his father, “If
you will send our brother with us we will go down and
buy grain for you, but if you will not send him then we
will not go down, for indeed the sovereign of Mitsrayim
vehemently warned us, saying, ‘You do not see my
face unless your brother is with you.’ For the sovereign
of Mitsrayim is a strong and mighty sovereign, and
look, if we shall go to him without our brother we shall
all be put to death!
12 “Do you not know and have you not heard that this
sovereign is very powerful and wise, and there is none
like him in all the earth? Look, we have seen all the
sovereigns of the earth and we have not seen one like
that sovereign, the sovereign of Mitsrayim. Indeed
among all the sovereigns of the earth there is none
greater than Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites, yet
the sovereign of Mitsrayim is greater and mightier than
he, and Aḇimeleḵ can only be compared to one of his
officers.
13 “Father, you have not seen his palace and his
throne, and all his servants standing before him. You
have not seen the sovereign on his throne in his
splendour and royal appearance, dressed in his royal
robes with a large golden crown upon his head. You
have not seen the honour and esteem which Elohim
has given to him, for there is none like him in all the
earth!
14 “Father, you have not seen the wisdom, the
understanding and the knowledge which Elohim has
given in his heart, nor heard his pleasant voice when
he spoke to us.
15 “We know not, father, who made known to him our
names and all that befell us, yet he asked also after
10

873

YASHAR

you, saying, ‘Is your father still living, and is it well with
him?’
16 “You have not seen the matters of the reign of
Mitsrayim regulated by him, without inquiring of
Pharaoh his master. You have not seen the awe and
fear which he impressed on all the Mitsrites.
17 “And also when we went from him, we threatened
to do to Mitsrayim like the rest of the cities of the
Amorites, and we were exceedingly wroth against all
his words which he spoke concerning us as spies. But
now when we shall again come before him, his fear will
fall upon us all, and not one of us will be able to speak
to him either a little or a great word.
18 “Now therefore father, please send the boy with us,
and we will go down and buy you food for our support,
and not die through hunger.” And Ya’aqoḇ said, “Why
have you dealt so evilly with me to tell the sovereign
you had a brother? What is this matter that you have
done to me?”
19 And Yahuḏah said to Ya’aqoḇ his father, “Give the
boy into my care and we will rise up and go down to
Mitsrayim and buy grain, and then return. And it shall
be when we return, if the boy be not with us, then let
me bear your blame forever.
20 “Have you seen all our infants weeping over you
through hunger and there is no power in your hand to
satisfy them? Now let your compassion be roused for
them and send our brother with us and we will go.
21 “For how will the kindness of HWHY to our ancestors
be manifested to you when you say that the sovereign
of Mitsrayim will take away your son? As HWHY lives I
will not leave him until I bring him and place him before
you. But pray for us to HWHY, that He may deal kindly
with us, to cause us to be received favourably and
kindly before the sovereign of Mitsrayim and his men.
For had we not delayed, indeed by now we would have
returned a second time with your son.”
874

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ said to his sons, “I trust in HWHY
Elohim that He may deliver you and give you favour in
the sight of the sovereign of Mitsrayim, and in the sight
of all his men.
23 “Now therefore rise up and go to the man, and take
for him in your hands a present from what can be
obtained in the land and bring it before him. And may
the Almighty Elohim give you favour before him that he
may send Binyamin and Shim’on your brothers with
you.”
24 And all the men rose up, and they took their brother
Binyamin, and they took in their hands a large present
of the best of the land, and they also took a double
portion of silver.
25 And Ya’aqoḇ strictly commanded his sons
concerning Binyamin, saying, “Take heed of him in the
way in which you are going, and do not separate
yourselves from him on the way, neither in Mitsrayim.”
26 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up from his sons and spread out
his hands and he prayed to HWHY on behalf of his sons,
saying, “O HWHY Elohim of the shamayim and earth,
remember Your covenant with our father Aḇraham.
Remember it with my father Yitsḥaq and deal kindly
with my sons and deliver them not into the hands of
the sovereign of Mitsrayim. Please do it O Elohim for
the sake of Your compassion, and redeem all my
children and rescue them from Mitsrite power, and
send them their two brothers.”
27 And all the wives of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and their
children lifted up their eyes to the shamayim and they
all wept before HWHY, and cried to Him to deliver their
fathers from the hand of the sovereign of Mitsrayim.
28 And Ya’aqoḇ wrote a record to the sovereign of
Mitsrayim and gave it into the hand of Yahuḏah and
into the hands of his sons for the sovereign of
Mitsrayim, saying:
22

875

YASHAR

“From your servant Ya’aqoḇ, son of Yitsḥaq, son of
Aḇraham the Iḇri, the prince of Elohim, to the powerful
and wise sovereign, the revealer of secrets, sovereign
of Mitsrayim, greetings.
30 “Be it known to my master the sovereign of
Mitsrayim, the scarcity of food was hard on us in the
land of Kena’an, and I sent my sons to you to buy us a
little food from you for our support.
31 “For my sons surrounded me and I, being very old
cannot see with my eyes, for my eyes have become
very heavy through age, as well as with daily weeping
for my son, for Yosĕph who was lost from before me.
And I commanded my sons that they should not enter
the gates of the city when they came to Mitsrayim, on
account of the inhabitants of the land.
32 “And I also commanded them to go about Mitsrayim
to seek for my son Yosĕph; maybe they might find him
there. And they did so, but you considered them as
spies of the land.
33 “Have we not heard concerning you that you
interpreted Pharaoh’s dream and spoke truly to him?
How then do you not know in your wisdom whether my
sons are spies or not?
34 “Now therefore, my master and sovereign, see, I
have sent my son before you, as you spoke to my
sons. Please keep your eyes on him until he is
returned to me in peace with his brothers.
35 “For do you not know, or have you not heard that
which our Elohim did to Pharaoh when he took my
mother Sarah, and what He did to Aḇimeleḵ sovereign
of the Pelishtites because of her, and also what our
father Aḇraham did to the nine sovereigns of Ĕylam,
how he smote them all with a few men that were with
him?
36 “And also what my two sons Shim’on and Lĕwi did
to the eight cities of the Amorites, how they destroyed
them because of their sister Dinah?
29

876

JASHER

“And also because of their brother Binyamin they
consoled themselves for the loss of his brother
Yosĕph. What will they then do for him when they see
the hand of any people prevailing over them, for his
sake?
38 “Do you not know, O sovereign of Mitsrayim, that
the power of Elohim is with us, and also that Elohim
always hears our prayers and does not forsake us all
the days?
39 “And when my sons told me of your dealings with
them, I did not call to HWHY for your sake, for then you
would have perished with your men before my son
Binyamin came before you. But I thought that as
Shim’on my son was in your house, maybe you might
deal kindly with him, therefore I did not do this matter
to you.
40 “Now therefore, see Binyamin my son comes to you
with my sons. Take heed of him and keep your eyes
on him, and then Elohim will place His eyes over you
and throughout your reign.
41 “Now I have told you all that is in my heart, and see,
my sons are coming to you with their brother. Search
the face of the whole earth for their sake and send
them back in peace with their brothers.”
42 And Ya’aqoḇ gave the record to his sons into the
care of Yahuḏah to give it to the sovereign of
Mitsrayim.
37

53 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ rose up and took
Binyamin and the whole of the presents, and they went
and came to Mitsrayim, and they stood before Yosĕph.
2 And Yosĕph saw his brother Binyamin with them,
and he greeted them, and these men came to
Yosĕph’s house.
3 And Yosĕph commanded the one over his house to
give to his brothers to eat, and he did so for them.
877

YASHAR

And at noon Yosĕph sent for the men to come
before him with Binyamin, and the men told the one
over Yosĕph’s house concerning the silver that was
returned in their sacks, and he said to them, “It will be
well with you, fear not.” And he brought their brother
Shim’on to them.
5 And Shim’on said to his brothers, “The master of
the Mitsrites has acted very kindly to me, he did not
keep me bound, as you saw with your eyes, for when
you went out from the city he let me free and dealt
kindly with me in his house.”
6 And Yahuḏah took Binyamin by the hand, and they
came before Yosĕph, and they bowed down to him to
the ground.
7 And the men gave the present to Yosĕph and they
all sat before him. And Yosĕph said to them, “Is it well
with you, is it well with your children, is it well with your
aged father?” and they said, “It is well.” And Yahuḏah
took the record which Ya’aqoḇ had sent and gave it
into the hand of Yosĕph.
8 And Yosĕph read the letter and knew his father’s
writing, and he wanted to weep and he went into an
inner room. And he wept a great weeping, and he went
out.
9 And he lifted up his eyes and saw his brother
Binyamin, and he said, “Is this your brother of whom
you spoke to me?” And Binyamin approached Yosĕph,
and Yosĕph placed his hand on his head and he said
to him, “May Elohim show favour to you my son.”
10 But when Yosĕph saw his brother, the son of his
mother, he again wanted to weep, and he entered the
chamber, and he wept there. And he washed his face,
and went out and refrained from weeping, and he said,
“Prepare food.”
11 And Yosĕph had a cup from which he drank, and it
was of silver splendidly inlaid with shoham stones and
4

878

JASHER

bdellium, and Yosĕph struck the cup in the sight of his
brothers while they were sitting to eat with him.
12 And Yosĕph said to the men, “I know by this cup
that Re’uḇĕn the first-born, Shim’on and Lĕwi and
Yahuḏah, Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun are children from
one mother, seat yourselves to eat according to your
births.”
13 And he also placed the others according to their
births, and he said, “I know that this, your youngest
brother has no brother, and I, like him, have no brother,
he shall therefore sit down to eat with me.”
14 And Binyamin went up before Yosĕph and sat on
the throne, and the men saw the acts of Yosĕph, and
they were astonished at them. And the men ate and
drank at that time with Yosĕph, and then he gave
presents to them, and Yosĕph gave one gift to
Binyamin. And Menashsheh and Ephrayim saw the
acts of their father, and they also gave presents to him.
And Asenath gave him one present, and there were
five presents in the hand of Binyamin.
15 And Yosĕph brought them out wine to drink, but
they would not drink, and they said, “From the day on
which Yosĕph was lost we have not drunk wine, nor
eaten any delicacies.”
16 And Yosĕph swore to them, and he pressed them
hard, and they drank plentifully with him on that day.
And afterward Yosĕph turned to his brother Binyamin
to speak with him, and Binyamin was still sitting on the
throne before Yosĕph.
17 And Yosĕph said to him, “Have you brought forth
any children?” and he said, “Your servant has ten
sons, and these are their names: Belah, Beḵer,
Ashbĕl, Gĕra, Na’aman, Ĕḥi, Rosh, Muppim, Ḥuppim,
and Ard, and I called their names after my brother
whom I have not seen.”
18 And he ordered them to bring before him his map
of the stars, whereby Yosĕph knew all the times, and
879

YASHAR

Yosĕph said to Binyamin, “I have heard that the Iḇrim
are acquainted with all wisdom, do you know anything
of this?”
19 And Binyamin said, “Your servant also has
knowledge in all the wisdom which my father taught
me.” And Yosĕph said to Binyamin, “Look now at this
instrument and understand where your brother Yosĕph
is in Mitsrayim, who you said went down to Mitsrayim.”
20 And Binyamin saw the instrument with the map of
the stars of the shamayim, and he was wise and
looked therein to know where his brother was. And
Binyamin divided the whole land of Mitsrayim into four
divisions, and he found that he who was sitting on the
throne before him was his brother Yosĕph. And
Binyamin wondered greatly, and when Yosĕph saw
that his brother Binyamin was so much astonished, he
said to Binyamin, “What have you seen, and why are
you astonished?”
21 And Binyamin said to Yosĕph, “I can see by this
that Yosĕph my brother sits here with me upon the
throne!” And Yosĕph said to him, “I am Yosĕph your
brother. Do not reveal this matter to your brothers.
See, I will send you with them when they go away, and
I will command them to be brought back again into the
city, and I will take you away from them.
22 “And if they risk their lives and fight for you, then I
shall know that they have repented of what they did to
me, and I will make myself known to them. But if they
forsake you when I take you, then you shall remain
with me, and I will strive with them, and they shall go
away, and I will not become known to them.”
23 At that time Yosĕph commanded his officer to fill
their sacks with food, and to put each man’s silver into
his sack, and to put the cup into the sack of Binyamin,
and to give them food for the journey, and they did so
for them.
880

JASHER

And on the next day the men rose early in the
morning, and they loaded their donkeys with their
grain, and they went out with Binyamin, and they went
toward the land of Kena’an with their brother Binyamin.
25 They had not gone far from Mitsrayim when
Yosĕph commanded him that was appointed over his
house, saying, “Rise, pursue these men before they
get too far from Mitsrayim, and say to them, ‘Why have
you stolen my master’s cup?’ ”
26 And Yosĕph’s officer rose up and he reached them,
and he spoke to them all the words of Yosĕph. And
when they heard this word they became exceedingly
wroth, and they said, “He with whom your master’s cup
shall be found shall die, and we will also become
slaves!”
27 And they hurried and each man brought down his
sack from his donkey, and they looked in their bags
and the cup was found in Binyamin’s bag. And they all
tore their garments and they returned to the city, and
they struck Binyamin on the way, continually striking
him until he came into the city, and they stood before
Yosĕph.
28 And Yahuḏah’s wrath was kindled, and he said,
“This man has only brought me back to destroy
Mitsrayim this day!”
29 And the men came to Yosĕph’s house, and they
found Yosĕph sitting on his throne, and all the mighty
men standing at his right and left.
30 And Yosĕph said to them, “What is this deed that
you have done, that you took away my silver cup and
went away? But I know that you took my cup in order
to know thereby in what part of the land your brother
was.”
31 And Yahuḏah said, “What shall we say to our
master? What shall we speak and how shall we justify
ourselves? Elohim has this day found the iniquity of all
24

881

YASHAR

your servants, therefore He has done this matter to us
this day.”
32 And Yosĕph rose up and caught hold of Binyamin
and took him from his brothers with violence, and he
came to the house and locked the door on them. And
Yosĕph commanded him that was appointed over his
house that he should say to them, “Thus said the
sovereign, ‘Go in peace to your father. See, I have
taken the man in whose hand my cup was found.’ ”

54 And when Yahuḏah saw the dealings of Yosĕph
with them, Yahuḏah approached him and broke open
the door, and came with his brothers before Yosĕph.
2 And Yahuḏah said to Yosĕph, “Let it not seem
grievous in the sight of my master, may your servant
please speak a word before you?” and Yosĕph said to
him, “Speak.”
3 And Yahuḏah spoke before Yosĕph, and his
brothers were there standing before them. And
Yahuḏah said to Yosĕph, “Indeed when we first came
to our master to buy food, you considered us as spies
of the land, and we brought Binyamin before you, and
you still mock us this day.
4 “Now therefore let the sovereign hear my words,
and please send our brother that he may go along with
us to our father, lest your being perish this day with all
the beings of the inhabitants of Mitsrayim.
5 “Do you not know what two of my brothers, Shim’on
and Lĕwi, did to the city of Sheḵem, and to seven cities
of the Amorites, because of our sister Dinah, and also
what they would do for the sake of their brother
Binyamin?
6 “And I with my strength, who am greater and
mightier than both of them, shall come upon you and
your land today if you are unwilling to send our brother.
7 “Have you not heard what our Elohim who chose
us did to Pharaoh because of Sarah our mother, whom
882

JASHER

he took away from our father? That he smote he and
his household with heavy plagues, that even to this
day the Mitsrites relate this wonder to each other. So
our Elohim will do to you for the sake of Binyamin
whom you have this day taken from his father, and
because of the evils this day which you heap over us
in your land. For our Elohim will remember His
covenant with our father Aḇraham and bring evil upon
you, because you have grieved the being of our father
this day.
8 “Now therefore hear my words that I have spoken
this day to you, and send our brother that he may go
away lest you and the people of your land die by the
sword, for you cannot all prevail over me.”
9 And Yosĕph answered Yahuḏah, saying, “Why
have you opened your mouth wide and why do you
boast over us, saying, strength is with you? As
Pharaoh lives, if I command all my mighty men to fight
against you, indeed you and these, your brothers
would sink in the mud.”
10 And Yahuḏah said to Yosĕph, “Indeed it is right for
you and your people to fear me. As HWHY lives if I once
draw my sword I shall not sheathe it again until I have
slain all Mitsrayim today, and I will begin with you and
finish with Pharaoh your master!”
11 And Yosĕph answered and said to him, “Indeed
strength does not belong to you alone. I am stronger
and mightier than you. Even if you draw your sword I
will put it to your neck and the necks of all your
brothers.”
12 And Yahuḏah said to him, “Indeed if I open my
mouth against you today I would swallow you up so
that you be destroyed from off the earth and perish this
day from your reign.” And Yosĕph said, “Indeed if you
open your mouth, I have power and might to close your
mouth with a stone so you shall not be able to speak a
word. See how many stones are before us, truly I can
883

YASHAR

take a stone, and force it into your mouth and break
your jaws.”
13 And Yahuḏah said, “Elohim is witness between us,
that we have not desired to fight against you until now.
Only give us our brother and we will go from you.” And
Yosĕph answered and said, “As Pharaoh lives, if all
the sovereigns of Kena’an came together with you, you
should not take him from my hand.
14 “Now therefore go your way to your father, and your
brother shall be a slave to me, for he has robbed the
sovereign’s house.” And Yahuḏah said, “What is it to
you or to the character of the sovereign? Indeed the
sovereign sends forth from his house, throughout the
land, silver and gold, either in gifts or expenses, and
you still speak of your cup which you placed in our
brother’s bag and say that he has stolen it from you.
15 “Elohim forbid that our brother Binyamin or any of
the seed of Aḇraham should do this matter to steal
from you, or from anyone else, whether sovereign,
prince, or any man.
16 “Now therefore cease this accusation lest the whole
earth hear your words, saying, ‘For a little silver the
sovereign of Mitsrayim disputed with the men, and he
accused them and took their brother for a slave.’ ”
17 And Yosĕph answered and said, “Take for yourself
this cup and go from me and leave your brother for a
slave, for it is the judgment of a thief to be a slave.”
18 And Yahuḏah said, “Why are you not ashamed of
your words, to leave our brother and to take your cup?
Indeed if you gave us your cup, or a thousand times as
much, we would not leave our brother for the silver
which is found in the hand of any man, that we will not
die over him.”
19 And Yosĕph answered, “And why to this day did
you forsake your brother and sell him for twenty pieces
of silver, and why then will you not do the same to your
brother?”
884

JASHER

And Yahuḏah said, “HWHY is witness between you
and I that we do not desire your battles! Now therefore
give us our brother and we will go from you without
quarreling.”
21 And Yosĕph answered and said, “If all the
sovereigns of the land should assemble, they will not
be able to take your brother from my hand.” And
Yahuḏah said, “What shall we say to our father, when
he sees that our brother does not come with us, and
will grieve over him?”
22 And Yosĕph answered and said, “This is the word
which you shall speak to your father, saying, ‘The rope
has gone after the bucket.’ ”
23 And Yahuḏah said, “Indeed you are a sovereign,
and why do you speak these words, giving a false
judgment? Woe to the sovereign who is like you!”
24 And Yosĕph answered and said, “There is no false
judgment in the word that I spoke for the sake of your
brother Yosĕph, for all of you sold him to the
Miḏyanites for twenty pieces of silver, and you all
denied it to your father and said to him, ‘An evil beast
has devoured him, Yosĕph has been torn to pieces.’ ”
25 And Yahuḏah said, “See, the fire of Shĕm burns in
my heart, now I will burn all your land with fire!” And
Yosĕph answered and said, “Indeed your sister-in-law
Tamar, who killed your sons, extinguished the fire of
Sheḵem.”
26 And Yahuḏah said, “If I pluck out a single hair from
my flesh, I will fill all Mitsrayim with its blood.”
27 And Yosĕph answered and said, “Such is your
custom to do as you did to your brother whom you sold,
and you dipped his coat in blood and brought it to your
father in order that he might say, ‘An evil beast
devoured him and here is his blood.’ ”
28 And when Yahuḏah heard this word he was
exceedingly wroth and his wrath burned within him,
and there was before him in that place, a stone, the
20

885

YASHAR

weight of which was about four hundred sheqels. And
Yahuḏah’s wrath was kindled and he took the stone in
one hand and threw it to the shamayim and caught it
with his left hand.
29 And afterward he placed it under his legs, and he
sat upon it with all his strength and the stone was
turned into dust from the strength of Yahuḏah.
30 And Yosĕph saw the deed of Yahuḏah and he was
very much afraid, but he commanded Menashsheh his
son and he also did with another stone like the deed of
Yahuḏah. And Yahuḏah said to his brothers, “Let not
any of you say, this man is a Mitsrite, but by his doing
this matter he is of our father’s clan.”
31 And Yosĕph said, “Not only to you is strength given,
for we are also powerful men, and why will you boast
over us all?” and Yahuḏah said to Yosĕph, “Please
send our brother and do not ruin your country this day.”
32 And Yosĕph answered and said to them, “Go and
tell your father, an evil beast has devoured him as you
said concerning your brother Yosĕph.”
33 And Yahuḏah spoke to his brother Naphtali, and he
said to him, “Make haste, go now and number all the
streets of Mitsrayim and come and tell me.” And
Shim’on said to him, “Do not let this matter be a trouble
to you. Now I will go to the mountain and take up one
large stone from the mountain and direct it at every one
in Mitsrayim, and kill all that are in it.”
34 And Yosĕph heard all these words that his brothers
spoke before him, but they did not know that Yosĕph
understood them, for they thought that he did not know
to speak Iḇri.
35 And Yosĕph was greatly afraid at the words of his
brothers lest they should destroy Mitsrayim, and he
commanded his son Menashsheh, saying, “Go now,
make haste and gather unto me all the inhabitants of
Mitsrayim, and all the mighty men together, and let
them come to me now on horseback and on foot and
886

JASHER

with all kinds of musical instruments.” And
Menashsheh went and did so.
36 And Naphtali went as Yahuḏah had commanded
him, for Naphtali was swift of foot as one of the swift
stags, and he would go upon the heads of grain and
they would not break under him.
37 And he went and numbered all the streets of
Mitsrayim, and found them to be twelve, and he came
hastily and told Yahuḏah. And Yahuḏah said to his
brothers, “Hasten and gird every man his sword upon
his loins and we will pass over Mitsrayim, and smite
them all, and let not a remnant remain.”
38 And Yahuḏah said, “Look, I will destroy three of the
streets with my strength, and you shall each destroy
one street.” And when Yahuḏah was speaking this
word, see, the inhabitants of Mitsrayim and all the
mighty men came toward them with all kinds of musical
instruments and with loud shouting.
39 And their number was five hundred cavalry and ten
thousand foot soldiers, and four hundred men who
could fight without sword or spear, with only their
hands and strength.
40 And all the mighty men came with great turmoil and
shouting, and they all surrounded the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
and frightened them, and the ground shook at the
sound of their shouting.
41 And when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ saw these
companies they were greatly afraid for their lives, and
Yosĕph did so in order to frighten the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
to become calm.
42 And Yahuḏah, seeing some of his brothers afraid,
said to them, “Why are you afraid while the favour of
Elohim is with us?” And when Yahuḏah saw all the
people of Mitsrayim surrounding them at the command
of Yosĕph to frighten them - only Yosĕph commanded
them, saying, “Do not touch any of them.” –
887

YASHAR

then Yahuḏah hastened and drew his sword, and
gave out a loud and bitter shout, and he smote with his
sword, and he leaped upon the ground and he still
continued to shout against all the people.
44 And when he did this matter HWHY caused the fear
of Yahuḏah and his brothers to fall upon the mighty
men and all the people that surrounded them.
45 And they all fled at the sound of the shouting, and
they were afraid and fell one upon the other, and many
of them died as they fell, and they all fled from before
Yahuḏah and his brothers and from before Yosĕph.
46 And while they were fleeing, Yahuḏah and his
brothers pursued them to the house of Pharaoh, and
they all escaped, and Yahuḏah again sat before
Yosĕph and roared at him like a lion, and gave a great
and mighty shout at him.
47 And the shout was heard at a distance, and all the
inhabitants of Sukkoth heard it, and all Mitsrayim
shook at the sound of the shout, and also the walls of
Mitsrayim and of the land of Goshen fell in from the
shaking of the earth. And Pharaoh also fell from his
throne onto the ground, and also all the pregnant
women of Mitsrayim and Goshen miscarried when
they heard the noise of the shaking, for they were
terribly afraid.
48 And Pharaoh sent word, saying, “What is this
matter that has come to pass in the land of Mitsrayim
today?” And they came and told him all the matters
from beginning to end, and Pharaoh was alarmed and
he wondered and was greatly afraid.
49 And his fright increased when he heard all these
matters, and he sent to Yosĕph, saying, “You have
brought to me the Iḇrim to destroy all Mitsrayim! What
will you do with that thieving slave? Send him away
and let him go with his brothers, and let us not perish
through their evil, even we, you and all Mitsrayim.
43

888

JASHER

“And if you do not desire to do this matter, cast off
from you all my valuables, and go with them to their
land, if you delight in it, for they will destroy my whole
country this day and slay all my people; even all the
women of Mitsrayim have miscarried through their
shouts! See what they have done merely by their
shouting and speaking, moreover if they fight against
the sword, they will destroy the land. Now therefore
choose that which you desire, whether me or the Iḇrim,
whether Mitsrayim or the land of the Iḇrim.”
51 And they came and told Yosĕph all the words of
Pharaoh that he had said concerning him, and Yosĕph
was greatly afraid at the words of Pharaoh. And
Yahuḏah and his brothers were still standing before
Yosĕph grieved and enraged, and all the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ roared at Yosĕph, like the roaring of the sea
and its waves.
52 And Yosĕph was greatly afraid for his brothers and
because of Pharaoh, and Yosĕph sought a pretense
to make himself known to his brothers, lest they should
destroy all Mitsrayim.
53 And Yosĕph commanded his son Menashsheh,
and Menashsheh went and approached Yahuḏah, and
placed his hand on his shoulder, and the wrath of
Yahuḏah was stilled.
54 And Yahuḏah said to his brothers, “Let not one of
you say that this is the act of a Mitsrite youth for this is
the work of my father’s house.”
55 And Yosĕph seeing and knowing that Yahuḏah’s
wrath was stilled, approached to speak to Yahuḏah in
the language of mildness.
56 And Yosĕph said to Yahuḏah, “indeed you speak
truth and have verified today your words concerning
your strength, and may your Elohim who delights in
you, increase your welfare. But tell me truly why from
among all your brothers do you dispute with me for the
50

889

YASHAR

sake of the boy, as none of them have spoken one
word to me concerning him?”
57 And Yahuḏah answered Yosĕph, saying, “Indeed
you must know that I was security for the boy to his
father, saying, ‘If I do not bring him to him I should bear
his blame forever.’
58 “Therefore I have approached you from among all
my brothers, for I saw that you were unwilling to allow
him to go from you. Now therefore may I find favour in
your sight that you shall send him to go with us, and
see, I will remain as a substitute for him, to serve you
in whatever you desire, for wherever you shall send
me, I will go to serve you with great strength.
59 “Send me now to a mighty sovereign who has
rebelled against you, and you shall know what I will do
to him and to his land. Although he may have cavalry
and army or an exceedingly mighty people, I will slay
them all and bring the sovereign’s head before you.
60 “Do you not know or have you not heard that our
father Aḇraham with his servant El’azar smote all the
sovereigns of Ĕylam with their armies in one night?
They left not one remaining, and ever since that day
our father’s strength was given to us for an inheritance,
for us and our seed forever.”
61 And Yosĕph answered and said, “You speak truth,
and falsehood is not in your mouth, for it was also told
to us that the Iḇrim have power and that HWHY their
Elohim greatly delights in them, and who then can
stand before them?
62 “However, on this condition I will send your brother,
if you will bring before me his brother, the son of his
mother, of whom you said that he had gone from you
down to Mitsrayim. And it shall come to pass when you
bring his brother to me, I will take him in his place,
because not one of you was security for him to your
father. And when he shall come to me, I will then send
his brother with you for whom you have been security.”
890

JASHER

And Yahuḏah’s wrath was kindled against Yosĕph
when he spoke this word, and his eyes were bloodshot
with wrath, and he said to his brothers, “How does this
man seek his own destruction this day and that of all
Mitsrayim!”
64 And Shim’on answered Yosĕph, saying, “Did we
not tell you at first that we did not know the exact spot
to which he went, and whether he is dead or alive, and
why does my master speak such words?”
65 And Yosĕph observing the appearance of Yahuḏah
discerned that his wrath began to kindle when he
spoke to him, saying, “Bring to me your other brother
instead of this brother.”
66 And Yosĕph said to his brothers, “Indeed you said
that your brother was either dead or lost. Now if I
should call him today and he should come before you,
would you give him to me instead of his brother?”
67 And Yosĕph began to speak and call out, “Yosĕph,
Yosĕph! Come this day before me, and appear to your
brothers and sit before them.”
68 And when Yosĕph spoke this word before them,
they each looked a different way to see from where
Yosĕph would come before them.
69 And Yosĕph observed all their deeds, and said to
them, “Why do you look here and there? I am Yosĕph
whom you sold to Mitsrayim. Now therefore let it not
grieve you that you sold me, for Elohim sent me as a
support during the scarcity of food before you.”
70 And his brothers were afraid of him when they
heard the words of Yosĕph, and Yahuḏah was
exceedingly afraid of him.
71 And when Binyamin heard the words of Yosĕph, he
was before them in the inner part of the house. And
Binyamin ran to Yosĕph his brother, and embraced
him and fell on his neck, and they wept.
72 And when Yosĕph’s brothers saw that Binyamin
had fallen on his brother’s neck and wept with him,
63

891

YASHAR

they also fell on Yosĕph and embraced him, and they
wept a great weeping with Yosĕph.
73 And the sound was heard in the house of Yosĕph
that they were Yosĕph’s brothers, and it pleased
Pharaoh exceedingly, for he was afraid for them lest
they should destroy Mitsrayim.
74 And Pharaoh sent his servants to Yosĕph to
congratulate him concerning his brothers who had
come to him, and all the captains of the armies and
companies that were in Mitsrayim came to rejoice with
Yosĕph, and all Mitsrayim rejoiced greatly regarding
Yosĕph’s brothers.
75 And Pharaoh sent his servants to Yosĕph, saying,
“Tell your brothers to bring all belonging to them and
let them come to me, and I will place them in the best
part of the land of Mitsrayim.” And they did so.
76 And Yosĕph commanded him that was placed over
his house to bring out to his brothers gifts and
garments, and he brought out to them many garments
being robes of royalty and many gifts, and Yosĕph
divided them among his brothers.
77 And he gave to each of his brothers a change of
garments of gold and silver, and three hundred pieces
of silver, and Yosĕph commanded them all to be
dressed in these garments, and to be brought before
Pharaoh.
78 And Pharaoh seeing that all Yosĕph’s brothers
were mighty men, and of good-looking appearance, he
greatly rejoiced.
79 And afterward they went out from the presence of
Pharaoh to go to the land of Kena’an, to their father,
and their brother Binyamin was with them,
80 And Yosĕph rose up and gave to them eleven
chariots from Pharaoh, and Yosĕph gave to them his
chariot, upon which he rode on the day of his being
crowned in Mitsrayim, to bring his father to Mitsrayim.
And Yosĕph sent to all his brothers’ children, garments
892

JASHER

according to their numbers, and a hundred pieces of
silver to each of them, and he also sent garments to
the wives of his brothers from the garments of the
sovereign’s wives, and he sent them.
81 And he gave to each of his brothers ten men to go
with them to the land of Kena’an to serve them, to
serve their children and all belonging to them in coming
to Mitsrayim.
82 And Yosĕph sent by the hand of his brother
Binyamin ten suits of garments for his ten sons, a
portion above the rest of the children of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ.
83 And he sent to each fifty pieces of silver, and ten
chariots for the sake of Pharaoh, and he sent to his
father ten donkeys loaded with all the best of
Mitsrayim, and ten female donkeys loaded with grain
and bread and food for his father, and to all that were
with him as provisions for the journey.
84 And he sent to his sister Dinah garments of silver
and gold, and frankincense and myrrh, and aloes and
women’s ornaments in great plenty. And he sent the
same from the wives of Pharaoh to the wives of
Binyamin.
85 And he gave to all his brothers, also to their wives,
all kinds of shoham stones and bdellium, and from all
the valuables among the great people of Mitsrayim.
None of all the costly goods was left but what Yosĕph
sent of to his father’s household.
86 And he sent his brothers away, and they went, and
he sent his brother Binyamin with them.
87 And Yosĕph went out with them to accompany
them on the way to the borders of Mitsrayim, and he
commanded them concerning his father and his
household, to come to Mitsrayim.
88 And he said to them, “Do not quarrel on the way,
for this matter was from HWHY to keep a great people
893

YASHAR

from starvation, for there will be yet five years of
scarcity of food in the land.”
89 And he commanded them, saying, “When you
come to the land of Kena’an, do not come suddenly
before my father in this matter, but act in your wisdom.”
90 And Yosĕph ceased to command them, and he
turned and went back to Mitsrayim, and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ went to the land of Kena’an with joy and
gladness to their father Ya’aqoḇ.
91 And they came to the borders of the land, and they
said to each other, ‘What shall we do in this matter
before our father? For if we come suddenly to him and
tell him the matter, he will be greatly alarmed at our
words and will not believe us.”
92 And they went along until they came near to their
houses, and they found Seraḥ, the daughter of Ashĕr,
coming out to meet them, and the maiden was very
good and clever, and knew how to play on the harp.
93 And they called to her and she came before them,
and she kissed them, and they took her and gave to
her a harp, saying, “Go now before our father, and sit
before him, and play on the harp, and speak these
words.”
94 And they commanded her to go to their house, and
she took the harp and hurried before them, and she
came and sat near Ya’aqoḇ.
95 And she played well and sang, and spoke in the
sweetness of her words, “Yosĕph my uncle is living,
and he rules throughout the land of Mitsrayim, and is
not dead.”
96 And she continued to repeat and speak these
words, and Ya’aqoḇ heard her words and they were
agreeable to him.
97 He listened while she repeated them twice and
three times, and joy entered the heart of Ya’aqoḇ at
the sweetness of her words, and the Ruaḥ of Elohim
was upon him, and he knew all her words to be true.
894

JASHER

And Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ Seraḥ when she spoke these
words before him, and he said to her, “My daughter,
may death never prevail over you, for you have revived
my spirit, only speak again before me as you have
spoken, for you have gladdened me with all your
words.”
99 And she continued to sing these words, and
Ya’aqoḇ listened and it pleased him, and he rejoiced,
and the Ruaḥ of Elohim was upon him.
100 While he was still speaking with her, see, his sons
came to him with horses and chariots and royal
garments and servants running before them.
101 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up to meet them, and saw his
sons dressed in royal garments and he saw all the
treasures that Yosĕph had sent to them.
102 And they said to him, “Know that our brother
Yosĕph is living, and it is he who rules throughout the
land of Mitsrayim, and it is he who spoke to us as we
told you.”
103 And Ya’aqoḇ heard all the words of his sons, and
his heart was moved at their words, for he could not
believe them until he saw all that Yosĕph had given
them and what he had sent him, and all the signs which
Yosĕph had spoken to them.
104 And they opened out before him, and showed him
all that Yosĕph had sent. They gave to each what
Yosĕph had sent him, and he knew that they had
spoken the truth, and he rejoiced exceedingly for the
sake of his son.
105 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “It is enough for me that my son
Yosĕph is still living, I will go and see him before I die!”
106 And his sons told him all that had befallen them,
and Ya’aqoḇ said, “I will go down to Mitsrayim to see
my son and his offspring.”
107 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up and put on the garments
which Yosĕph had sent him, and after he had washed,
98

895

YASHAR

and shaved his hair, he put the turban on his head
which Yosĕph had sent him.
108 And all the people of Ya’aqoḇ’s house and their
wives put on the garments which Yosĕph had sent to
them, and they greatly rejoiced at Yosĕph that he was
still living and that he was ruling in Mitsrayim.
109 And all the inhabitants of Kena’an heard of this
matter, and they came and rejoiced much with
Ya’aqoḇ that he was still living.
110 And Ya’aqoḇ made a feast for them for three days,
and all the sovereigns of Kena’an and nobles of the
land ate and drank and rejoiced in the house of
Ya’aqoḇ.

55 And it came to be after this that Ya’aqoḇ said, “I
will go and see my son in Mitsrayim but will then come
back to the land of Kena’an of which Elohim has
spoken to Aḇraham, for I cannot leave the land of my
birth-place.”
2 See the word of HWHY came to him, saying, “Go
down to Mitsrayim with all your household and remain
there. Fear not, to go down to Mitsrayim for I will make
you a great nation there.”
3 And Ya’aqoḇ said within himself, “I will go and see
my son whether the fear of his Elohim is still in his heart
among all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim.”
4 And HWHY said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Fear not about
Yosĕph, for he still holds to his integrity to serve Me,
as will seem good in your eyes.” And Ya’aqoḇ rejoiced
exceedingly concerning his son.
5 At that time Ya’aqoḇ commanded his sons and
household to go to Mitsrayim according to the word of
HWHY to him, and Ya’aqoḇ rose up with his sons and
all his household, and he went out from the land of
Kena’an from Be’ĕrsheḇa, with joy and gladness of
heart, and they went to the land of Mitsrayim.
896

JASHER

And it came to be when they came near Mitsrayim,
Ya’aqoḇ sent Yahuḏah before him to Yosĕph that he
might show him a place in Mitsrayim. And Yahuḏah did
according to the word of his father, and he hurried and
ran and came to Yosĕph, and they assigned for them
a place in the land of Goshen for all his household, and
Yahuḏah returned and came along the way to his
father.
7 And Yosĕph harnessed the chariot, and he
assembled all his mighty men and his servants and all
the officers of Mitsrayim in order to go and meet his
father Ya’aqoḇ. And Yosĕph’s decree was proclaimed
in Mitsrayim, saying, “All that do not go to meet
Ya’aqoḇ shall die.”
8 And on the next day Yosĕph went out with all
Mitsrayim - a great and mighty host, all dressed in
garments of fine linen and purple and with instruments
of silver and gold and with their weapons of battle with
them.
9 And they all went to meet Ya’aqoḇ with all kinds of
musical instruments, with drums and timbrels,
scattering myrrh and aloes all along the way, and they
all went after this manner, and the earth shook at their
shouting.
10 And all the women of Mitsrayim went up on the
roofs of Mitsrayim and on the walls to meet Ya’aqoḇ.
And on the head of Yosĕph was Pharaoh’s royal
crown, for Pharaoh had sent it to him to put on at the
time of his going to meet his father.
11 And when Yosĕph came within fifty ammah of his
father, he came down from the chariot and he walked
toward his father, and when all the officers of Mitsrayim
and her nobles saw that Yosĕph had gone on foot
toward his father, they also came down and walked on
foot toward Ya’aqoḇ.
12 And when Ya’aqoḇ approached the company of
Yosĕph, Ya’aqoḇ saw the company that was coming
6

897

YASHAR

toward him with Yosĕph, and it delighted him and
Ya’aqoḇ was astonished at it.
13 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Yahuḏah, “Who is that man
whom I see in the camp of Mitsrayim dressed in royal
robes with a great red garment on him and a royal
crown on his head, who has come down from his
chariot and is coming toward us?” and Yahuḏah
answered his father, saying, “He is your son Yosĕph
the sovereign.” And Ya’aqoḇ rejoiced in seeing the
esteem of his son.
14 And Yosĕph came near to his father and he bowed
to his father, and all the men of the company bowed to
the ground with him before Ya’aqoḇ.
15 And see, Ya’aqoḇ ran and hurried to his son
Yosĕph and fell on his neck and kissed him, and they
wept. And Yosĕph also embraced his father and
kissed him, and they wept and all the people of
Mitsrayim wept with them.
16 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Yosĕph, “Now I will gladly die
after I have seen your face, that you are still living and
with esteem.”
17 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and their wives and their
children and their servants, and all the household of
Ya’aqoḇ wept exceedingly with Yosĕph, and they
kissed him and wept greatly with him.
18 And Yosĕph and all his people returned home to
Mitsrayim afterward, and Ya’aqoḇ and his sons and all
the children of his household came with Yosĕph to
Mitsrayim, and Yosĕph placed them in the best part of
Mitsrayim, in the land of Goshen.
19 And Yosĕph said to his father and to his brothers,
“I will go up and tell Pharaoh, saying, ‘My brothers and
my father’s household and all belonging to them have
come to me, and see, they are in the land of Goshen.’
”

898

JASHER

And Yosĕph did so and took of his brothers
Re’uḇĕn, Yissasḵar, Zeḇulun and his brother
Binyamin, and he placed them before Pharaoh.
21 And Yosĕph spoke to Pharaoh, saying, “My
brothers and my father’s household and all belonging
to them, together with their flocks and cattle have come
to me from the land of Kena’an, to sojourn in Mitsrayim;
for the scarcity of food was hard on them.”
22 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “Place your father
and brothers in the best part of the land, do not
withhold from them any that is good, and cause them
to eat of the fatness of the land.”
23 And Yosĕph answered, saying, “See I have settled
them in the land of Goshen, for they are shepherds,
therefore let them remain in Goshen to feed their flocks
apart from the Mitsrites.
24 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “Do with your
brothers all that they shall say to you.” And the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ bowed down to Pharaoh, and they went out
from him in peace afterward, and Yosĕph brought his
father before Pharaoh.
25 And Ya’aqoḇ came and bowed down to Pharaoh,
and Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ Pharaoh, and then he went out.
And Ya’aqoḇ and all his sons, and all his household
dwelt in the land of Goshen.
26 In the second year, that is, in the hundred and
thirtieth year of the life of Ya’aqoḇ, Yosĕph sustained
his father and his brothers, and all his father’s
household with bread according to their little ones. All
the days of the scarcity of food they lacked naught.
27 And Yosĕph gave to them the best part of the whole
land; they had the best of Mitsrayim all the days of
Yosĕph. And Yosĕph also gave to them and to the
whole of his father’s household, clothes and garments
year by year. And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ remained safely
in Mitsrayim all the days of their brother.
20

899

YASHAR

And Ya’aqoḇ always ate at Yosĕph’s table,
Ya’aqoḇ and his sons did not leave Yosĕph’s table day
or night, besides what Ya’aqoḇ’s children ate in their
houses.
29 And all Mitsrayim ate bread during the days of the
scarcity of food from the house of Yosĕph, for all the
Mitsrites sold all belonging to them because of the
scarcity of food.
30 And Yosĕph purchased all the lands and fields of
Mitsrayim for bread on the account of Pharaoh, and
Yosĕph supplied all Mitsrayim with bread all the days
of the scarcity of food. And Yosĕph collected all the
silver and gold that came to him for the grain which
they bought throughout the land, and he accumulated
much gold and silver, besides an immense quantity of
shoham stones, bdellium and valuable garments
which they brought to Yosĕph from every part of the
land when their silver was spent.
31 And Yosĕph took all the silver and gold that came
into his hand - about seventy-two kiḵars of gold, and
silver, and also shoham stones, and bdellium in great
quantities - and Yosĕph went and concealed them in
four parts. And he concealed one part in the wilderness
near the Sea of Reeds, and one part by the river
Perath, and the third and fourth part he concealed in
the desert opposite to the wilderness of Paras and
Maḏai.
32 And he took part of the gold and silver that was left,
and gave it to all his brothers and to all his father’s
household, and to all the women of his father’s
household, and the rest he brought to the house of
Pharaoh - about twenty kiḵars of gold and silver.
33 And Yosĕph gave all the gold and silver that was
left to Pharaoh, and Pharaoh placed it in the treasury.
And the days of the scarcity of food ceased after that
in the land, and they sowed and reaped in the whole
28

900

JASHER

land, and they obtained their usual quantity year by
year; they lacked naught.
34 And Yosĕph dwelt safely in Mitsrayim, and the
whole land was under his counsel, and his father and
all his brothers dwelt in the land of Goshen and took
possession of it.
35 And Yosĕph was very aged, advanced in days, and
his two sons, Ephrayim and Menashsheh, remained
constantly in the house of Ya’aqoḇ, together with the
children of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ their brothers, to learn
the Ways of HWHY and His Torot.
36 And Ya’aqoḇ and his sons dwelt in the land of
Mitsrayim in the land of Goshen, and they took
possession in it, and they were fruitful and multiplied in
it.

56 And Ya’aqoḇ lived in the land of Mitsrayim
seventeen years, and the days of Ya’aqoḇ, and the
years of his life were a hundred and forty-seven years.
2 At that time Ya’aqoḇ was struck with the illness of
which he died, and he sent and called for his son
Yosĕph from Mitsrayim, and Yosĕph his son came
from Mitsrayim and Yosĕph came to his father.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Yosĕph and to his sons, “See,
I am dying, and the Elohim of your ancestors will visit
you, and bring you back to the land, which HWHY swore
to give to you and to your children after you. Now
therefore when I am dead, bury me in the cave which
is in Maḵpĕlah in Ḥeḇron in the land of Kena’an, near
my ancestors.”
4 And Ya’aqoḇ made his sons swear to bury him in
Maḵpĕlah, in Ḥeḇron, and his sons swore to him
concerning this matter.
5 And he commanded them, saying, “Serve HWHY
your Elohim, for He who delivered your fathers will also
deliver you from all trouble.”
901

YASHAR

And Ya’aqoḇ said “Call all your children to me.” And
all the children of Ya’aqoḇ’s sons came and sat before
him, and Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ them, and he said to them,
“HWHY Elohim of your fathers shall grant you a
thousand times as much and baraḵ you, and may He
give you the beraḵah of your father Aḇraham.” And all
the children of Ya’aqoḇ’s sons went out on that day
after he had baraḵ them.
7 And on the next day Ya’aqoḇ again called for his
sons, and they all assembled and came to him and sat
before him. And on that day Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ his sons
before his death, each man he baraḵ according to his
beraḵah; see, it is written in the Book of the Law of
HWHY pertaining to Yisra’ĕl.
8 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Yahuḏah, “I know my son that
you are a mighty man from your brothers; reign over
them, and your sons shall reign over their sons forever.
9 “Only teach your sons the bow and all the weapons
of battle, in order that they may fight the battles of their
brother who will rule over his enemies.”
10 And Ya’aqoḇ again commanded his sons on that
day, saying, “See, this day I shall be gathered to my
people; carry me up from Mitsrayim, and bury me in
the cave of Maḵpĕlah as I have commanded you.
11 “However, please take heed that none of your sons
carry me, only yourselves. And this is the manner you
shall do to me, when you carry my body to go with it to
the land of Kena’an to bury me:
12 Yahuḏah, Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun shall carry my
coffin at the eastern side. Re’uḇĕn, Shim’on and Gaḏ
at the south. Ephrayim, Menashsheh and Binyamin at
the west. Dan, Ashĕr and Naphtali at the north.
13 “Let not Lĕwi carry with you, for he and his sons will
carry the ark of the Covenant of HWHY with the
Yisra’ĕlites in the camp. Neither let Yosĕph my son
carry, for as a sovereign so let his esteem be, however,
Ephrayim and Menashsheh shall be in their place.
6

902

JASHER

“Thus shall you do to me when you carry me away.
Do not neglect any matter of all that I command you,
and it shall come to pass when you do this to me, that
HWHY will remember you favourably and your children
after you forever.
15 “And you my sons, honour each his brother and his
relative, and command your children and your
children’s children after you to serve HWHY Elohim of
your ancestors all the days,
16 in order that you may prolong your days in the land,
you and your children and your children’s children
forever, when you do what is good and right in the sight
of HWHY your Elohim, to go in all His Ways.
17 “And you, Yosĕph my son, please forgive the
wrongs of your brothers and all their misdeeds in the
injury that they heaped upon you, for Elohim intended
it for you and your children’s benefit.
18 “And O my son, do not leave your brothers to the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim, neither hurt their feelings, for
see, I commit them to the hand of Elohim and in your
hand to guard them from the Mitsrites.” And the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ answered their father saying, “O, our
father, all that you have commanded us, so we will do;
may Elohim only be with us.”
19 And Ya’aqoḇ said to his sons, “So may Elohim be
with you when you keep all His Ways. Do not turn from
His Ways either to the right or the left in performing
what is good and right in His sight.
20 “For I know that many and grievous troubles will
befall you in the latter days in the land, even your
children and children’s children, only serve HWHY and
He will save you from all trouble.
21 “And it shall come to pass when you shall go after
Elohim to serve Him and will teach your children after
you, and your children’s children, to know HWHY, then
HWHY will raise up for you and your children a servant
from among your children. And HWHY will deliver you
14

903

YASHAR

through his hand from all affliction, and bring you out
of Mitsrayim and bring you back to the land of your
fathers to inherit it safely.”
22 And Ya’aqoḇ ceased commanding his sons, and he
drew his feet into the bed. He died and was gathered
to his people.
23 And Yosĕph fell on his father and he cried out and
wept over him and he kissed him, and he called out in
a bitter voice, and he said, “O my father, my father!”
24 And his son’s wives and all his household came
and fell on Ya’aqoḇ, and they wept over him, and cried
in a very loud voice concerning Ya’aqoḇ.
25 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ rose up together, and
they tore their garments, and they all put sackcloth on
their loins, and they fell on their faces, and they threw
dust on their heads toward the shamayim.
26 And the matter was told to Asenath Yosĕph’s wife,
and she rose up and put on sackcloth and she with all
the Mitsrite women with her came and mourned and
wept for Ya’aqoḇ.
27 And also all the people of Mitsrayim who knew
Ya’aqoḇ all came on that day when they heard this
matter, and all Mitsrayim wept for many days.
28 And also from the land of Kena’an the women came
to Mitsrayim when they heard that Ya’aqoḇ was dead,
and they wept for him in Mitsrayim for seventy days.
29 And it came to be after this that Yosĕph
commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father with myrrh and frankincense and all manner of
incense and perfume, and the doctors embalmed
Ya’aqoḇ as Yosĕph had commanded them.
30 And all the people of Mitsrayim and the elders and
all the inhabitants of the land of Goshen wept and
mourned over Ya’aqoḇ, and all his sons and the
children of his household lamented and mourned over
their father Ya’aqoḇ many days.
904

JASHER

And after the days of his weeping had passed at
the end of seventy days, Yosĕph said to Pharaoh, “I
will go up and bury my father in the land of Kena’an as
he made me swear, and then I will return.”
32 And Pharaoh sent Yosĕph, saying, “Go up and bury
your father as he said, and as he made you swear.”
And Yosĕph rose up with all his brothers to go to the
land of Kena’an to bury their father Ya’aqoḇ as he had
commanded them.
33 And Pharaoh commanded that it should be
proclaimed throughout Mitsrayim, saying, “Whoever
does not go up with Yosĕph and his brothers to the
land of Kena’an to bury Ya’aqoḇ, shall die.”
34 And all Mitsrayim heard of Pharaoh’s call, and they
all rose up together, and all the servants of Pharaoh,
and the elders of his house, and all the elders of the
land of Mitsrayim went up with Yosĕph. And all the
officers and nobles of Pharaoh went up as the servants
of Yosĕph, and they went to bury Ya’aqoḇ in the land
of Kena’an.
35 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ carried the coffin on which
he lay; according to all that their father commanded
them, so his sons did to him.
36 And the coffin was of pure gold, and it was inlaid
round about with shoham stones and bdellium. And
the covering of the coffin was gold woven work, joined
with threads, and over them were hooks of shoham
stones and bdellium.
37 And Yosĕph placed a large golden crown on the
head of his father Ya’aqoḇ, and he put a golden
sceptre in his hand, and they surrounded the coffin as
was the custom of sovereigns during their lives.
38 And all the armies of Mitsrayim went before him in
this order: first, all the mighty men of Pharaoh, and the
mighty men of Yosĕph, and after them the rest of the
inhabitants of Mitsrayim. And they were all girded with
31

905

YASHAR

swords and equipped with scaled armour, and the
weapons of battle were on them.
39 And all the lamenters and mourners went at a
distance opposite to the coffin, going and weeping and
lamenting, and the rest of the people went after the
coffin.
40 And Yosĕph and his household went together near
the coffin barefoot and weeping, and the rest of
Yosĕph’s servants went around him - each man had
his ornaments upon him - and they were all armed with
their weapons of battle.
41 And fifty of Ya’aqoḇ’s servants went in front of the
coffin, and they scattered myrrh and aloes along the
way, and all manner of perfume. And all the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ that carried the coffin walked on the
perfumery, and the servants of Ya’aqoḇ went before
them scattering the perfume along the way.
42 And Yosĕph went up with a great company, and
they did after this manner every day until they reached
the land of Kena’an. And they came to the threshing
floor of Ataḏ, which is on the other side of Yardĕn, and
they mourned an exceedingly great and grievous
mourning in that place.
43 And all the sovereigns of Kena’an heard of this
matter and they all went out, each man from his house
- thirty-one sovereigns of Kena’an - and they all came
with their men to mourn and weep over Ya’aqoḇ.
44 And all these sovereigns saw Ya’aqoḇ’s coffin, and
see, Yosĕph’s crown was on it, and they also put their
crowns on the coffin, and encircled it with crowns.
45 And all these sovereigns made a great and
grievous mourning in that place with the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ and Mitsrayim over Ya’aqoḇ, for all the
sovereigns of Kena’an knew the might of Ya’aqoḇ and
his sons.

906

JASHER

And the report reached Ĕsaw, saying, “Ya’aqoḇ
died in Mitsrayim, and his sons and all Mitsrayim are
carrying him to the land of Kena’an to bury him.”
47 And Ĕsaw heard this matter, and he was dwelling
in mount Sĕ’ir, and he rose up with his sons and all his
people and all his household, a people exceedingly
great, and they came to mourn and weep over
Ya’aqoḇ.
48 And it came to be, when Ĕsaw came, he mourned
for his brother Ya’aqoḇ, and all Mitsrayim and all
Kena’an again rose up and mourned a great mourning
with Ĕsaw over Ya’aqoḇ in that place.
49 And Yosĕph and his brothers brought their father
Ya’aqoḇ from that place, and they went to Ḥeḇron to
bury Ya’aqoḇ in the cave with his fathers.
50 And they came to Qiryath Arba, to the cave, and as
they came Ĕsaw stood with his sons against Yosĕph
and his brothers as a hindrance in the cave, saying,
“Ya’aqoḇ shall not be buried in here, for it belongs to
us and to our father.”
51 And Yosĕph and his brothers heard the words of
Ĕsaw’s sons, and they were exceedingly wroth. And
Yosĕph approached toward Ĕsaw, saying, “What is
this word which they have spoken? Indeed my father
Ya’aqoḇ bought it from you for great riches after the
death of Yitsḥaq, now twenty-five years ago, and also
all the land of Kena’an he bought from you and from
you and from your sons, and your seed after you.
52 “And Ya’aqoḇ bought it for his sons and his seed
after him for an inheritance forever, and why do you
speak these words today?”
53 And Ĕsaw answered, saying, “You speak falsely
and speak lies, for I sold no matter belonging to me in
all this land as you say, neither did my brother Ya’aqoḇ
buy whatever belonging to me in this land.”
54 And Ĕsaw spoke these matters in order to deceive
Yosĕph with his words, for Ĕsaw knew that Yosĕph
46

907

YASHAR

was not present in those days when Ĕsaw sold all
belonging to him in the land of Kena’an to Ya’aqoḇ.
55 And Yosĕph said to Ĕsaw, “Indeed my father
established these matters with you in the record of
purchase, and witnessed the record with witnesses,
and see, it is with us in Mitsrayim.”
56 And Ĕsaw answered, saying to him, “Bring the
record. All that you will find in the record, so we will
do.”
57 And Yosĕph called to Naphtali his brother, and he
said, “Hurry quickly, do not stand still, and please run
to Mitsrayim and bring all the records; the record of the
purchase, the sealed record and the open record, and
also bring all the first records in which all the matters
of the birth-right are written.
58 “And you shall bring them to us here, that we may
know from them all the words of Ĕsaw and his sons
which they spoke today.”
59 And Naphtali listened to the voice of Yosĕph and
he hurried and ran to go down to Mitsrayim. And
Naphtali was swifter on foot than any of the stags
throughout the wilderness, for he would go upon heads
of grain without crushing them.
60 And when Ĕsaw saw that Naphtali had gone to
fetch the records, he and his sons increased their
resistance against the cave, and Ĕsaw and all his
people rose up against Yosĕph and his brothers to
battle.
61 And all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and the people of
Mitsrayim fought with Ĕsaw and his men, and the sons
of Ĕsaw and his people were smitten before the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ, and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slew of Ĕsaw’s
people forty men.
62 And Ḥushim son of Dan, son of Ya’aqoḇ, was at
that time with Ya’aqoḇ’s sons, but he was about a
hundred ammah away from the place of battle, for he
908

JASHER

remained with the children of Ya’aqoḇ’s sons by
Ya’aqoḇ’s coffin to guard it.
63 And Ḥushim was dumb and deaf, still he
understood the voice of fear among men.
64 And he asked, saying, “Why do you not bury the
dead, and what is this great fear?” and they answered
him the words of Ĕsaw and his sons. And he ran to
Ĕsaw in the midst of the battle, and he slew Ĕsaw with
a sword, and he cut off his head, and it sprang to a
distance, and Ĕsaw fell among the people of the battle.
65 And when Ḥushim did this matter the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ prevailed over the sons of Ĕsaw, and the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ buried their father Ya’aqoḇ by force in the
cave, and the sons of Ĕsaw saw it.
66 And Ya’aqoḇ was buried in Ḥeḇron, in the cave of
Maḵpĕlah which Aḇraham had bought from the sons of
Ḥĕth for the possession of a burial place, and he was
buried in very costly garments.
67 And no sovereign had such honour paid him as
Yosĕph paid to his father at his death, for he buried
him with great honour like the burial of sovereigns.
68 And Yosĕph and his brothers made a mourning of
seven days for their father.

57 And it came to be after this that the sons of Ĕsaw
fought with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ. And the sons of Ĕsaw
fought with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ in Ḥeḇron, and Ĕsaw
was still lying dead, and not buried.
2 And the battle was fierce between them, and the
sons of Ĕsaw were smitten before the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and the sons of Ya’aqoḇ slew eighty men of the sons
of Ĕsaw, and not one died of the people of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ. And the hand of Yosĕph prevailed over all
the people of the sons of Ĕsaw, and he took Tsepho,
son of Eliphaz, son of Ĕsaw, and fifty of his men
captive, and he bound them with chains of iron, and
909

YASHAR

gave them into the hand of his servants to bring them
to Mitsrayim.
3 And it came to be when the sons of Ya’aqoḇ had
taken Tsepho and his people captive, all those that
remained were greatly afraid for their lives from the
house of Ĕsaw, lest they should also be taken captive,
and they all fled with Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw and his
people, with Ĕsaw’s body, and they went on their way
to Mount Sĕ’ir.
4 And they came to Mount Sĕ’ir and they buried Ĕsaw
in Sĕ’ir, but they had not brought his head with them to
Sĕ’ir, for it was buried in that place where the battle
had been in Ḥeḇron.
5 And it came to be when the sons of Ĕsaw had fled
from before the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
pursued them to the borders of Sĕ’ir. But they did not
slay a single man from among them when they
pursued them, for Ĕsaw’s body which they carried with
them caused them confusion, so they fled and the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ turned back from them and came up to the
place where their brothers were in Ḥeḇron. And they
remained there on that day, and on the next day until
they rested from the battle.
6 And it came to be on the third day they assembled
all the sons of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite, and they assembled all
the children of the East, a multitude of people like the
sand of the sea, and they went and came down to
Mitsrayim to fight against Yosĕph and his brothers, in
order to deliver their brothers.
7 And Yosĕph and all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ heard that
the sons of Ĕsaw and the children of the East had
come upon them to battle in order to deliver their
brothers.
8 And Yosĕph and his brothers and the strong men
of Mitsrayim went forth and fought in the city of
Ra’meses, and Yosĕph and his brothers delivered a
910

JASHER

mighty blow among the sons of Ĕsaw and the children
of the East.
9 And they slew of them six hundred thousand men,
and they slew among them all the mighty men of the
children of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite; there were only a few of
them left. And they also slew a great many of the
children of the East, and of the children of Ĕsaw, and
Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw, and the children of the East all
fled before Yosĕph and his brothers.
10 And Yosĕph and his brothers pursued them until
they came to Sukkoth, and they further slew thirty men
of them in Sukkoth, and the rest escaped and they
each fled to his city.
11 And Yosĕph and his brothers and the mighty men
of Mitsrayim turned back from them with joy and
gladness of heart, for they had smitten all their
enemies.
12 And Tsepho son of Eliphaz and his men were still
slaves in Mitsrayim to the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and their
pains increased.
13 And when the sons of Ĕsaw and the sons of Sĕ’ir
returned to their land, the sons of Sĕ’ir saw that they
had all fallen into the hands of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and the people of Mitsrayim, because of the battle of
the sons of Ĕsaw.
14 And the sons of Sĕ’ir said to the sons of Ĕsaw, “You
have seen and therefore you know that this army was
for your sake, and not one mighty man or one skilled
in battle remains.
15 “Now therefore go out from our land, go from us to
the land of Kena’an to the land of the dwelling of your
fathers. Why shall your children inherit the
possessions of our children in latter days?”
16 And the children of Ĕsaw would not listen to the
children of Sĕ’ir, and the children of Sĕ’ir thought to
fight against them.
911

YASHAR

And the children of Ĕsaw sent secretly to Angĕas
sovereign Aphrika, that is Dinhaḇah, saying,
18 “Send to us some of your men and let them come
to us, and we will fight together with the children of
Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite, for they have resolved to fight against
us to drive us away from the land.”
19 And Angĕas sovereign of Dinhaḇah did so, for he
was in those days friendly to the children of Ĕsaw. And
Angĕas sent five hundred mighty foot soldiers to the
children of Ĕsaw, and eight hundred cavalry.
20 And the children of Sĕ’ir sent to the children of the
East and to the children of Miḏyan, saying, “You have
seen what the children of Ĕsaw have done to us, for
whose sake we were almost all destroyed in their battle
with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
21 “Now therefore come to us and help us, and we will
fight them together, and we will drive them from the
land and be avenged of the cause of our brothers who
died for their sakes in their battle with their brothers the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ.”
22 And all the children of the East listened to the
children of Sĕ’ir, and they came to them - about eight
hundred men with drawn swords - and the children of
Ĕsaw fought with the children of Sĕ’ir at that time in the
wilderness of Paran.
23 And the children of Sĕ’ir prevailed at that time over
the sons of Ĕsaw, and on that day the children of Sĕ’ir
slew about two hundred men of the people of Angĕas
sovereign of Dinhaḇah of the children of Ĕsaw in the
battle.
24 And on the second day the children of Ĕsaw came
again to fight a second time with the children of Sĕ’ir,
and the battle was hard on the children of Ĕsaw this
second time, and it troubled them greatly for the sake
of the children of Sĕ’ir.
25 And when the children of Ĕsaw saw that the
children of Sĕ’ir were more powerful than they were,
17

912

JASHER

some men of the children of Ĕsaw turned and helped
the children of Sĕ’ir their enemies.
26 And more of the children of Ĕsaw fell battle - fiftyeight men of the people of Angĕas sovereign of
Dinhaḇah.
27 And on the third day the children of Ĕsaw heard that
some of their brothers had turned from them to fight
against them in the second battle, and the children of
Ĕsaw mourned when they heard this word.
28 And they said, “What shall we do to our brothers
who turned from us to help the children of Sĕ’ir our
enemies?” and the children of Ĕsaw again sent to
Angĕas sovereign of Dinhaḇah, saying,
29 “Send to us again other men that with them we may
fight against the children of Sĕ’ir, for they have already
twice been greater than we were.”
30 And Angĕas again sent about six hundred mighty
men to the children of Ĕsaw, and they came to help the
children of Ĕsaw.
31 And in ten days’ time the children of Ĕsaw again
fought with the children of Sĕ’ir in the wilderness of
Paran, and the battle was very fierce upon the children
of Sĕ’ir. And the children of Ĕsaw prevailed at this time
over the children of Sĕ’ir, and the children of Sĕ’ir were
smitten before the children of Ĕsaw, and the children
of Ĕsaw slew from them about two thousand men.
32 And all the mighty men of the children of Sĕ’ir died
in this battle, and there only remained their young
children that were left in their cities.
33 And all Miḏyan and the children of the East took to
flight from the battle, and they left the children of Sĕ’ir
and fled when they saw that the battle was fierce upon
them. And the children of Ĕsaw pursued all the children
of the East until they reached their land.
34 And the children of Ĕsaw further slew of them about
two hundred and fifty men, and from the people of the
children of Ĕsaw there fell in that battle about thirty
913

YASHAR

men. But this evil came upon them through their
brothers turning from them to help the children of Sĕ’ir
the Ḥorite, and the children of Ĕsaw again heard of the
evil doings of their brothers, and they again mourned
because of this matter.
35 And it came to be after the battle, the children of
Ĕsaw turned back and came home to Sĕ’ir, and the
children of Ĕsaw slew those who had remained in the
land of the children of Sĕ’ir. They also slew their wives
and little ones, they left not a being alive except fifty
young men and maidens whom they allowed to live.
And the children of Ĕsaw did not put them to death, but
the young men became their slaves, and the maidens
they took for wives.
36 And the children of Ĕsaw dwelt in Sĕ’ir in the place
of the children of Sĕ’ir, and they inherited their land and
took possession of it.
37 And the children of Ĕsaw took all belonging to the
children of Sĕ’ir in the land, also their flocks, their oxen
and their goods, and all belonging to the children of
Sĕ’ir, the children of Ĕsaw took. And the children of
Ĕsaw dwelt in Sĕ’ir in the place of the children of Sĕ’ir
to this day. And the children of Ĕsaw divided the land
into divisions to the five sons of Ĕsaw, according to
their clans.
38 And it came to be in those days, that the children of
Ĕsaw resolved to crown a sovereign over them in the
land of which they came to possess. But they said to
each other, “Not so, for he shall reign over us in our
land, and we shall be under his counsel and he shall
fight our battles, against our enemies, and they did so.”
39 And all the children of Ĕsaw swore, saying that
none of their brothers should ever reign over them, but
a strange man who is not of their brothers, for the
beings of all the children of Ĕsaw were embittered
every man against his son, brother and friend,
914

JASHER

because of the evil they sustained from their brothers
when they fought with the children of Sĕ’ir.
40 Therefore the sons of Ĕsaw swore, saying from
then onward, they would not choose a sovereign from
their brothers, but one from a strange land unto this
day.
41 And there was a man there from the people of
Angĕas sovereign of Dinhaḇah - his name was Bela
son of Be’or - who was a very mighty man, goodlooking and handsome and wise in all wisdom, and a
man of sense and counsel, and there was none of the
people of Angĕas like him.
42 And all the children of Ĕsaw took him and anointed
him and they crowned him as sovereign, and they
bowed down to him, and they said to him, “May the
sovereign live, may the sovereign live!”
43 And they spread out the sheet, and each man
brought him earrings of gold and silver or rings or
bracelets, and they made him very rich in silver and in
gold, in shoham stones and bdellium. And they made
him a royal throne, and they placed a royal crown on
his head, and they built a palace for him and he dwelt
in it, and he became sovereign over all the children of
Ĕsaw.
44 And the people of Angĕas took their payment for
their battle from the children of Ĕsaw, and they went
and returned at that time to their master in Dinhaḇah.
45 And Bela reigned over the children of Ĕsaw thirty
years, and the children of Ĕsaw dwelt in the land
instead of the children of Sĕ’ir, and they dwelt safely in
their place to this day.

58 And it came to be in the thirty-second year of the
Yisra’ĕlites going down to Mitsrayim, that is in the
seventy-first year of the life of Yosĕph, in that year
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim died, and Maḡron his
son reigned in his place.
915

YASHAR

And Pharaoh commanded Yosĕph before his death
to be a father to his son, Maḡron, and that Maḡron
should be under the care of Yosĕph and under his
counsel.
3 And all Mitsrayim agreed to this matter that Yosĕph
should be sovereign over them, for all the Mitsrites
loved Yosĕph as of before, only Maḡron son of
Pharaoh sat upon his father’s throne, and he became
sovereign in those days in his father’s place.
4 Maḡron was forty-one years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned forty years in Mitsrayim. And all
Mitsrayim called his name Pharaoh after the name of
his father, as it was their custom to do in Mitsrayim to
every sovereign that reigned over them.
5 And it came to be when Pharaoh reigned in his
father’s place, he put the laws of Mitsrayim and all the
affairs of the reign in the hand of Yosĕph, as his father
had commanded him.
6 And Yosĕph became sovereign over Mitsrayim, for
he was overseer over all Mitsrayim, and all Mitsrayim
was under his care and under his counsel, for all
Mitsrayim inclined to Yosĕph after the death of
Pharaoh, and they loved him exceedingly to reign over
them.
7 But there were some people among them, who did
not like him, saying, “No stranger shall reign over us.”
Still the whole reign of Mitsrayim fell in those days
upon Yosĕph, after the death of Pharaoh, he being the
official, doing as he liked throughout the land without
anyone interfering.
8 And all Mitsrayim was under the care of Yosĕph,
and Yosĕph fought against all his surrounding
enemies, and he subdued them. Yosĕph also subdued
all the land and all the Pelishtites to the borders of
Kena’an, and they were all under his power and they
gave a yearly levy to Yosĕph.
2

916

JASHER

And Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim sat on his
throne in his father’s place, but he was under the
control and counsel of Yosĕph, as he was at first under
the control of his father.
10 Neither did he reign but in the land of Mitsrayim
only, under the counsel of Yosĕph, but Yosĕph reigned
over the whole country at that time, from Mitsrayim to
the great river Perath.
11 And Yosĕph was successful in all his ways, and
HWHY was with him, and HWHY gave Yosĕph additional
wisdom, and honour, and esteem, and love toward him
in the hearts of the Mitsrites and throughout the land,
and Yosĕph reigned over the whole country forty
years.
12 And all the countries of the Pelishtites and Kena’an
and Tsiḏon, and on the other side of Yardĕn, brought
presents to Yosĕph all his days, and the whole country
was in the hand of Yosĕph. And they brought to him a
yearly tribute as it was decreed, for Yosĕph had fought
against all his surrounding enemies and subdued
them. And the whole country was in the hand of
Yosĕph, and Yosĕph sat safely on his throne in
Mitsrayim.
13 And also all his brothers, the sons of Ya’aqoḇ dwelt
safely in the land, all the days of Yosĕph, and they
were fruitful and multiplied exceedingly in the land, and
they served HWHY all their days, as their father Ya’aqoḇ
had commanded them.
14 And it came to be at the end of many days and
years, when the children of Ĕsaw were dwelling quietly
in their land with Bela their sovereign, that the children
of Ĕsaw were fruitful and multiplied in the land, and
they resolved to go and fight against the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ and all Mitsrayim, and to deliver their brother
Tsepho, son of Eliphaz, and his men, for they were still
slaves in those days to Yosĕph.
9

917

YASHAR

And the children of Ĕsaw sent to all the children of
the East, and they made peace with them, and all the
children of the East came to them to go with the
children of Ĕsaw to Mitsrayim to battle.
16 And there also came to them some of the people of
Angĕas, sovereign of Dinhaḇah, and they also sent to
the children of Yishma’ĕl and they also came to them.
17 And all this people assembled and came to Sĕ’ir to
assist the children of Ĕsaw in their battle, and this
camp was very large and great with people, numerous
as the sand of the sea - about eight hundred thousand
men - foot soldiers and cavalry, and all these
companies went down to Mitsrayim to fight against the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they encamped by Ra’meses.
18 And Yosĕph went out with his brothers with the
mighty men of Mitsrayim - about six hundred men - and
they fought with them in the land of Ra’meses. And at
that time the sons of Ya’aqoḇ fought with the children
of Ĕsaw again, in the fiftieth year of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ going down to Mitsrayim, that is the thirtieth
year of the reign of Bela over the children of Ĕsaw in
Sĕ’ir.
19 And HWHY gave all the mighty men of Ĕsaw and the
children of the East into the hand of Yosĕph and his
brothers, and the people of the children of Ĕsaw and
the children of the East were smitten before Yosĕph.
20 And of the people of Ĕsaw and the children of the
East that were slain, there fell before the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, about two hundred thousand men, and their
sovereign Bela son of Be’or fell with them in the battle.
And when the children of Ĕsaw saw that their
sovereign had fallen in battle and was dead, their
hands became weak in the battle.
21 And Yosĕph and his brothers and all Mitsrayim
were still smiting the people of the house of Ĕsaw, and
all Ĕsaw’s people were afraid of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
and fled from before them.
15

918

JASHER

And Yosĕph and his brothers and all Mitsrayim
pursued them a day’s journey, and they further slew
from them about three hundred men, continuing to
smite them on the way; and afterward they turned back
from them.
23 And Yosĕph and all his brothers returned to
Mitsrayim, not one man was missing from them, but of
the Mitsrites there fell twelve men.
24 And when Yosĕph returned to Mitsrayim he
ordered Tsepho and his men to be further bound, and
they bound them in irons and they increased their grief.
25 And all the people of the children of Ĕsaw, and the
children of the East, returned in shame, each to his
city, for all the mighty men that were with them had
fallen in battle.
26 And when the children of Ĕsaw saw that their
sovereign had died in battle, they hastened and took a
man from the people of the children of the East - his
name was Yoḇaḇ son of Zeraḥ - from the land of
Botsrah, and they appointed him to reign over them
instead of Bela their sovereign.
27 And Yoḇaḇ sat on the throne of Bela as sovereign
in his place, and Yoḇaḇ reigned in Eḏom over all the
children of Ĕsaw ten years. And the children of Ĕsaw
no longer went to fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
from then onward, for the sons of Ĕsaw knew the might
of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and they were greatly afraid of
them.
28 But from then onward the children of Ĕsaw hated
the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and the hatred and enmity were
very strong between them all the days, to this day.
29 And it came to be after this, at the end of ten years,
Yoḇaḇ, son of Zeraḥ, from Botsrah, died, and the
children of Ĕsaw took a man whose name was
Ḥusham, from the land of Tĕman, and they made him
sovereign over them instead of Yoḇaḇ. And Ḥusham
22

919

YASHAR

reigned in Eḏom over all the children of Ĕsaw for
twenty years.
30 And Yosĕph, sovereign of Mitsrayim, and his
brothers, and all the children of Yisra’ĕl dwelt safely in
Mitsrayim in those days, together with all the children
of Yosĕph and his brothers, having no hindrance or
evil accident. And the land of Mitsrayim was at that
time at rest from battle in the days of Yosĕph and his
brothers.

59 And these are the names of the sons of Yisra’ĕl
who dwelt in Mitsrayim, who had come with Ya’aqoḇ,
all the sons of Ya’aqoḇ that came to Mitsrayim, every
man with his household:
2 The children of Lĕ’ah were Re’uḇĕn, Shim’on, Lĕwi,
Yahuḏah, Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun, and their sister
Dinah.
3 And the sons of Raḥĕl were Yosĕph and Binyamin.
4 And the sons of Zilpah, the female servant of Lĕ’ah,
were Gaḏ and Ashĕr.
5 And the sons of Bilhah, the female servant of
Raḥĕl, were Dan and Naphtali.
6 And these were their offspring that were born to
them in the land of Kena’an, before they came to
Mitsrayim with their father Ya’aqoḇ:
7 The sons of Re’uḇĕn were Ḥanoḵ, Pallu, Ḥetsron
and Karmi.
8 And the sons of Shim’on were Yemu’ĕl, Yamin,
Ohaḏ, Yaḵin, Tsoḥar and Sha’ul, son of the Kena’anite
woman.
9 And the children of Lĕwi were Gĕreshon, Qehath
and Merari, and their sister Yoḵeḇeḏ, who was born to
them in their going down to Mitsrayim.
10 And the sons of Yahuḏah were Ĕr, Onan, Shĕlah,
Perez and Zeraḥ.
11 And Ĕr and Onan died in the land of Kena’an. And
the sons of Perez were Ḥetsron and Ḥamul.
920

JASHER

And the sons of Yissasḵar were Tola, Puw’ah, lyoḇ
and Shomeron.
13 And the sons of Zeḇulun were Sereḏ, Ĕylon and
Yaḥle’ĕl. And the son of Dan was Ḥushim.
14 And the sons of Naphtali were Yaḥtse’ĕl, Guni,
Yĕtser and Shillĕm.
15 And the sons of Gaḏ were Tsephon, Ḥaggi, Shuni,
Etsbon, Ĕri, Aroḏi and Arĕli.
16 And the children of Ashĕr were Yimnah, Yishwah,
Yishwi, Beri’ah and their sister Seraḥ. And the sons of
Beri’ah were Ḥeḇer and Malki’ĕl.
17 And the sons of Binyamin were Bela, Beḵer,
Ashbĕl, Gĕra, Na’aman, Aḥi, Rosh, Muppim, Ḥuppim
and Ard.
18 And the sons of Yosĕph, that were born to him in
Mitsrayim, were Menashsheh and Ephrayim.
19 And all the beings that went out from the loins of
Ya’aqoḇ, were seventy beings; these are they who
came with Ya’aqoḇ their father to Mitsrayim to dwell
there. And Yosĕph and all his brothers dwelt safely in
Mitsrayim, and they ate of the best of Mitsrayim all the
days of the life of Yosĕph.
20 And Yosĕph lived in the land of Mitsrayim ninetythree years, and Yosĕph reigned over all Mitsrayim
eighty years.
21 And when the days of Yosĕph drew near that he
should die, he sent and called for his brothers and all
his father’s household, and they all came together and
sat before him.
22 And Yosĕph said to his brothers and to the whole
of his father’s household, “See I die, and Elohim will
indeed visit you and bring you up from this land to the
land which He swore to your fathers to give to them.
23 “And it shall be when Elohim shall visit you to bring
you up from here to the land of your fathers, then bring
up my bones with you from here.”
12

921

YASHAR

And Yosĕph made the sons of Yisra’ĕl swear for
their seed after them, saying, “Elohim will indeed visit
you and you shall bring up my bones with you from
here.”
25 And it came to be after this that Yosĕph died in that
year, the seventy-first year of the Yisra’ĕlites going
down to Mitsrayim.
26 And Yosĕph was one hundred and ten years old
when he died in the land of Mitsrayim, and all his
brothers and all his servants rose up and they
embalmed Yosĕph, as was their custom, and his
brothers and all Mitsrayim mourned over him for
seventy days.
27 And they put Yosĕph in a coffin filled with spices
and all kinds of perfume, and they buried him by the
side of the river, that is Shiḥor. And his sons and all his
brothers, and the whole of his father’s household made
a seven day’s mourning for him.
28 And it came to be after the death of Yosĕph, in
those days all the Mitsrites began to rule over the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and Pharaoh, sovereign of
Mitsrayim, who reigned in his father’s place, took all
the laws of Mitsrayim and brought the whole reign of
Mitsrayim under his counsel, and he reigned safely
over his people.
24

60 And when the turn of the year, being the seventysecond year from the Yisra’ĕlites going down to
Mitsrayim, after the death of Yosĕph, Tsepho, son of
Eliphaz, son of Ĕsaw, fled from Mitsrayim, he and his
men, and they went away.
2 And he came to Aphrika, which is Dinhaḇah, to
Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika, and Angĕas received
them with great honour, and he made Tsepho the
commander of his army.
3 And Tsepho found favour in the sight of Angĕas
and in the sight of his people, and Tsepho was captain
922

JASHER

of the army to Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika for many
days.
4 And Tsepho enticed Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika
to gather all his army to go and fight against the
Mitsrites, and with the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, and to avenge
of them the cause of his brothers.
5 But Angĕas would not listen to Tsepho to do this
matter, for Angĕas knew the strength of the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ, and what they had done to his army in their
battle with the children of Ĕsaw.
6 And Tsepho was in those days very great in the
sight of Angĕas and in the sight of all his people, and
he continually enticed them to fight against Mitsrayim,
but they would not.
7 And it came to be in those days, there was in the
land of the Ḥittites a man in the city of Puzimna, whose
name was Uzu, and he came to be abominably
worshipped by the children of the Ḥittites. And the man
died and had no son, only one daughter whose name
was Yaniah.
8 And the maiden was exceedingly good-looking, fair
of form and intelligent. There was none seen like her
for good looks and wisdom throughout the land.
9 And the people of Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika
saw her and they came and praised her to him. And
Angĕas sent to the children of the Ḥittites, and he
requested to take her for himself as a wife, and the
people of the Ḥittites consented to give her to him for
a wife.
10 And when the messengers of Angĕas were going
out from the land of the Ḥittites to take their journey,
see, the messengers of Turnus sovereign of Bibentu
came to the Ḥittites. For Turnus sovereign of Bibentu
also sent his messengers to request Yaniah for him, to
take to himself for a wife, for all his men had also
praised her to him, therefore he sent all his servants to
her.
923

YASHAR

And the servants of Turnus came to the Ḥittites,
and they asked for Yaniah, to be taken to Turnus their
sovereign for a wife.
12 And the people of the Ḥittites said to them, “We
cannot give her, because Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika
desired her to take her to him for a wife before you
came, and that we should give her to him. And now
therefore we cannot do this matter to deprive Angĕas
of the maiden in order to give her to Turnus,
13 for we are greatly afraid of Angĕas lest he come in
battle against us and destroy us, and Turnus your
master will not be able to deliver us from his hand.”
14 And when the messengers of Turnus heard all the
words of the children of the Ḥittites, they turned back
to their master and told him all the words of the children
of the Ḥittites.
15 And the children of the Ḥittites sent a record to
Angĕas, saying, “Behold Turnus has sent for Yaniah to
take her to him for a wife, and thus have we answered
him. And we heard that he has gathered his whole
army to go to battle against you, and he intends to pass
by the way of Sardunia to fight against your brother
Luqas, and after that he will come to fight against you.”
16 And Angĕas heard the words of the children of the
Ḥittites which they sent to him in the record, and his
wrath was kindled and he rose up and assembled his
whole army and came through the islands of the sea,
the way to Sardunia, to his brother Luqas sovereign of
Sardunia.
17 And Niblos, son of Luqas, heard that his uncle
Angĕas was coming, and he went out to meet him with
a great army, and he kissed him and embraced him.
And Niblos said to Angĕas, “When you ask my father
after his welfare, when I shall go with you to fight
against Turnus, ask of him to make me commander of
his army.” And Angĕas did so, and he came to his
11

924

JASHER

brother and his brother came to meet him, and he
asked him after his welfare.
18 And Angĕas asked his brother Luqas after his
welfare, and to make his son Niblos commander of his
army. And Luqas did so, and Angĕas and his brother
Luqas rose up and they went toward Turnus to battle,
and there was with them a great army and a mighty
people.
19 And he came in ships, and they came into the
province of Ashtorash, and see, Turnus came toward
them, for he went out to Sardunia, and intended to
destroy it and afterward to pass on from there to
Angĕas to fight against him.
20 And Angĕas and Luqas his brother met Turnus in
the valley of Kanopia, and the battle was strong and
mighty between them in that place.
21 And the battle was fierce upon Luqas sovereign of
Sardunia, and all his army fell, and Niblos his son also
fell in that battle.
22 And his uncle Angĕas commanded his servants
and they made a golden coffin for Niblos and they put
him into it. And Angĕas again waged battle toward
Turnus, but Angĕas was stronger than he, and he slew
him, and he smote all his people with the edge of the
sword. And Angĕas avenged the cause of Niblos his
brother’s son and the cause of the army of his brother
Luqas.
23 And when Turnus died, the hands of those that
survived the battle became weak, and they fled from
before Angĕas and Luqas his brother.
24 And Angĕas and his brother Luqas pursued them
to the highway, which is between Alphanu and Romah,
and they slew the whole army of Turnus with the edge
of the sword.
25 And Luqas sovereign of Sardunia commanded his
servants that they should make a coffin of brass, and
925

YASHAR

that they should place the body of his son Niblos in it,
and they buried him in that place.
26 And they built a high tower upon it there on the
highway, and they called its name after the name of
Niblos to this day. And they also buried Turnus
sovereign of Bibentu there in that place with Niblos.
27 And see, on the highway between Alphanu and
Romah, the grave of Niblos is on one side and the
grave of Turnus on the other, and a pavement between
them to this day.
28 And when Niblos was buried, Luqas his father
returned with his army to his land Sardunia, and
Angĕas his brother sovereign of Aphrika went with his
people to the city of Bibentu, that is the city of Turnus.
29 And the inhabitants of Bibentu heard of his fame
and they were greatly afraid of him, and they went out
to meet him with weeping and supplication, and the
inhabitants of Bibentu begged Angĕas not to slay them
nor destroy their city. And so he did, for Bibentu was in
those days reckoned as one of the cities of the children
of the Ḥittites, therefore he did not destroy the city.
30 But from then onward the companies of the
sovereign of Aphrika would go to the Ḥittites to spoil
and plunder it, and whenever they went, Tsepho the
captain of the army of Angĕas would go with them.
31 And it came to be after this that Angĕas turned with
his army and they came to the city of Puzimna, and
Angĕas took from there Yaniah the daughter of Uzu for
a wife and brought her to his city to Aphrika.

61 And it came to be at that time, Pharaoh sovereign
of Mitsrayim commanded all his people to make a
strong palace for him in Mitsrayim.
2 And he also commanded the sons of Ya’aqoḇ to
assist the Mitsrites in the building, and the Mitsrites
made an attractive and elegant palace for a royal
926

JASHER

dwelling, and he dwelt in it and he renewed his reign
and he reigned safely.
3 And Zeḇulun son of Ya’aqoḇ died in that year, that
is the seventy-second year of the going down of the
Yisra’ĕlites to Mitsrayim. And Zeḇulun died a hundred
and fourteen years old, and was put into a coffin and
given into the hands of his children.
4 And in the seventy-fifth year his brother Shim’on
died. He was a hundred and twenty years old at his
death, and he was also put into a coffin and given into
the hands of his children.
5 And Tsepho son of Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw, captain of
the army to Angĕas sovereign of Dinhaḇah, was still
daily enticing Angĕas to prepare for battle to fight
against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ in Mitsrayim. But Angĕas
was unwilling to do this matter, for his servants had
related to him all the might of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
what they had done to them in their battle with the
children of Ĕsaw.
6 And in those days Tsepho was daily enticing
Angĕas to fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ in those
days.
7 And after some time Angĕas listened to the words
of Tsepho and consented to him to fight against the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ in Mitsrayim, and Angĕas got all his
people in order, a people numerous as the sand which
is upon the sea shore, and he formed his resolve to go
to Mitsrayim to battle.
8 And among the servants of Angĕas was a young
man, fifteen years old - Bil’am son of Be’or was his
name - and the young man was very wise and
understood the art of witchcraft.
9 And Angĕas said to Bil’am, “Please divine for us
with the witchcraft, that we may know who will prevail
in this battle to which we are now proceeding.
10 And Bil’am ordered that they should bring him wax,
and he made from it the likeness of chariots and
927

YASHAR

horsemen representing the army of Angĕas and the
army of Mitsrayim. And he put them in the skillfully
prepared waters that he had for that purpose, and he
took in his hand the branches of myrtle trees, and he
exercised his skill, and he cast spells over the water.
And there appeared to him in the water the resembling
images of the armies of Angĕas falling before the
resembling images of the Mitsrites and the sons of
Ya’aqoḇ.
11 And Bil’am told this matter to Angĕas, and Angĕas
despaired and did not arm himself to go down to
Mitsrayim to battle, but remained in his city.
12 And when Tsepho son of Eliphaz saw that Angĕas
despaired of going out to battle with the Mitsrites,
Tsepho fled from Angĕas from Aphrika, and he went
and came to the Ḥittites.
13 And all the people of the Ḥittites received him with
great honour, and they hired him to fight their battles
all the days. And Tsepho became exceedingly rich in
those days, and the companies of the sovereign of
Aphrika spread themselves further in those days, and
the children of the Ḥittites assembled and went to
Mount Kuptitsia because of the companies of Angĕas
sovereign of Aphrika, who were advancing on them.
14 And it came to be one day that Tsepho lost a young
heifer, and he went to seek it, and he heard it lowing
round about the mountain.
15 And Tsepho went and he looked and see, there
was a large cave at the bottom of the mountain, and
there was a great stone there at the entrance of the
cave. And Tsepho split the stone and he came into the
cave and he looked and see, a large beast was
devouring the ox. From the middle upward it
resembled a man, and from the middle downward it
resembled a beast, and Tsepho rose up against the
beast and slew it with his swords.
928

JASHER

And the inhabitants of the Ḥittites heard of this
matter, and they rejoiced exceedingly, and they said,
“What shall we do to this man who has slain this beast
that devoured our cattle?”
17 And they all assembled to qadosh one day in the
year to him, and they called the name of it Tsepho after
his name, and they brought to him drink offerings year
after year on that day, and they brought gifts to him.
18 At that time Yaniah the daughter of Uzu wife of
sovereign Angĕas became ill, and her illness was
heavily felt by Angĕas and his officers. And Angĕas
said to his wise men, “What shall I do to Yaniah and
how shall I heal her from her illness?” And his wise
men said to him, “Because the air of our country is not
like the air of the land of the Ḥittites, and our water is
not like their water, therefore from this has the
sovereigness become ill.
19 “For through the change of air and water she
became ill, and also because in her country she drank
only the water which came from Purmah, which her
ancestors had brought up with bridges.”
20 And Angĕas commanded his servants, and they
brought to him in vessels of the waters of Purmah
belonging to the Ḥittites, and they weighed those
waters with all the waters of the land of Aphrika, and
they found those waters lighter than the waters of
Aphrika.
21 And Angĕas saw this matter, and he commanded
all his officers to assemble the hewers of stone in
thousands and tens of thousands, and they hewed
stone without number. And the builders came and they
built an exceedingly strong bridge, and they brought
the spring of water from the land of the Ḥittites to
Aphrika, and those waters were for Yaniah the
sovereigness and for all her concerns, to drink from
and to bake, wash and bathe, and also to water all
16

929

YASHAR

seed from which food can be obtained, and all fruit of
the ground.
22 And the sovereign commanded that they should
bring the soil of the Ḥittites in large ships, and they also
brought stones to build. And the builders built palaces
for Yaniah the sovereigness, and the sovereigness
became healed of her illness.
23 And at the turn of the year, the companies of
Aphrika continued coming to the land of the Ḥittites to
plunder as usual. And Tsepho son of Eliphaz heard
their report, and he gave orders concerning them and
he fought with them, and they fled before him, and he
delivered the land of the Ḥittites from them.
24 And the children of the Ḥittites saw the might of
Tsepho, and the children of the Ḥittites resolved and
they made Tsepho sovereign over them, and he
became sovereign over them. And while he reigned
they went to subdue the children of Tuḇal, and all the
surrounding islands.
25 And their sovereign Tsepho went at their head and
they fought against Tuḇal and the islands, and they
subdued them. And when they returned from the battle
they renewed his reign for him, and they built for him a
very large palace for his royal dwelling and throne. And
they made a large throne for him, and Tsepho reigned
over the whole land of the Ḥittites and over the land of
Italiyah fifty years.

62 In that year, being the seventy-ninth year of the
Yisra’ĕlites going down to Mitsrayim, Re’uḇĕn son of
Ya’aqoḇ died in the land of Mitsrayim. Re’uḇĕn was a
hundred and twenty-five years old when he died, and
they put him in a coffin, and he was given into the
hands of his children.
2 And in the eightieth year his brother Dan died. He
was a hundred and twenty years at his death, and he
930

JASHER

was also put in a coffin and given into the hands of his
children.
3 And in that year Ḥusham sovereign of Eḏom died,
and after him Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ reigned for thirtyfive years. And in the eighty-first year, Yissasḵar son
of Ya’aqoḇ died in Mitsrayim. And Yissasḵar was a
hundred and twenty-two years old at his death, and he
was put in a coffin in Mitsrayim, and given into the
hands of his children.
4 And in the eighty-second year Ashĕr his brother
died. He was a hundred and twenty-three years old at
his death, and he was placed in a coffin in Mitsrayim,
and given into the hands of his children.
5 And in the eighty-third year Gaḏ died. He was a
hundred and twenty-five years old at his death, and he
was put in a coffin in Mitsrayim, and given into the
hands of his children.
6 And it came to be in the eighty-fourth year, that is
the fiftieth year of the reign of Haḏaḏ, son of Beḏaḏ,
sovereign of Eḏom, that Haḏaḏ assembled all the
children of Ĕsaw, and he gathered his whole army in
readiness - about four hundred thousand men - and he
directed his way to the land of Mo’aḇ, and he went to
fight against Mo’aḇ and to make them compulsory
labour for him.
7 And the children of Mo’aḇ heard this matter, and
they were very much afraid, and they sent to the
children of Miḏyan to assist them in fighting with
Haḏaḏ, son of Beḏaḏ, sovereign of Eḏom.
8 And Haḏaḏ came to the land of Mo’aḇ. And Mo’aḇ
and the children of Miḏyan went out to meet him, and
they placed themselves in battle array against him in
the field of Mo’aḇ.
9 And Haḏaḏ fought with Mo’aḇ, and there fell of the
children of Mo’aḇ and the children of Miḏyan many
slain ones, about two hundred thousand men.
931

YASHAR

And the battle was very fierce upon Mo’aḇ, and
when the children of Mo’aḇ saw that the battle was
hard upon them, they weakened their hands and
turned their backs, and left the children of Miḏyan to
carry on the battle.
11 And the children of Miḏyan did not know the
intentions of Mo’aḇ, but they strengthened themselves
in battle and fought with Haḏaḏ and all his army, and
all Miḏyan fell before him.
12 And Haḏaḏ smote all Miḏyan with a great smiting,
and he slew them with the edge of the sword, he left
none remaining of those who came to assist Mo’aḇ.
13 And when all the children of Miḏyan had perished
in battle, and the children at Mo’aḇ had escaped,
Haḏaḏ made all Mo’aḇ compulsory labour for him at
that time. And they came to be under his hand, and
they gave a yearly levy as it was ordered, and Haḏaḏ
turned and went back to his land.
14 And at the turn of the year, when the rest of the
people of Miḏyan that were in the land heard that all
their brothers had fallen in battle with Haḏaḏ for the
sake of Mo’aḇ, because the children of Mo’aḇ had
turned their backs in battle and left Miḏyan to fight,
then five of the princes of Miḏyan resolved with the rest
of their brothers who remained in their land, to fight
against Mo’aḇ to avenge the cause of their brothers.
15 And the children of Miḏyan sent to all their brothers
the children of the East, and all their brothers - all the
children of Qeturah - came to assist Miḏyan to fight
against Mo’aḇ.
16 And the children of Mo’aḇ heard this matter, and
they were greatly afraid that all the children of the East
had assembled together against them for battle, and
they the children of Mo’aḇ sent a memorial to the land
of Eḏom to Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ, saying,
17 “Come now to us and assist us and we will smite
Miḏyan, for they have all assembled together and
10

932

JASHER

come against us with all their brothers the children of
the East to battle, to avenge the cause of Miḏyan that
fell in battle.”
18 And Haḏaḏ, son of Beḏaḏ, sovereign of Eḏom,
went out with his whole army and went to the land of
Mo’aḇ to fight against Miḏyan. And Miḏyan and the
children of the East fought with Mo’aḇ in the field of
Mo’aḇ, and the battle was very fierce between them.
19 And Haḏaḏ smote all the children of Miḏyan and the
children of the East with the edge of the sword, and at
that time Haḏaḏ delivered Mo’aḇ from the hand of
Miḏyan. And those that remained of Miḏyan and of the
children of the East fled before Haḏaḏ and his army,
and Haḏaḏ pursued them to their land, and smote
them with a very great slaughter, and the slain fell in
the way.
20 And Haḏaḏ delivered Mo’aḇ from the hand of
Miḏyan, for all the children of Miḏyan had fallen with
the edge of the sword, and Haḏaḏ turned and went
back to his land.
21 And from then onward, the children of Miḏyan
hated the children of Mo’aḇ, because they had fallen
in battle for their sake, and there was a great and
mighty enmity between them all the days.
22 And all that were found of Miḏyan on the way in the
land of Mo’aḇ perished by the sword of Mo’aḇ, and all
that were found of Mo’aḇ on the way in the land of
Miḏyan, perished by the sword of Miḏyan. Miḏyan did
so to Mo’aḇ and Mo’aḇ to Miḏyan for many days.
23 And it came to be at that time, that Yahuḏah son of
Ya’aqoḇ died in Mitsrayim, in the eighty-sixth year of
Ya’aqoḇ’s going down to Mitsrayim. And Yahuḏah was
a hundred and twenty-nine years old at his death, and
they embalmed him and put him into a coffin, and he
was given into the hands of his children.

933

YASHAR

And in the eighty-ninth year Naphtali died. He was
a hundred and thirty-two years old, and he was put into
a coffin and given into the hands of his children.
25 And it came to be in the ninety-first year of the
Yisra’ĕlites going down to Mitsrayim, that is in the
thirtieth year of the reign of Tsepho son of Eliphaz, son
of Ĕsaw, over the children of the Ḥittites, the children
of Aphrika came upon the children of the Ḥittites to
plunder them as usual, but they had not come upon
them for these thirteen years.
26 And they came to them in that year, and Tsepho
son of Eliphaz went out to them with some of his men
and smote them grievously. And the companies of
Aphrika fled from before Tsepho and the slain fell
before him, and Tsepho and his men pursued them,
going on and smiting them until they were near to
Aphrika.
27 And Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika heard the matter
which Tsepho had done, and it troubled him
exceedingly, and Angĕas was afraid of Tsepho all the
days.
24

63 And in the ninety-third year, Lĕwi son of Ya’aqoḇ
died in Mitsrayim. And Lĕwi was a hundred and thirtyseven years old when he died, and they put him into a
coffin and he was given into the hands of his children.
2 And it came to be after the death of Lĕwi, when all
Mitsrayim saw that the sons of Ya’aqoḇ the brothers of
Yosĕph were dead, all the Mitsrites began to afflict the
children of Ya’aqoḇ, and to embitter their lives from
that day to the day of their going out from Mitsrayim.
And they took from their hands all the vineyards and
fields which Yosĕph had given to them, and all the fine
houses in which the people of Yisra’ĕl lived. And all the
fatness of Mitsrayim, the Mitsrites took all from the
sons of Ya’aqoḇ in those days.
934

JASHER

And the hand of all Mitsrayim became more
grievous in those days against the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and the Mitsrites provoked the Yisra’ĕlites until the
children of Yisra’ĕl were wearied of their lives because
of the Mitsrites.
4 And it came to be in those days, in the hundred and
second year of Yisra’ĕl’s going down to Mitsrayim, that
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim died, and Mĕlol his
son reigned in his place. And all the mighty men of
Mitsrayim and all that generation which knew Yosĕph
and his brothers died in those days.
5 And another generation rose up in their place,
which had not known the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and all the
good which they had done to them, and all their might
in Mitsrayim.
6 Therefore all Mitsrayim began from that day
onward to embitter the lives of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and to afflict them with all manner of hard labour,
because they had not known their ancestors who had
delivered them in the days of the scarcity of food.
7 And this was also from HWHY, for the children of
Yisra’ĕl, to benefit them in their latter days, in order that
all the children of Yisra’ĕl might know HWHY their
Elohim,
8 and in order to know the signs and mighty wonders
which HWHY would do in Mitsrayim because of His
people Yisra’ĕl, in order that the children of Yisra’ĕl
might fear HWHY Elohim of their ancestors, and walk in
all His Ways, they and their seed after them all the
days.
9 Mĕlol was twenty years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned ninety-four years. And all Mitsrayim
called his name Pharaoh after the name of his father,
as it was their custom to do to every sovereign who
reigned over them in Mitsrayim.
3

935

YASHAR

At that time all the companies of Angĕas sovereign
of Aphrika went out to spread along the land of the
Ḥittites as usual for plunder.
11 And Tsepho son of Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw heard their
report, and he went forth to meet them with his army,
and he fought them there on the way.
12 And Tsepho smote the companies of the sovereign
of Aphrika with the edge of the sword, and left none
remaining of them, and not even one returned to his
master in Aphrika.
13 And Angĕas heard of this which Tsepho son of
Eliphaz had done to all his companies, that he had
destroyed them, and Angĕas assembled all his
companies, all the men of the land of Aphrika, a people
as numerous as the sand by the sea shore.
14 And Angĕas sent to Luqas his brother, saying,
“Come to me with all your men and help me to smite
Tsepho and all the children of the Ḥittites who have
destroyed my men.” And Luqas came with his whole
army, a very great company, to assist Angĕas his
brother to fight against Tsepho and the children of the
Ḥittites.
15 And Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites heard
this matter, and they were greatly afraid and a great
fear fell upon their hearts.
16 And Tsepho also sent a letter to the land of Eḏom
to Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ sovereign of Eḏom and to all
the children of Ĕsaw, saying,
17 “I have heard that Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika is
coming to us with his brother for battle against us, and
we are greatly afraid of him, for his army is very great,
particularly as he comes against us with his brother
and his army also.
18 “Now therefore, you also come up with me and help
me, and we will fight together against Angĕas and his
brother Luqas, and you will save us out of their hands,
but if not, know that we shall all die.”
10

936

JASHER

And the children of Ĕsaw sent a letter to the
children of the Ḥittites and to Tsepho their sovereign,
saying, “We cannot fight against Angĕas and his
people, for a covenant of peace has been between us
these many years, from the days of Bela the first
sovereign, and from the days of Yosĕph son of
Ya’aqoḇ sovereign of Mitsrayim, with whom we fought
on the other side of Yardĕn when he buried his father.”
20 And when Tsepho heard the words of his brothers,
the children of Ĕsaw he refrained from them, and
Tsepho was greatly afraid of Angĕas.
21 And Angĕas and Luqas his brother arrayed all their
companies, about eight hundred thousand men,
against the children of the Ḥittites.
22 And all the children of the Ḥittites said to Tsepho,
“Pray for us to the Elohim of your ancestors. Maybe He
will deliver us from the hand of Angĕas and his army,
for we have heard that He is a great Elohim and that
He delivers all who trust in Him!”
23 And Tsepho heard their words, and Tsepho sought
HWHY and he said,
24 “O HWHY Elohim of Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq my
ancestors, this day I know that You are a true Elohim,
and all the mighty ones of the nations are vain and
useless.
25 “Remember now today Your covenant to me with
Aḇraham our father, which our ancestors related to us,
and deal favourably with me today for the sake of
Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq our fathers, and save me and
the children of the Ḥittites from the hand of the
sovereign of Aphrika who comes against us for battle.”
26 And HWHY listened to the voice of Tsepho, and He
had regard for him because of Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq,
and HWHY delivered Tsepho and the children of the
Ḥittites from the hand of Angĕas and his people.
27 And Tsepho fought Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika
and all his people on that day, and HWHY gave all the
19

937

YASHAR

people of Angĕas into the hands of the children of the
Ḥittites.
28 And the battle was fierce upon Angĕas, and
Tsepho smote all the men of Angĕas and Luqas his
brother with the edge of the sword, and there fell from
them about four hundred thousand men till the evening
of that day.
29 And when Angĕas saw that all his men perished,
he sent a letter to all the inhabitants of Aphrika to come
to him, to assist him in the battle, and he wrote in the
letter, saying, “All who are found in Aphrika let them
come to me, from ten years old and upward. Let them
all come to me, and see, if he does not come he shall
die, and all that he has, with his whole household, the
sovereign will take.”
30 And all the rest of the inhabitants of Aphrika were
afraid at the words of Angĕas, and there went out of
the city about three hundred thousand men and boys,
from ten years upward, and they came to Angĕas.
31 And at the end of ten days Angĕas renewed the
battle against Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites,
and the battle was very great and strong between
them.
32 And from the army of Angĕas and Luqas, Tsepho
sent many of the wounded to his hand - about two
thousand men - and Sosiphtar the captain of the army
of Angĕas fell in that battle.
33 And when Sosiphtar had fallen, the companies of
Aphrika turned their backs to flee, and they fled, and
Angĕas and Luqas his brother were with them.
34 And Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites pursued
them, and they continued to smite them heavily on the
way - about two hundred men - and they pursued
Azdruḇal son of Angĕas who had fled with his father,
and they smote twenty of his men on the way. But
Azdruḇal escaped from the children of the Ḥittites, and
they did not slay him.
938

JASHER

And Angĕas and Luqas his brother fled with the rest
of their men, and they escaped and came to Aphrika
with fear and dread, and Angĕas feared all the days
lest Tsepho son of Eliphaz should go to battle against
him.
35

64 And Bil’am son of Be’or was at that time with
Angĕas in the battle. And when he saw that Tsepho
prevailed over Angĕas, he fled from there and came to
the Ḥittites.
2 And Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites
received him with great honour, for Tsepho knew
Bil’am’s wisdom, and Tsepho gave to Bil’am many gifts
and he remained with him.
3 And when Tsepho had returned from the battle, he
commanded all the children of the Ḥittites to be
numbered who had gone into battle with him, and see,
not one was missing.
4 And Tsepho rejoiced at this matter, and he
renewed his reign, and he made a feast for all his
subjects.
5 But Tsepho did not remember HWHY and did not
consider that HWHY had helped him in battle, and that
He had delivered him and his people from the hand of
the sovereign of Aphrika, but still walked in the ways
of the children of the Ḥittites and the wicked children
of Ĕsaw, to serve other mighty ones which his brothers
the children of Ĕsaw had taught him. It is therefore
said, “From the wicked goes forth wickedness.”
6 And Tsepho reigned over all the children of the
Ḥittites safely, but did not know HWHY who had
delivered him and all his people from the hand of the
sovereign of Aphrika. And the companies of Aphrika
came no more to the Ḥittites to plunder as usual, for
they knew of the power of Tsepho who had smitten
them all with the edge of the sword. So Angĕas was
939

YASHAR

afraid of Tsepho son of Eliphaz, and of the children of
the Ḥittites all the days.
7 At that time when Tsepho had returned from the
battle, and when Tsepho had seen how he prevailed
over all the people of Aphrika and had smitten them in
battle with the edge of the sword, then Tsepho took
counsel with the children of the Ḥittites, to go to
Mitsrayim to fight against the sons of Ya’aqoḇ and with
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim.
8 For Tsepho heard that the mighty men of Mitsrayim
were dead and that Yosĕph and his brothers the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ were dead, and that all their children, the
children of Yisra’ĕl remained in Mitsrayim.
9 And Tsepho considered to go to fight against them
and all Mitsrayim, to avenge the cause of his brothers
the children of Ĕsaw, whom Yosĕph with his brothers
and all Mitsrayim had smitten in the land of Kena’an,
when they went up to bury Ya’aqoḇ in Ḥeḇron.
10 And Tsepho sent messengers to Haḏaḏ, son of
Beḏaḏ, sovereign of Eḏom, and to all his brothers the
children of Ĕsaw, saying,
11 “Did you not say that you would not fight against the
sovereign of Aphrika for he is a member of your
covenant? See, I fought with him and smote him and
all his people.
12 “Now therefore I have resolved to fight against
Mitsrayim and the children of Ya’aqoḇ who are there,
and I will be avenged of them for what Yosĕph, his
brothers and ancestors did to us in the land of Kena’an
when they went up to bury their father in Ḥeḇron.
13 “Now then if you are willing to come to me to assist
me in fighting against them and Mitsrayim, then we
shall avenge the cause of our brothers.”
14 And the children of Ĕsaw listened to the words of
Tsepho, and the children of Ĕsaw gathered
themselves together, a very great people, and they
940

JASHER

went to assist Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites
in battle.
15 And Tsepho sent to all the children of the East and
to all the children of Yishma’ĕl with words such as
these, and they gathered themselves and came to the
assistance of Tsepho and the children of the Ḥittites in
the battle upon Mitsrayim.
16 And all these sovereigns, the sovereign of Eḏom
and the children of the East, and all the children of
Yishma’ĕl, and Tsepho the sovereign of the Ḥittites
went out and arrayed all their armies in Ḥeḇron.
17 And the camp was very great, extending in length
a distance of three days’ journey, a people numerous
as the sand on the sea shore which cannot be counted.
18 And all these sovereigns and their armies went
down and came against all Mitsrayim in battle, and
encamped together in the valley of Pathros.
19 And all Mitsrayim heard their report, and they also
gathered themselves together, all the people of the
land of Mitsrayim, and of all the cities belonging to
Mitsrayim - about three hundred thousand men.
20 And the men of Mitsrayim also sent to the children
of Yisra’ĕl who in those days were in the land of
Goshen, to come to them in order to go and fight
against these sovereigns.
21 And the men of Yisra’ĕl assembled and were about
one hundred and fifty men, and they went to battle to
assist the Mitsrites.
22 And the men of Yisra’ĕl and of Mitsrayim went out,
about three hundred thousand men and one hundred
and fifty men, and they went toward these sovereigns
to battle, and they placed themselves from without the
land of Goshen opposite Pathros.
23 And the Mitsrites did not trust in Yisra’ĕl to go with
them in their divisions together for battle, for all the
Mitsrites said, “Maybe the children of Yisra’ĕl will
941

YASHAR

deliver us into the hand of the children of Ĕsaw and
Yishma’ĕl, for they are their brothers.”
24 And all the Mitsrites said to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“You remain here together in your position and we will
go and fight against the children of Ĕsaw and
Yishma’ĕl, and if these sovereigns should prevail over
us, then you come all together upon them and assist
us.” And the children of Yisra’ĕl did so.
25 And Tsepho son of Eliphaz son of Ĕsaw sovereign
of the Ḥittites, and Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ sovereign of
Eḏom, and all their divisions, and all the children of the
East, and children of Yishma’ĕl, a people numerous as
sand, encamped together in the valley of Pathros
opposite Taḥpanḥes.
26 And Bil’am son of Be’or the Aramean was there in
the camp of Tsepho, for he came with the children of
the Ḥittites to the battle. And Bil’am was a man highly
honoured in the eyes of Tsepho and his men.
27 And Tsepho said to Bil’am, “Try by divination for us
that we may know who will prevail in the battle, we or
the Mitsrites.”
28 And Bil’am rose up and tried the art of divination,
and he was skillful in the knowledge of it, but he was
confused and the work was destroyed in his hand.
29 And he tried it again but it did not succeed, and
Bil’am despaired of it and left it and did not complete
it, for this was from HWHY, in order to cause Tsepho
and his people to fall into the hand of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, who had trusted in HWHY, the Elohim of their
ancestors, in their battle.
30 And Tsepho and Haḏaḏ put their armies in battle
array, and all the Mitsrites went alone against them about three hundred thousand men - and not one man
of Yisra’ĕl was with them.
31 And all the Mitsrites fought with these sovereigns
opposite Pathros and Taḥpanḥes, and the battle was
fierce against the Mitsrites.
942

JASHER

And the sovereigns were stronger than the Mitsrites
in that battle, and about one hundred and eighty men
of Mitsrayim fell on that day. And about thirty men of
the armies of the sovereigns, and all the men of
Mitsrayim fled from before the sovereigns, so the
children of Ĕsaw and Yishma’ĕl pursued the Mitsrites,
continuing to smite them to the place where the camp
of the children of Yisra’ĕl was.
33 And all the Mitsrites cried to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “Hasten to us and assist us and save us from
the hand of Ĕsaw, Yishma’ĕl and the children of the
Ḥittites!”
34 And the hundred and fifty men of the children of
Yisra’ĕl ran from their position to the camps of these
sovereigns, and the children of Yisra’ĕl cried to HWHY
their Elohim to deliver them.
35 And HWHY listened to Yisra’ĕl, and HWHY gave all
the men of the sovereigns into their hand, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl fought against these sovereigns,
and the children of Yisra’ĕl smote about four thousand
of the sovereigns’ men.
36 And HWHY threw a great confusion into the camp of
the sovereigns, so that the fear of the children of
Yisra’ĕl fell upon them.
37 And all the armies of the sovereigns fled from
before the children of Yisra’ĕl, and the children of
Yisra’ĕl pursued them continuing to smite them to the
borders of the land of Kush.
38 And the children of Yisra’ĕl slew of them on the way
a further two thousand men, but not one of the children
of Yisra’ĕl fell.
39 And when the Mitsrites saw that the children of
Yisra’ĕl had fought with such few men with the
sovereigns, and that the battle was so very fierce
against them,
40 all the Mitsrites were greatly afraid for their lives
because of the mighty battle, and all the Mitsrites fled,
32

943

YASHAR

every man hiding himself from the arrayed armies, and
they hid themselves on the way, and they left the
Yisra’ĕlites to fight.
41 And the children of Yisra’ĕl inflicted a terrible blow
upon the sovereigns’ men, and they returned from
them after they had driven them to the border of the
land of Kush.
42 And all Yisra’ĕl knew the matter which the men of
Mitsrayim had done to them, that they had fled from
them in battle, and had left them to fight alone.
43 So the children of Yisra’ĕl also acted with cunning,
and as the children of Yisra’ĕl returned from battle,
they found some of the Mitsrites on the way and smote
them there.
44 And while they slew them, they said to them these
words:
45 “Why did you go from us and leave us, being few
people, to fight against these sovereigns who had a
great people to smite us, that you might thereby deliver
your own beings?”
46 And of some which the Yisra’ĕlites met on the way,
then the children of Yisra’ĕl spoke to each other,
saying, “Smite, smite, for he is a Yishma’ĕlite, or an
Eḏomite, or from the children of the Ḥittites!” And they
stood over him and slew him, but they knew that he
was a Mitsrite.
47 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did these matters
cunningly against the Mitsrites, because they had
deserted them in battle and had fled from them.
48 And the children of Yisra’ĕl slew of the men of
Mitsrayim, about two hundred men on the way in this
manner.
49 And all the men of Mitsrayim saw the evil which the
children of Yisra’ĕl had done to them, so all Mitsrayim
greatly feared the children of Yisra’ĕl, for they had
seen their great power, and that not one man of them
had fallen.
944

JASHER

So all the children of Yisra’ĕl returned with joy on
their way to Goshen, and the rest of Mitsrayim
returned, each man to his place.
50

65 And it came to be after these matters, that all the
counsellors of Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim, and all
the elders of Mitsrayim assembled and came before
the sovereign and bowed down to the ground, and they
sat before him.
2 And the counsellors and elders of Mitsrayim spoke
to the sovereign, saying,
3 “Look, the people of the children of Yisra’ĕl are
greater and mightier than we are, and you know all the
evil which they did to us on the way when we returned
from battle.
4 And you have also seen their strong power, for this
power to them is from their fathers, for but a few men
stood up against a people numerous as the sand, and
smote them by the edge of the sword. But of
themselves not one has fallen, so that if they had been
numerous they would then have utterly destroyed
them.
5 “Now therefore give us counsel what to do with
them, until we gradually destroy them from among us,
lest they become too numerous for us in the land.
6 “For if the children of Yisra’ĕl should increase in the
land, they will become an obstacle to us, and if any
battle should come to take place, they with their great
strength will join our enemy against us, and fight
against us, destroy us from the land and go away from
it.”
7 So the sovereign answered the elders of Mitsrayim
and said to them, “This is the plan advised against
Yisra’ĕl, from which we will not depart.
8 “See, in the land are Pithom and Ra’meses, cities
unfortified against battle. It is necessary for us to build
them, and to fortify them.
945

YASHAR

“Now therefore you go and also act cunningly
toward them, and send a call in Mitsrayim and in
Goshen at the command of the sovereign, saying,
10 ‘All you men of Mitsrayim, Goshen, Pathros and all
their inhabitants; the sovereign has commanded us to
build Pithom and Ra’meses, and to fortify them for
battle. Whoever among you of all Mitsrayim, of the
children of Yisra’ĕl and of all the inhabitants of the
cities, are willing to build with us, shall each have his
wages given to him daily at the sovereign’s order.’ So
you go first and do cunningly, and gather yourselves
and come to Pithom and Ra’meses to build.
11 “And while you are building, send a call of this kind
to be made throughout Mitsrayim every day at the
command of the sovereign.
12 “And when some of the children of Yisra’ĕl shall
come to build with you, you shall give them their wages
daily for a few days.
13 “And after they shall have built with you for their
daily wage, withdraw yourselves away from them daily
one by one in secret, and then you shall rise up and
become their task-masters and officers, and you shall
leave them afterward to build without wages. But
should they refuse, then force them with all your might
to build.
14 “And if you do this it will be well with us to
strengthen our land against the children of Yisra’ĕl, for
because of the fatigue of the building and the work, the
children of Yisra’ĕl will decrease, because you will
deprive them from their wives day by day.”
15 And all the elders of Mitsrayim heard the counsel of
the sovereign, and the counsel seemed good in their
eyes and in the eyes of the servants of Pharaoh, and
in the eyes of all Mitsrayim, and they did according to
the word of the sovereign.
16 And all the servants went away from the sovereign,
and they sent a call to be made in all Mitsrayim, in
9

946

JASHER

Taḥpanḥes and in Goshen, and in all the cities which
surrounded Mitsrayim, saying,
17 “You have seen what the children of Ĕsaw and
Yishma’ĕl did to us, who came to battle against us and
wanted to destroy us.
18 “Now therefore the sovereign commanded us to
fortify the land, to build the cities Pithom and
Ra’meses, and to fortify them for battle, if they should
again come against us.
19 “Whoever of you from all Mitsrayim and from the
children of Yisra’ĕl will come to build with us, he shall
have his daily wages given by the sovereign, as his
command is to us.”
20 And when Mitsrayim and all the children of Yisra’ĕl
heard all that the servants of Pharaoh had spoken,
they came from the Mitsrites, and the children of
Yisra’ĕl to build with the servants of Pharaoh, Pithom
and Ra’meses, but none of the children of Lĕwi came
with their brothers to build.
21 And all the servants of Pharaoh and his princes
came at first with deceit to build with all Yisra’ĕl as daily
hired labourers, and they gave to Yisra’ĕl their daily
wage at the beginning.
22 And the servants of Pharaoh built with all Yisra’ĕl,
and were employed in that work with Yisra’ĕl for a
month.
23 And at the end of the month, all the servants of
Pharaoh began to withdraw secretly from the people of
Yisra’ĕl daily.
24 And Yisra’ĕl went on with the work at that time, but
they then received their daily wage, because some of
the men of Mitsrayim were still continuing the work with
Yisra’ĕl at that time; therefore the Mitsrites gave
Yisra’ĕl their wage in those days, in order that they, the
Mitsrites their fellow workmen, might also take the pay
for their labour.
947

YASHAR

And at the end of a year and four months all the
Mitsrites had withdrawn from the children of Yisra’ĕl,
so that the children of Yisra’ĕl were left alone
employed in the work.
26 And after all the Mitsrites had withdrawn from the
children of Yisra’ĕl they returned and became
oppressors and officers over them, and some of them
stood over the children of Yisra’ĕl as slave-drivers, to
receive from them all that they gave them for the pay
of their labour.
27 And the Mitsrites did to the children of Yisra’ĕl in
this manner day by day, in order to afflict them in their
work.
28 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl were alone
employed in the labour, and the Mitsrites refrained
from giving any pay to the children of Yisra’ĕl from that
time onward.
29 And when some of the men of Yisra’ĕl refused to
work because of the wages not being given to them,
then the slave-drivers and the servants of Pharaoh
oppressed them and struck them with heavy blows,
and made them return by force, to labour with their
brothers. So all the Mitsrites did to the children of
Yisra’ĕl all the days.
30 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl were greatly afraid of
the Mitsrites in this matter, and all the children of
Yisra’ĕl returned and worked alone without pay.
31 And the children of Yisra’ĕl built Pithom and
Ra’meses, and all the children of Yisra’ĕl did the work,
some making bricks, and some building, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl built and fortified all the land of
Mitsrayim and its walls. And the children of Yisra’ĕl
were engaged in work for many years, until the time
came when HWHY remembered them and brought
them out of Mitsrayim.
25

948

JASHER

But the children of Lĕwi were not employed in the
work with their brothers of Yisra’ĕl, from the beginning
to the day of their going out from Mitsrayim.
33 For all the children of Lĕwi knew that the Mitsrites
had spoken all these words with deceit to the
Yisra’ĕlites, therefore the children of Lĕwi refrained
from approaching to the work with their brothers.
34 And the Mitsrites did not direct their attention to
make the children of Lĕwi work afterward, since they
had not been with their brothers at the beginning.
Therefore the Mitsrites left them alone.
35 And the hands of the men of Mitsrayim were
directed with continued severity against the children of
Yisra’ĕl in the work, and the Mitsrites made the
children of Yisra’ĕl work with harshness.
36 And the Mitsrites embittered the lives of the
children of Yisra’ĕl with hard work, in mortar and
bricks, and also in all manner of work in the field.
37 And the children of Yisra’ĕl called Melol the
sovereign of Mitsrayim ‘Meror, sovereign of Mitsrayim,’
because in his days the Mitsrites had embittered their
lives with all manner of work.
38 And all the work wherein the Mitsrites made the
children of Yisra’ĕl labour, they exacted with
harshness, in order to afflict the children of Yisra’ĕl. But
the more they afflicted them, the more they increased
and grew, and the Mitsrites were grieved because of
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
32

66 At that time Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ sovereign of
Eḏom died, and Samlah from Masrĕqah, from the land
of the children of the East, reigned in his place.
2 In the thirteenth year of the reign of Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, which was the hundred and
twenty-fifth year of the Yisra’ĕlites going down to
Mitsrayim, Samlah had reigned over Eḏom eighteen
years.
949

YASHAR

And when he reigned, he drew out his armies to go
and fight against Tsepho son of Eliphaz and the
children of the Ḥittites, because they had fought
against Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika, and they
destroyed his whole army.
4 But he did not join with him, for the children of Ĕsaw
prevented him, saying, “He is their brother.” So
Samlah listened to the voice of the children of Ĕsaw,
and turned back with all his armies to the land of Eḏom,
and did not proceed to fight against Tsepho son of
Eliphaz.
5 And Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim heard this
word, saying, “Samlah sovereign of Eḏom has
resolved to fight the children of the Ḥittites, and
afterward he will come to fight against Mitsrayim.”
6 And when the Mitsrites heard this matter, they
increased the labour upon the children of Yisra’ĕl, lest
the Yisra’ĕlites should do to them as they did to them
in their battle with the children of Ĕsaw in the days of
Haḏaḏ.
7 So the Mitsrites said to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“Hurry and do your work, and finish your task, and
strengthen the land, lest the children of Ĕsaw your
brothers should come to fight against us! For because
of you they will come against us.”
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did the work of the men
of Mitsrayim day by day, and the Mitsrites afflicted the
children of Yisra’ĕl in order to lessen them in the land.
9 But as the Mitsrites increased the labour upon the
children of Yisra’ĕl, so the children of Yisra’ĕl
increased and multiplied, and all Mitsrayim was filled
with the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 And in the hundred and twenty-fifth year of
Yisra’ĕl’s going down to Mitsrayim, all the Mitsrites saw
that their counsel did not succeed against Yisra’ĕl, but
that they increased and grew, and the land of
3

950

JASHER

Mitsrayim and the land of Goshen were filled with the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
11 So all the elders of Mitsrayim and its wise men
came before the sovereign and bowed down to him
and sat before him.
12 And all the elders of Mitsrayim and the wise men
said to the sovereign, “May the sovereign live forever!
You counselled us the counsel against the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and we did to them according to the word of
the sovereign.
13 “But in proportion to the increase of the labour, so
do they increase and grow in the land, and look, the
whole country is filled with them!
14 “Now therefore our master and sovereign, the eyes
of all Mitsrayim are upon you to give them advice with
your wisdom, by which they may prevail over Yisra’ĕl
to destroy them, or to diminish them from the land.”
And the sovereign answered them saying, “Give
counsel in this matter that we may know what to do to
them.”
15 And an officer, one of the sovereign’s counsellors,
whose name was lyoḇ, from Aram-Naharayim, in the
land of Uts, answered the sovereign, saying,
16 “If it please the sovereign, let him hear the counsel
of his servant.” And the sovereign said to him, “Speak.”
17 And lyoḇ spoke before the sovereign, the princes,
and before all the elders of Mitsrayim, saying,
18 “Look, the counsel of the sovereign which he
advised formerly respecting the labour of the children
of Yisra’ĕl is very good, and you must not remove from
them that labour forever.
19 “But this is the advice counselled by which you may
lessen them, if it seems good to the sovereign to afflict
them.
20 “Look, we have feared battle for a long time, and
we said, ‘When Yisra’ĕl becomes fruitful in the land,
951

YASHAR

they will drive us from the land if a battle should take
place.’
21 “If it please the sovereign, let a royal decree go
forth, and let it be written in the laws of Mitsrayim which
shall not be revoked, that every male child born to the
Yisra’ĕlites, his blood shall be spilled on the ground.
22 “And by your doing this, when all the male children
of Yisra’ĕl have died, the evil of their wars will cease!
Let the sovereign do so and send for all the Iḇri
midwives and order them in this matter to execute it.”
So the word pleased the sovereign and the princes,
and the sovereign did according to the word of lyoḇ.
23 And the sovereign sent for the Iḇri midwives to be
called, of which the name of one was Shiphrah, and
the name of the other Pu’ah.
24 And the midwives came before the sovereign, and
stood in his presence.
25 And the sovereign said to them, “When you do the
service of a midwife the Iḇri women, and see them
upon the birth-stools, if it is a son, then you shall kill
him, but if it is a daughter, then she shall live.
26 “But if you will not do this matter, then I will burn
you and all your houses with fire!”
27 But the midwives feared Elohim and did not listen
to the sovereign of Mitsrayim nor to his words, and
when the Iḇri women brought forth son or daughter to
the midwife, then the midwife did all that was
necessary for the child and let it live; thus the midwives
did all the days.
28 And this matter was told to the sovereign, and he
sent and called for the midwives and he said to them,
“Why have you done this matter and have saved the
children alive?”
29 And the midwives answered and spoke together
before the sovereign, saying,
30 “Let not the sovereign think that the Iḇri women are
as the Mitsrite women, for all the children of Yisra’ĕl
952

JASHER

are lively, and before the midwife comes to them they
are delivered. And as for us your female servants, for
many days no Iḇri woman has brought forth upon us,
for all the Iḇri women are their own midwives, because
they are lively.”
31 And Pharaoh heard their words and believed them
in this matter, and the midwives went away from the
sovereign, and Elohim dealt well with them, and the
people multiplied and grew exceedingly.

67 There was a man in the land of Mitsrayim of the
seed of Lĕwi, whose name was Amram, son of
Qehath, son of Lĕwi, son of Yisra’ĕl.
2 And this man went and took a wife, namely
Yoḵeḇeḏ the daughter of Lĕwi his father’s sister, and
she was one hundred and twenty-six years old, and he
came to her.
3 And the woman conceived and bore a daughter,
and she called her name Miryam, because in those
days the Mitsrites had embittered the lives of the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And she conceived again and bore a son and she
called his name Aharon, for in the days of her
conception, Pharaoh began to spill the blood of the
male children of Yisra’ĕl.
5 In those days Tsepho son of Eliphaz, son of Ĕsaw,
sovereign of the Ḥittites died, and Yaneas reigned in
his place.
6 And the time that Tsepho reigned over the children
of the Ḥittites was fifty years, and he died and was
buried in the city of Naḇna in the land of the Ḥittites.
7 And Yaneas, one of the mighty men of the children
of the Ḥittites, reigned after him, and he reigned fifty
years.
8 And it came to be after the death of the sovereign
of the Ḥittites that Bil’am son of Be’or fled from the land
953

YASHAR

of the Ḥittites, and he went and came to Mitsrayim to
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim.
9 And Pharaoh received him with great honour, for
he had heard of his wisdom, and he gave him presents
and made him for a counsellor, and made him great.
10 And Bil’am dwelt in Mitsrayim, in honour with all the
nobles of the sovereign, and the nobles exalted him,
because they all coveted to learn his wisdom.
11 And in the hundred and thirtieth year of Yisra’ĕl’s
going down to Mitsrayim, Pharaoh dreamed that he
was sitting on his royal throne, and lifted up his eyes
and saw an old man standing before him. And there
were scales in the hands of the old man, such scales
as are used by merchants.
12 And the old man took the scales and hung them
before Pharaoh.
13 And the old man took all the elders of Mitsrayim and
all its nobles and great men, and he tied them together
and put them in one scale.
14 And he took a young goat and put it into the other
scale, and the young goat outweighed them all.
15 And Pharaoh was astonished at this dreadful
vision, why the young goat should outweigh them all,
and Pharaoh awoke, and see, it was a dream.
16 And Pharaoh rose early in the morning and called
all his servants and related to them the dream, and the
men were greatly afraid.
17 And the sovereign said to all his wise men, “Please
interpret the dream which I dreamed, that I may know
it.”
18 And Bil’am son of Be’or answered the sovereign
and said to him, “This means none else but a great evil
that will spring up against Mitsrayim in the latter days.
19 “For a son will be born to Yisra’ĕl who will destroy
all Mitsrayim and its inhabitants, and bring out the
Yisra’ĕlites from Mitsrayim with a mighty hand.
954

JASHER

“Now therefore, O sovereign, take counsel on this
matter, that you may destroy the hope of the children
of Yisra’ĕl and their expectation, before this evil rises
against Mitsrayim.”
21 And the sovereign said to Bil’am, “And what shall
we do to Yisra’ĕl? Only after a certain manner did we
at first counsel against them and could not prevail over
them.
22 “Now therefore also give advice against them by
which we may prevail over them.”
23 And Bil’am answered the sovereign, saying, “Send
now and call your two counsellors, and we will see
what their advice is on this matter, and afterward your
servant will speak.”
24 And the sovereign sent and called his two
counsellors Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite and Iyoḇ the Utsite,
and they came and sat before the sovereign.
25 And the sovereign said to them, “Look, you have
both heard the dream which I have dreamed, and the
interpretation thereof; now therefore give counsel and
know and see what is to be done to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, whereby we may prevail over them, before
their evil shall spring up against us.”
26 And Re’uw’ĕl
the Miḏyanite answered the
sovereign and said, “May the sovereign live, may the
sovereign live forever.”
27 “If it seems good to the sovereign, let him rest from
the Iḇrim and leave them, and let him not stretch out
his hand against them.
28 “For these are they whom HWHY chose in days of
old, and took as the lot of His inheritance from among
all the nations of the earth and the sovereigns of the
earth. And who is there that stretched his hand against
them without punishment, of whom their Elohim was
not avenged?
29 “Indeed you know that when Aḇraham went down
to Mitsrayim, Pharaoh, the former sovereign of
20

955

YASHAR

Mitsrayim, saw Sarah his wife, and took her for a wife,
because Aḇraham said, ‘She is my sister.’ For he was
afraid, lest the men of Mitsrayim should slay him
because of his wife.
30 “And when the sovereign of Mitsrayim had taken
Sarah then Elohim struck him and his household with
heavy plagues, until he restored to Aḇraham his wife
Sarah; then he was healed.
31 “And Elohim punished Aḇimeleḵ the Gerarite,
sovereign of the Pelishtites, because of Sarah wife of
Aḇraham, in stopping up every womb from man to
beast.
32 “Then their Elohim came to Aḇimeleḵ in the dream
by night and frightened him in order that he might
restore to Aḇraham Sarah whom he had taken. And
afterward all the people of Gerar were punished
because of Sarah, and Aḇraham prayed to his Elohim
for them, and He was entreated of him, and He healed
them.
33 “And Aḇimeleḵ feared all this evil that came upon
him and his people, and he returned to Aḇraham his
wife Sarah, and gave her to him with many gifts.
34 “He also did so to Yitsḥaq when he had driven him
from Gerar, and Elohim had done wonderfully to him,
that all the water courses of Gerar were dried up, and
their produce trees did not bring forth
35 until Aḇimeleḵ of Gerar, and Aḥuzzath one of his
friends, and Piḵol the commander of his army, went to
him and they bent and bowed down before him to the
ground.
36 And they requested of him to pray for them, and he
prayed to HWHY for them, and HWHY was entreated of
him and He healed them.
37 “Ya’aqoḇ also, the perfect man, was delivered
through his integrity from the hand of his brother Ĕsaw,
and the hand of Laḇan the Aramean his mother’s
brother, who had sought his life. Likewise from the
956

JASHER

hand of all the sovereigns of Kena’an who had come
together against him and his children to destroy them,
and HWHY delivered them out of their hands, that they
turned upon them and smote them. For who had ever
stretched out his hand against them without
punishment?
38 “Indeed Pharaoh the former, your father’s father,
raised Yosĕph son of Ya’aqoḇ above all the princes of
the land of Mitsrayim, when he saw his wisdom. For
through his wisdom he rescued all the inhabitants of
the land from the scarcity of food,
39 after which he ordered Ya’aqoḇ and his children to
come down to Mitsrayim, in order that through their
good, the land of Mitsrayim and the land of Goshen
might be delivered from the scarcity of food.
40 “Now therefore if it seems good in your eyes, cease
from destroying the children of Yisra’ĕl. But if it is not
your will that they shall dwell in Mitsrayim, send them
out from here, that they may go to the land of Kena’an,
the land where their ancestors sojourned.”
41 And when Pharaoh heard the words of Yithro he
was very wroth with him, so that he rose with shame
from the sovereign’s presence, and went to Miḏyan,
his land, and took Yosĕph’s rod with him.
42 And the sovereign said to Iyoḇ the Utsite, “What do
you say Iyoḇ, and what is your advice regarding the
Iḇrim?”
43 So Iyoḇ said to the sovereign, “Look, all the
inhabitants of the land are in your power, let the
sovereign do as it seems good in his eyes.”
44 And the sovereign said to Bil’am, “What do you say,
Bil’am? Speak your word that we may hear it.”
45 And Bil’am said to the sovereign, “Of all that the
sovereign has counselled against the Iḇrim they will be
delivered, and the sovereign will not be able to prevail
over them with any counsel.
957

YASHAR

“For if you think to lessen them by the flaming fire,
you cannot prevail over them, for indeed their Elohim
delivered Aḇraham their father from Ur-Kasdim. And if
you think to destroy them with a sword, indeed Yitsḥaq
their father was delivered from it, and a ram was
placed in his place.
47 “And if you think to lessen them with hard and harsh
labour, you will not prevail even in this, for their father
Ya’aqoḇ served Laḇan in all manner of hard work, and
prospered.
48 “Now therefore, O sovereign, hear my words, for
this is the counsel which is counselled against them,
by which your will prevail over them, and from which
you should not depart:
49 “If it please the sovereign let him order all their
children which shall be born from this day onward, to
be thrown into the water, for by this you can wipe away
their name, for none of them, nor of their fathers, were
tried in this manner.”
50 And the sovereign heard the words of Bil’am, and
the word pleased the sovereign and the princes, and
the sovereign did according to the word of Bil’am.
51 And the sovereign ordered a call to be issued and
a law to be made throughout the land of Mitsrayim,
saying, “Every male child born to the Iḇrim from this
day onward shall be thrown into the water.”
52 And Pharaoh called to all his servants, saying, “Go
now and seek throughout the land of Goshen where
the children of Yisra’ĕl are, and see that every son born
to the Iḇrim shall be thrown into the river, but every
daughter you shall let live.”
53 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl heard this word
which Pharaoh had commanded, to cast their male
children into the river, some of the people separated
from their wives but others clung to them.
54 And from that day onward, when the time of
delivery arrived to those women of Yisra’ĕl who had
46

958

JASHER

remained with their husbands, they went to the field to
give birth there, and they brought forth in the field, and
left their children in the field and returned home.
55 And HWHY who had sworn to their ancestors to
multiply them, sent one of His attending messengers
which are in the shamayim to wash each child in water,
to anoint and wrap it and to put into its hands two
smooth stones from one of which it sucked milk and
from the other honey. And he caused its hair to grow
to its knees, by which it might cover itself; to comfort it
and to cling to it, through His compassion for it.
56 And when Elohim had compassion over them and
had desired to multiply them upon the face of the land,
He ordered His earth to receive them to be preserved
therein till the time of their growing up, after which the
earth opened its mouth and vomited them out and they
sprouted forth from the city like the plants of the earth,
and the grass of the forest. And they returned each to
his clan and to his father’s house, and they remained
with them.
57 And the infants of the children of Yisra’ĕl were on
the earth like the plants of the field, through Elohim’s
favour to them.
58 And when all the Mitsrites saw this matter, they
went out, each to his field with his yoke of oxen and his
ploughshare, and they ploughed it up as one ploughs
the earth at seedtime.
59 But when they ploughed they were unable to hurt
the infants of the children of Yisra’ĕl, so the people
increased and grew exceedingly.
60 And Pharaoh ordered his officers to go daily to
Goshen to seek for the infants of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
61 And when they had sought and found one, they
took it from its mother’s bosom by force, and threw it
into the river, but the female child they left with its
959

YASHAR

mother. So the Mitsrites did to the Yisra’ĕlites all the
days.

68 And it came to be at that time the Ruaḥ of Elohim
was upon Miryam the daughter of Amram the sister of
Aharon, and she went out and naḇu about the house,
saying, “See a son will be born to us from my father
and mother this time, and he will save Yisra’ĕl from the
hands of Mitsrayim.”
2 And when Amram heard the words of his daughter,
he went and took his wife back to the house, after he
had driven her away at the time when Pharaoh ordered
every male child of the house of Ya’aqoḇ to be thrown
into the water.
3 So Amram took Yoḵeḇeḏ his wife, three years after
he had driven her away, and he came to her and she
conceived.
4 And at the end of seven months from her
conception she brought forth a son, and the whole
house was filled with great light as of the light of the
sun and moon at the time of their shining.
5 And when the woman saw the child that it was good
and pleasing to the eye, she hid it for three months in
an inner room.
6 In those days the Mitsrites conspired to destroy all
the Iḇrim there.
7 And the Mitsrite women went to Goshen where the
children of Yisra’ĕl were, and they carried their young
ones on their shoulders; their infants who could not yet
speak.
8 And in those days, when the women of the children
of Yisra’ĕl brought forth, each woman had hidden her
son from before the Mitsrites, that the Mitsrites might
not know of their bringing forth, and might not destroy
them from the land.
9 And the Mitsrite women came to Goshen and their
children who could not speak were on their shoulders,
960

JASHER

but when a Mitsrite woman came into the house of an
Iḇri woman her infant began to cry.
10 And when it cried the child that was in the inner
room answered it, so the Mitsrite women went and told
it at the house of Pharaoh.
11 And Pharaoh sent his officers to take the children
and slay them; thus did the Mitsrites to the Iḇri women
all the days.
12 And it came to be at that time, about three months
from Yoḵeḇeḏ’s concealment of her son, that the
matter was known in Pharaoh’s house.
13 And the woman hastened to take away her son
before the officers came, and she took for him an ark
of papyrus, and coated it with tar and with pitch, and
put the child in it, and she laid it in the reeds by the
edge of the river.
14 And his sister Miryam stood at a distance to know
what would be done to him, and what would become
of her words.
15 And at that time Elohim sent out a terrible heat in
the land of Mitsrayim, which burned up the flesh of man
like the sun in its circuit, and it greatly oppressed the
Mitsrites.
16 And all the Mitsrites went down to bathe in the river,
because of the consuming heat which burned up their
flesh.
17 And Bathia, the daughter of Pharaoh, also went to
bathe in the river, due to the consuming heat, and her
female servants walked at the river side, and all the
women of Mitsrayim as well.
18 And Bathia lifted up her eyes to the river, and she
saw the ark on the water, and sent her female servant
to fetch it.
19 And she opened it and saw the child, and see, the
infant wept, and she had compassion on him, and she
said, “This is one of the Iḇri children.”
961

YASHAR

And all the women of Mitsrayim walking on the river
side desired to nurse him, but he would not suck, for
this matter was from HWHY in order to restore him to
his mother’s breast.
21 And at that time Miryam his sister was among the
Mitsrite women at the river side, and she saw this
matter and she said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go
and fetch a nurse of the Iḇri women, that she may
nurse the child for you?”
22 And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go,” and the
young woman went and called the child’s mother.
23 And Pharaoh’s daughter said to Yoḵeḇeḏ, “Take
this child away and nurse it for me, and I will pay you
your wages - two bits of silver daily.” And the woman
took the child and nursed it.
24 And at the end of two years, when the child grew
up, she brought him to the daughter of Pharaoh, and
he was as a son to her, and she called his name
Mosheh, for she said, “Because I drew him out of the
water.”
25 And Amram his father called his name Ḥabar, for
he said it was for him that he associated with his wife
whom he had turned away.
26 And Yoḵeḇeḏ his mother called his name
Yequthi’ĕl, because, she said, “I have hoped for him to
the Almighty, and Elohim restored him to me.”
27 And Miryam his sister called him Yereḏ, for she
went down after him to the river to know what his end
would be.
28 And Aharon his brother called his name AḇiZanowaḥ, saying, “My father left my mother and
returned to her for his sake.”
29 And Qehath the father of Amram called his name
Aḇiḡdor, because for his sake Elohim repaired the
breach of the house of Ya’aqoḇ, that they could no
longer throw their male children into the water.
20

962

JASHER

And their nurse called him Aḇi Soḵoh, saying, “In
his tent was he hidden for three months, because of
the children of Ḥam.”
31 And all Yisra’ĕl called his name Shemayahu, son of
Nethan’ĕl, for they said, “In his days has Elohim heard
their cries and rescued them from their oppressors.”
32 And Mosheh was in Pharaoh’s house, and was as
a son to Bathia, Pharaoh’s daughter, and Mosheh
grew up among the sovereign’s children.
30

69 And in those days the sovereign of Eḏom died, in
the eighteenth year of his reign, and was buried in his
palace which he had built for himself as his royal
dwelling in the land of Eḏom.
2 And the children of Ĕsaw sent to Pethor, which is
on the river, and they brought from there a young man
of good-looking eyes and handsome appearance,
whose name was Sha’ul, and they made him
sovereign over them in the place of Samlah.
3 And Sha’ul reigned over all the children of Ĕsaw in
the land of Eḏom for forty years.
4 And when Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim saw that
the counsel which Bil’am had advised regarding the
children of Yisra’ĕl did not succeed, but that they were
still fruitful, multiplied and increased throughout the
land of Mitsrayim,
5 then Pharaoh commanded in those days that a call
should be issued throughout Mitsrayim to the children
of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “No man shall diminish any matter
of his daily labour.
6 “And the man who shall be found deficient in his
labour which he performs daily, whether in mortar or in
bricks, then his youngest son shall be put in their
place.”
7 And the labour of Mitsrayim increased on the
children of Yisra’ĕl in those days, and see, if one brick
was deficient in any man’s daily labour, the Mitsrites
963

YASHAR

took his youngest boy by force from his mother, and
put him to the building in place of the brick which his
father had left lacking.
8 And the men of Mitsrayim did so to all the children
of Yisra’ĕl day by day, all the days for a long period.
9 But the tribe of Lĕwi did not at that time work with
the Yisra’ĕlites their brothers, from the beginning, for
the children of Lĕwi knew the cunning of the Mitsrites
which they exercised at first toward the Yisra’ĕlites.

70 And in the third year from the birth of Mosheh,
Pharaoh was sitting at a feast, when Alparanith the
sovereigness was sitting at his right and Bathia at his
left, and the boy Mosheh was lying on her bosom, and
Bil’am son of Be’or with his two sons, and all the
princes of the reign were sitting at table in the
sovereign’s presence.
2 And the boy stretched out his hand on the
sovereign’s head, and took the crown from the
sovereign’s head and placed it on his own head.
3 And when the sovereign and princes saw the deed
which the boy had done, the sovereign and princes
were afraid, and one man to his neighbour expressed
astonishment.
4 And the sovereign said to the princes who were
before him at the table, “What do you speak and what
do you say, O you princes, in this matter, and what is
to be the judgment against the boy because of this
deed?”
5 And Bil’am son of Be’or the magician answered
before the sovereign and princes, and he said,
“Remember now, O my master and sovereign, the
dream which you dreamed many days ago, and that
which your servant interpreted to you.
6 “Now therefore this is a child from the Iḇri children,
in whom is the Ruaḥ of Elohim, and let not my master
964

JASHER

the sovereign think that this youngster did this matter
without knowledge.
7 “For he is an Iḇri boy, and wisdom and
understanding are with him, although he is yet a child,
and with wisdom he has done this and chosen for
himself the reign of Mitsrayim.
8 “For this is the manner of all the Iḇrim, to deceive
sovereigns and their nobles, to do all these matters
cunningly, in order to make the sovereigns of the earth
and their men tremble.
9 “Indeed you know that Aḇraham their father acted
so, who deceived the army of Nimroḏ sovereign of
Baḇel, and Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of Gerar, and that he
took possession of the land of the children of Ḥĕth and
all the reigns of Kena’an.
10 “And that he went down to Mitsrayim and said of
Sarah his wife, ‘She is my sister’, in order to mislead
Mitsrayim and her sovereign.
11 “His son Yitsḥaq also did so when he went to Gerar
and dwelt there, and his strength prevailed over the
army of Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites.
12 “He also thought of making the reign of the
Pelishtites stumble, in saying that Riḇqah his wife was
his sister.
13 “Ya’aqoḇ also dealt treacherously with his brother,
and took from his hand his birthright and his beraḵah.
14 “He then went to Paddan Aram to the house of
Laḇan his mother’s brother, and cunningly obtained
from him his daughter, his cattle, and all belonging to
him, and fled away and returned to the land of Kena’an
to his father.
15 “His sons sold their brother Yosĕph, who went
down to Mitsrayim and became a slave, and was
placed in the prison house for twelve years,
16 until the former Pharaoh dreamed dreams, and
withdrew him from the prison house, and made him
965

YASHAR

great above all the princes in Mitsrayim because of his
interpreting his dreams to him.
17 “And when Elohim caused a scarcity of food
throughout the land, he sent for and brought his father
and all his brothers, and the whole of his father’s
household, and supported them without price or
reward, and bought the Mitsrites for slaves.
18 “Now therefore my master sovereign see, this child
has risen up in their place in Mitsrayim, to do according
to their deeds and to strive with every sovereign, prince
and judge.
19 “If it please the sovereign, let us now spill his blood
on the ground, lest he grow up and take away the reign
from your hand, and the hope of Mitsrayim perish after
he come to reign.”
20 And Bil’am said to the sovereign, “Let us also call
for all the judges of Mitsrayim and the wise men
thereof, and let us know if the judgment of death is due
to this boy as you say, and then we will slay him.”
21 And Pharaoh sent and called for all the wise men
of Mitsrayim, and they came before the sovereign, and
a messenger of HWHY came among them, and he was
like one of the wise men of Mitsrayim.
22 And the sovereign said to the wise men, “Indeed
you have heard what this Iḇri boy who is in the house
has done, and thus has Bil’am judged in the matter.
23 “Now you judge also and see what is due to the boy
for the deed he has done.
24 And the messenger, who seemed like one of the
wise men of Pharaoh, answered and said as follows,
before all the wise men of Mitsrayim and before the
sovereign and the princes:
25 “If it please the sovereign, let the sovereign send
for men who shall bring before him a shoham stone
and a coal of fire, and place them before the child, and
if the child stretches out his hand and take the shoham
966

JASHER

stone, then we shall know that with wisdom the boy
has done all that he has done, and we must slay him.
26 “But if he stretches out his hand on the coal, then
we shall know that it was not with knowledge that he
did this matter, and he shall live.”
27 And the word seemed good in the eyes of the
sovereign and the princes, so the sovereign did
according to the word of the messenger of HWHY.
28 And the sovereign ordered the shoham stone and
coal to be brought and placed before Mosheh.
29 And they placed the boy before them, and the boy
strove to stretch out his hand to the shoham stone, but
the messenger of HWHY took his hand and placed it on
the coal, and the coal became extinguished in his
hand, and he lifted it up and put it into his mouth, and
burned part of his lips and part of his tongue, and he
became slow in mouth and tongue.
30 And when the sovereign and princes saw this, they
knew that Mosheh had not acted with wisdom in taking
off the crown from the sovereign’s head.
31 So the sovereign and princes refrained from slaying
the child, so Mosheh remained in Pharaoh’s house,
growing up, and HWHY was with him.
32 And while the boy was in the sovereign’s house, he
was robed in purple and he grew among the children
of the sovereign.
33 And when Mosheh grew up in the sovereign’s
house, Bathia the daughter of Pharaoh considered him
as a son, and all the household of Pharaoh honoured
him, and all the men of Mitsrayim were afraid of him.
34 And he went out daily and came to the land of
Goshen, where his brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl
were, and Mosheh saw them daily in shortness of
breath and hard labour.
35 And Mosheh asked them, saying, “Why is this
labour weighed out to you day by day?”
967

YASHAR

And they told him all that had befallen them, and all
the commands which Pharaoh had put upon them
before his birth.
37 And they told him all the counsels which Bil’am son
of Be’or had counselled against them, and what he had
also counselled against him in order to slay him when
he had taken the sovereign’s crown from off his head.
38 And when Mosheh heard these words his wrath
was kindled against Bil’am, and he sought to kill him,
and he was in ambush for him day by day.
39 And Bil’am was afraid of Mosheh, and he and his
two sons rose up and went out from Mitsrayim, and
they fled and delivered their beings and took
themselves to the land of Kush to Kikianus, sovereign
of Kush.
40 And Mosheh was in the sovereign’s house going
out and coming in. HWHY gave him favour in the eyes
of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all of his servants, and
in the eyes of all the people of Mitsrayim, and they
loved Mosheh exceedingly.
41 And the day arrived when Mosheh went to Goshen
to see his brothers, that he saw the children of Yisra’ĕl
in their burdens and hard labour, and Mosheh was
grieved for their sakes.
42 And Mosheh returned to Mitsrayim and went to the
house of Pharaoh, and came before the sovereign,
and Mosheh bowed down before the sovereign.
43 And Mosheh said to Pharaoh, “Please my master,
I have come to seek a small request from you, do not
turn my face away empty.” And Pharaoh said to him,
“Speak.”
44 And Mosheh said to Pharaoh, “Let there be given
to your servants the children of Yisra’ĕl who are in
Goshen, one day to rest from their labour on it.”
45 And the sovereign answered Mosheh and said,
“Look, I have lifted up your face in this matter to grant
your request.”
36

968

JASHER

And Pharaoh ordered a call to be issued throughout
Mitsrayim and Goshen, saying,
47 “To you, all the children of Yisra’ĕl, thus says the
sovereign, ‘For six days you shall do your work and
labour, but on the seventh day you shall rest, and shall
not perform any work, thus shall you do all the days,
as the sovereign and Mosheh son of Bathia have
commanded.’ ”
48 And Mosheh rejoiced at this word which the
sovereign had granted to him, and all the children of
Yisra’ĕl did as Mosheh ordered them.
49 For this matter was from HWHY to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, for HWHY had begun to remember the children
of Yisra’ĕl to save them for the sake of their fathers.
50 And HWHY was with Mosheh and his name went
throughout Mitsrayim.
51 And Mosheh became great in the eyes of all the
Mitsrites, and in the eyes of all the children of Yisra’ĕl,
seeking good for his people Yisra’ĕl and speaking
words of peace regarding them to the sovereign.
46

71 And when Mosheh was eighteen years old, he
desired to see his father and mother, and he went to
them to Goshen. And when Mosheh had come near
Goshen, he came to the place where the children of
Yisra’ĕl were occupied in work, and he saw their
burdens, and he saw a Mitsrite smiting one of his Iḇri
brothers.
2 And when the man who was beaten saw Mosheh
he ran to him for help, for the man Mosheh was greatly
respected in the house of Pharaoh, and he said to him,
“My master attend to me! This Mitsrite came to my
house in the night, bound me, and came to my wife in
my presence, and now he seeks to take my life away.”
3 And when Mosheh heard this wicked matter, his
wrath was kindled against the Mitsrite, and he turned
this way and the other, and when he saw there was no
969

YASHAR

man there, he smote the Mitsrite and hid him in the
sand, and delivered the Iḇri from the hand of him that
smote him.
4 And the Iḇri went to his house, and Mosheh
returned to his home, and went out and came back to
the sovereign’s house.
5 And when the man had returned home, he thought
of rejecting his wife, for it was not right in the house of
Ya’aqoḇ, for any man to come to his wife after she had
been defiled.
6 And the woman went and told her brothers, and the
woman’s brothers sought to slay him, but he fled to his
house and escaped.
7 And on the second day Mosheh went out to his
brothers, and looked, and see, two men were
quarreling, and he said to the wicked one, “Why do you
smite your neighbour?”
8 And he answered him and said to him, “Who has
appointed you for a prince and judge over us? Do you
think to slay me as you slew the Mitsrite?” And Mosheh
was afraid and he said, “Indeed the matter is known!”
9 And Pharaoh heard of this matter, and he ordered
Mosheh to be slain. So Elohim sent his messenger,
and he appeared to Pharaoh in the likeness of a
captain of the guard.
10 And the messenger of HWHY took the sword from
the hand of the captain of the guard, and took his head
off with it, for the likeness of the captain of the guard
was turned into the likeness of Mosheh.
11 And the messenger of HWHY took hold of the right
hand of Mosheh, and brought him out from Mitsrayim,
and placed him outside the borders of Mitsrayim, a
distance of forty days’ journey.
12 And Aharon his brother alone remained in the land
of Mitsrayim, and he naḇu to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
saying,
970

JASHER

“Thus says HWHY Elohim of your ancestors, ‘Throw
away, each man, the abominations of his eyes, and do
not defile yourselves with the idols of Mitsrayim.’ ”
14 And the children of Yisra’ĕl rebelled and would not
listen to Aharon at that time.
15 And HWHY thought to destroy them, were it not that
HWHY remembered the covenant which he had made
with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ.
16 In those days the hand of Pharaoh continued to be
severe against the children of Yisra’ĕl, and he crushed
and oppressed them until the time when Elohim sent
forth his word and took notice of them.
13

72 And it came to be in those days that there was a
great battle between the children of Kush and the
children of the East and Aram, and they rebelled
against the sovereign of Kush in whose hands they
were.
2 So Kikianus sovereign of Kush went forth with all
the children of Kush, a people numerous as the sand,
and he went to fight against Aram and the children of
the East, to bring them under subjection.
3 And when Kikianus went out, he left Bil’am the
magician, with his two sons, to guard the city, and the
lowest sort of the people of the land.
4 So Kikianus went out to Aram and the children of
the East, and he fought against them and smote them,
and they all fell down wounded before Kikianus and his
people.
5 And he took many of them captives and he brought
them under subjection as at first, and he encamped on
their land to take tribute from them as usual.
6 And Bil’am son of Be’or, when the sovereign of
Kush had left him to guard the city and the poor of the
city, he rose up and conspired with the people of the
land to rebel against sovereign Kikianus, not to let him
enter the city when he should come home.
971

YASHAR

And the people of the land listened to him, and they
swore to him and made him sovereign over them, and
his two sons for captains of the army.
8 So they rose up and raised the walls of the city at
the two corners, and they built an exceedingly strong
building.
9 And at the third corner they dug ditches without
number, between the city and the river which
surrounded the whole land of Kush, and they made the
waters of the river burst forth there.
10 At the fourth corner they collected numerous
serpents by their spells and divination, and they
fortified the city and dwelt in it, and no one went out or
in before them.
11 And Kikianus fought against Aram and the children
of the East and he subdued them as before, and they
gave him their usual tribute, and he went and returned
to his land.
12 And when Kikianus the sovereign of Kush
approached his city and all the captains of the armies
with him, they lifted up their eyes and saw that the
walls of the city were built up and greatly raised, so the
men were astonished at this.
13 And they said to one another, “It is because they
saw that we were delayed in battle and were greatly
afraid of us, that is why they have done this matter and
raised the city walls and fortified them so that the
sovereigns of Kena’an might not come in battle against
them.”
14 So the sovereign and the companies approached
the city door and they looked up and see, all the gates
of the city were closed, and they called out to the
watchmen, saying, “Open for us, that we may enter the
city.”
15 But the watchmen refused to open to them by the
order of Bil’am the magician, their sovereign, they did
not allow them to enter their city.
7

972

JASHER

So they appointed a battle with them opposite the
city gate, and one hundred and thirty men of the army
at Kikianus fell on that day.
17 And on the next day they continued to fight, and
they fought at the side of the river. They strove to pass
but were not able, so some of them sank in the pits and
died.
18 So the sovereign ordered them to cut down trees to
make rafts, on which they might pass over to them, and
they did so.
19 And when they came to the place of the ditches, the
waters revolved by mills, and two hundred men on ten
rafts were drowned.
20 And on the third day they came to fight at the side
where the serpents were, but they could not approach
there, for the serpents slew of them one hundred and
seventy men, and they ceased fighting against Kush.
And they besieged Kush for nine years, no person
came out or in.
21 At that time when the battle and the siege was
against Kush, Mosheh fled from Mitsrayim from
Pharaoh who sought to kill him for having slain the
Mitsrite.
22 And Mosheh was eighteen years old when he fled
from Mitsrayim from the presence of Pharaoh, and he
fled and escaped to the camp of Kikianus, which at that
time was besieging Kush.
23 And Mosheh was nine years in the camp of
Kikianus sovereign of Kush, all the time that they were
besieging Kush, and Mosheh went out and came in
with them.
24 And the sovereign and princes and all the fighting
men loved Mosheh, for he was great and worthy. His
stature was like a noble lion, his face was like the sun,
and his strength was like that of a lion, and he was
counsellor to the sovereign.
16

973

YASHAR

And at the end of nine years, Kikianus was seized
with a deadly disease, and his illness prevailed over
him, and he died on the seventh day.
26 So his servants embalmed him and carried him and
buried him opposite the city gate to the north of the
land of Mitsrayim.
27 And they built an elegant, strong and high building
over him, and they placed great stones below.
28 And the sovereign’s scribes engraved on those
stones all the might of their sovereign Kikianus, and all
his battles which he had fought. See, they are written
there at this day.
29 Now after the death of Kikianus sovereign of Kush,
it grieved his men and companies greatly because of
the battle.
30 So they said one to the other, “Give us counsel
what we are to do at this time, as we have dwelt in the
wilderness nine years away from our homes.
31 “If we say we will fight against the city, many of us
will fall wounded or killed, and if we remain here in the
siege we shall also die,
32 for now all the sovereigns of Aram and of the
children of the East will hear that our sovereign is
dead, and they will attack us suddenly in a hostile
manner, and they will fight against us and leave no
remnant of us.
33 “Now therefore let us go and make a sovereign over
us, and let us remain in the siege until the city is
delivered up to us.”
34 And they desired to choose on that day a man for a
sovereign from the army of Kikianus, but they found
none of their choice like Mosheh to reign over them.
35 And they hastened and each man stripped off his
garments and cast them upon the ground, and they
made a great heap and placed Mosheh upon it.
25

974

JASHER

And they rose up and blew with trumpets and called
out before him, and said, “May the sovereign live, may
the sovereign live!”
37 And all the people and nobles swore to him to give
him Aḏoniyah the sovereigness, the Kushite, wife of
Kikianus for a wife, and they made Mosheh sovereign
over them on that day.
38 And all the people of Kush sent a call on that day,
saying, “Every man must give something to Mosheh of
what is in his possession.”
39 And they spread out a sheet on the heap, and every
man cast into it something of what he had, one a gold
earring and the other a coin.
40 Also of shoham stones, bdellium, pearls and
marble the children of Kush cast to Mosheh on the
heap, also silver and gold in great quantities.
41 And Mosheh took all the silver and gold, all the
vessels, and the bdellium and shoham stones, which
all the children of Kush had given to him, and he placed
them among his treasures.
42 And Mosheh reigned over the children of Kush on
that day, in the place of Kikianus sovereign of Kush.
36

73 In the fifty-fifth year of the reign of Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, that is in the hundred and fiftyseventh year of the Yisra’ĕlites going down into
Mitsrayim, Mosheh reigned in Kush.
2 Mosheh was twenty-seven years old when he
began to reign over Kush, and he reigned forty years.
3 And HWHY granted Mosheh favour and kindness in
the eyes of all the children of Kush, and the children of
Kush loved him exceedingly, so Mosheh was favoured
by HWHY and by men.
4 And in the seventh day of his reign, all the children
of Kush assembled and came before Mosheh and
bowed down to him to the ground.
975

YASHAR

And all the children spoke together in the presence
of the sovereign, saying, “Give us counsel that we may
see what is to be done to this city,
6 for it is now nine years that we have been besieging
round about the city, and have not seen our children
and our wives.”
7 So the sovereign answered them, saying, “If you
will listen to my voice in all that I shall command you,
then HWHY will give the city into our hands and we shall
subdue it,
8 for if we fight against them as in the former battle
which we had with them before the death of Kikianus,
many of us will fall down wounded as before.
9 “Now therefore look, here is counsel for you in this
matter; if you will listen to my voice, then the city will
be delivered into our hands.”
10 So all the armies answered the sovereign, saying,
“All that our master shall command, that we will do.”
11 And Mosheh said to them, “Pass through and make
a call in the whole camp to all the people, saying,
12 ‘Thus says the sovereign, “Go into the forest and
bring with you the young of the stork, each man a
young one in his hand.
13 “And any person transgressing the word of the
sovereign, who shall not bring his young one, he shall
die, and the sovereign will take all belonging to him.
14 “And when you shall bring them they shall be in
your keeping; you shall raise them until they grow up,
and you shall teach them to dart upon, as is the way of
the young of the hawk.” ’ ”
15 So all the children of Kush heard the words of
Mosheh, and they rose up and sent a call to be issued
throughout the camp, saying,
16 “Unto you, all the children of Kush, the sovereign’s
order is: that you go all together to the forest, and catch
there the young storks, each man his young one in his
hand, and you shall bring them home.
5

976

JASHER

“And any person violating the order of the
sovereign shall die, and the sovereign will take all that
belongs to him.”
18 And all the people did so, and they went out to the
forest and they climbed the fir trees and caught, each
man a young one in his hand, all the young of the
storks. And they brought them into the desert and
reared them by order of the sovereign, and they taught
them to dart upon, similar to the young hawks.
19 And after the young storks were reared, the
sovereign ordered them to be hungered for three days,
and all the people did so.
20 And on the third day, the sovereign said to them,
“Strengthen yourselves and become mighty men, and
each man put on his armour and gird his sword upon
him, and each man ride his horse and each take his
young stork in his hand.
21 “And we will rise up and fight against the city at the
place where the serpents are.” And all the people did
as the sovereign had ordered.
22 And each man took his young one in his hand, and
they went away, and when they came to the place of
the serpents the sovereign said to them, “Each man
send out his young stork upon the serpents.”
23 And each man sent out his young stork at the
sovereign’s order, and the young storks ran upon the
serpents and they devoured them all and destroyed
them out of that place.
24 And when the sovereign and people had seen that
all the serpents were destroyed in that place, all the
people raised up a great shout.
25 And they approached and fought against the city
and took it and subdued it, and they entered the city.
26 And there died on that day one thousand and one
hundred men of the people of the city; all that inhabited
the city, but not one of the people besieging died.
17

977

YASHAR

So all the children of Kush went each to his home,
to his wife and children and to all belonging to him.
28 And Bil’am the magician, when he saw that the city
was taken, opened the gate and he and his two sons
and eight brothers fled and returned to Mitsrayim to
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim.
29 They are the sorcerers and magicians who are
mentioned in the Book of the Torah, standing against
Mosheh when HWHY brought the plagues upon
Mitsrayim.
30 So Mosheh took the city by his wisdom, and the
children of Kush placed him on the throne instead of
Kikianus sovereign of Kush.
31 And they placed the royal crown upon his head, and
they gave him for a wife Aḏoniyah the Kushite
sovereigness, wife of Kikianus.
32 And Mosheh revered HWHY Elohim of his fathers,
so that he did not come to her, nor did he turn his eyes
to her,
33 for Mosheh remembered how Aḇraham had made
his servant El’azar swear, saying to him, “You shall not
take a woman from the daughters of Kena’an for my
son Yitsḥaq.”
34 Also what Yitsḥaq did when Ya’aqoḇ had fled from
his brother, when he commanded him, saying, “You
shall not take a wife from the daughters of Kena’an,
nor make alliance with any of the children of Ḥam.
35 “For HWHY our Elohim gave Ḥam son of Noaḥ, and
his children and all his seed, as slaves to the children
of Shĕm and to the children of Yepheth, and to their
seed after them for slaves, forever.”
36 Therefore Mosheh did not turn his heart nor his
eyes to the wife of Kikianus all the days that he reigned
over Kush.
37 And Mosheh revered HWHY his Elohim all his life,
and Mosheh walked before HWHY in truth, with all his
heart and being, he did not turn from the right Way all
27

978

JASHER

the days of his life. He did not turn aside from the Way
either to the right or to the left, in which Aḇraham,
Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ had walked.
38 And Mosheh strengthened himself in the reign of
the children of Kush, and he guided the children of
Kush with his usual wisdom, and Mosheh prospered in
his reign.
39 And at that time Aram and the children of the East
heard that Kikianus sovereign of Kush had died, so
Aram and the children of the East rebelled against
Kush in those days.
40 And Mosheh gathered all the children of Kush, a
very mighty people, about thirty thousand men, and he
went out to fight against Aram and the children of the
East.
41 And they went at first to the children of the East,
and when the children of the East heard their report,
they went to meet them, and engaged in battle with
them.
42 And the battle was fierce against the children of the
East, so HWHY gave all the children of the East into the
hand of Mosheh, and about three hundred men fell
down slain.
43 And all the children of the East turned back and
retreated, so Mosheh and the children of Kush
followed them and subdued them, and put them to
compulsory labour, as was their custom.
44 So Mosheh and all the people with him passed over
from there to the land of Aram for battle.
45 And the people of Aram also went to meet them,
and they fought against them, and HWHY delivered
them into the hand of Mosheh, and many of the men
of Aram fell down wounded.
46 And Aram also were subdued by Mosheh and the
people of Kush, and also gave their usual levy.
47 And Mosheh brought Aram and the children of the
East under subjection to the children of Kush, and
979

YASHAR

Mosheh and all the people who were with him,
returned to the land of Kush.
48 And Mosheh strengthened himself in the reign of
the children of Kush, and HWHY was with him, and all
the children of Kush revered him.

74 In the end of years Sha’ul sovereign of Eḏom died,
and Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor reigned in his place.
2 In the sixteenth year of the reign of Mosheh over
Kush, Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor reigned in the land of
Eḏom over all the children of Eḏom for thirty-eight
years.
3 In his days Mo’aḇ rebelled against the power of
Eḏom, having been under Eḏom since the days of
Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ, who smote them and Miḏyan,
and brought Mo’aḇ under subjection to Eḏom.
4 And when Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor reigned over
Eḏom, all the children of Mo’aḇ withdrew their
allegiance from Eḏom.
5 And Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika died in those
days, and Azdruḇal his son reigned in his place.
6 And in those days Yaneas sovereign of the children
of the Ḥittites died, and they buried him in his palace
which he had built for himself in the plain of Kanopia
for a residence, and Latinus reigned in his place.
7 In the twenty-second year of the reign of Mosheh
over the children of Kush, Latinus reigned forty-five
years over the children of the Ḥittites.
8 And he also built for himself a great and mighty
tower, and in it he built an elegant palace for his
residence, to conduct his reign, as was the custom.
9 In the third year of his reign he sent a call to be
made to all his skillful men, who made many ships for
him.
10 And Latinus assembled all his armies, and they
came in ships, and went in them to fight against
Azdruḇal son of Angĕas sovereign of Aphrika, and
980

JASHER

they came to Aphrika and engaged in battle with
Azdruḇal and his army.
11 And Latinus prevailed over Azdruḇal, and Latinus
took from Azdruḇal the water-shaft which his father
had brought from the children of the Ḥittites, when he
took Yaniah the daughter of Uzi for a wife. So Latinus
overthrew the bridge of the water-shaft, and smote the
whole army of Azdruḇal a severe blow.
12 And the remaining strong men of Azdruḇal
strengthened themselves, and their hearts were filled
with envy, and trying death, they again engaged in
battle with Latinus sovereign of the Ḥittites.
13 And the battle was fierce upon all the men of
Aphrika, and they all fell wounded before Latinus and
his people, and Azdruḇal the sovereign also fell in the
battle.
14 And the sovereign Azdruḇal had a very goodlooking daughter, whose name was Ushpezena, and
all the men of Aphrika embroidered her likeness on
their garments, because of her exceedingly good looks
and lovely appearance.
15 And the men of Latinus saw Ushpezena, the
daughter of Azdruḇal, and praised her before Latinus
their sovereign.
16 And Latinus ordered her to be brought to him, and
Latinus took Ushpezena for a wife, and he turned back
on his way to the Ḥittites.
17 And it came to be after the death of Azdruḇal son
of Angĕas, when Latinus had turned back to his land
from the battle, that all the inhabitants of Aphrika rose
up and took Anibal son of Angĕas, the younger brother
of Azdruḇal, and made him sovereign instead at his
brother over the whole land at Aphrika.
18 And when he reigned, he resolved to go to the
Ḥittites to fight against the children of the Ḥittites, to
avenge the cause of Azdruḇal his brother, and the
cause of the inhabitants of Aphrika, and he did so.
981

YASHAR

And he made many ships, and he came in them
with his whole army, and he went to the Ḥittites.
20 So Aniḇal fought with the children of the Ḥittites,
and the children of the Ḥittites fell wounded before
Aniḇal and his army, and Aniḇal avenged his brother’s
cause.
21 And Aniḇal continued the battle for eighteen years
with the children of the Ḥittites, and Aniḇal dwelt in the
land of the Ḥittites and encamped there for a long time.
22 And Aniḇal smote the children of the Ḥittites very
severely, and he slew their great men and princes. And
of the rest of the people he smote about eighty
thousand men.
23 And at the end of days and years, Aniḇal returned
to his land of Aphrika, and he reigned safely in the
place of Azdruḇal his brother.
19

75 At that time, in the hundred and eightieth year of
the Yisra’ĕlites going down to Mitsrayim, there went
out from Mitsrayim thirty thousand mighty men on foot,
from the children of Yisra’ĕl, who were all of the tribe
of Yosĕph, of the children of Ephrayim son of Yosĕph.
2 For they said the period was completed which
HWHY had appointed to the children of Yisra’ĕl in the
times of old, which he had spoken to Aḇraham.
3 And these men girded themselves, and each man
put his sword at his side, and every man his armour
upon him, and they trusted to their strength, and went
out together from Mitsrayim with a mighty hand.
4 But they brought no food for the journey, only silver
and gold, they did not even bring bread for that day in
their hands, for they thought of getting their food for
payment from the Pelishtites, and if not they would
take it by force.
5 And these men were very great and mighty men,
one man could pursue a thousand and two could put
982

JASHER

ten thousand to flight, so they trusted to their strength
and went together as they were.
6 And they directed their course toward the land of
Gath, and went down and found the shepherds of Gath
feeding the cattle of the children of Gath.
7 And they said to the shepherds, “Give us some of
the sheep for payment, that we may eat, for we are
hungry, for we have eaten no bread today.”
8 And the shepherds said, “Are they our sheep or
cattle that we should give them to you even for
payment?” so the children of Ephrayim approached to
take them by force.
9 And the shepherds of Gath shouted over them so
that their cry was heard at a distance, so all the
children of Gath went out to them.
10 And when the children of Gath saw the evil deeds
of the children of Ephrayim, they returned and
assembled the men of Gath, and each man put on his
armour, and came out to the children of Ephrayim for
battle.
11 And they engaged with them in the valley of Gath,
and the battle was fierce, and they smote from each
other a great many on that day.
12 And on the second day the children of Gath sent to
all the cities of the Pelishtites that they should come to
their help, saying,
13 “Come up to us and help us, that we may smite the
children of Ephrayim who have come out from
Mitsrayim to take our cattle, and to fight against us
without cause.”
14 Now the beings of the children of Ephrayim were
exhausted with hunger and thirst, for they had eaten
no bread for three days. And forty thousand men went
out from the cities of the Pelishtites to the assistance
of the men of Gath.

983

YASHAR

And these men were engaged in battle with the
children of Ephrayim, and HWHY delivered the children
of Ephrayim into the hands of the Pelishtites.
16 And they smote all the children of Ephrayim, all who
had gone out from Mitsrayim. None were remaining
but ten men who had run away from the battle.
17 For this evil was from HWHY against the children of
Ephrayim, for they transgressed the word of HWHY in
going out from Mitsrayim, before the time had arrived
which HWHY in the days of old had appointed to
Yisra’ĕl.
18 And of the Pelishtites also there fell a great many,
about twenty thousand men, and their brothers carried
them and buried them in their cities.
19 And the slain of the children of Ephrayim remained
forsaken in the valley of Gath for many days and years,
and were not brought to burial, and the valley was filled
with men’s bones.
20 And the men who had escaped from the battle
came to Mitsrayim, and told all the children of Yisra’ĕl
all that had befallen them.
21 And their father Ephrayim mourned over them for
many days, and his brothers came to console him.
22 And he came to his wife and she bore a son, and
he called his name Beri’ah, for she was unfavoured in
his house.
15

76 And Mosheh son of Amram was still sovereign in
the land of Kush in those days, and he prospered in
his reign, and he conducted the reign of the children of
Kush in justice, in righteousness, and integrity.
2 And all the children of Kush loved Mosheh all the
days that he reigned over them, and all the inhabitants
of the land of Kush greatly revered him.
3 And in the fortieth year of the reign of Mosheh over
Kush, Mosheh was sitting on the royal throne while
984

JASHER

Aḏoniyah the sovereigness was before him, and all the
nobles were sitting around him.
4 And Aḏoniyah the sovereigness said before the
sovereign and the princes, “What is this deed which
you, the children of Kush, have done for this long time?
5 “Indeed you know that for the forty years this man
has reigned over Kush he has not approached me, nor
has he served the mighty ones of the children of Kush.
6 “Now therefore hear, O you children of Kush, and
no longer let this man reign over you as he is not of our
flesh.
7 “Look Menakrus my son is grown up, let him reign
over you, for it is better for you to serve the son of your
master, than to serve a stranger; a slave of the
sovereign of Mitsrayim.”
8 And all the people and nobles of the children of
Kush heard the words which Aḏoniyah the
sovereigness had spoken in their ears.
9 And all the people were preparing until the evening,
and in the morning they rose early and made
Menakrus, son of Kikianus, sovereign over them.
10 But all the children of Kush were afraid to stretch
out their hand against Mosheh, for HWHY was with
Mosheh, and the children of Kush remembered the
oath which they swore to Mosheh, so they did no harm
to him.
11 But the children of Kush gave many presents to
Mosheh, and sent him from them with great honour.
12 So Mosheh went out from the land of Kush, and
went home and ceased to reign over Kush. And
Mosheh was sixty-six years old when he went out from
the land of Kush, for the matter was from HWHY, for the
period had arrived which he had appointed in the days
of old, to bring out Yisra’ĕl from the affliction of the
children of Ḥam.

985

YASHAR

So Mosheh went to Miḏyan, for he was afraid to
return to Mitsrayim because of Pharaoh, and he went
and sat at a well of water in Miḏyan.
14 And the seven daughters of Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite
went out to feed their father’s flock.
15 And they came to the well and drew water to water
their father’s flock.
16 So the shepherds of Miḏyan came and drove them
away, and Mosheh rose up and helped them and
watered the flock.
17 And they came home to their father Re’uw’ĕl, and
told him what Mosheh did for them.
18 And they said, “A Mitsrite man has delivered us
from the hands of the shepherds; he drew up water for
us and watered the flock.”
19 And Re’uw’ĕl said to his daughters, “And where is
he? Why have you left the man?”
20 And Re’uw’ĕl sent for him and fetched him and
brought him home, and he ate bread with him.
21 And Mosheh related to Re’uw’ĕl that he had fled
from Mitsrayim and that he reigned forty years over
Kush, and that afterward they had taken the reign from
him, and had sent him away in peace with honour and
with presents.
22 And when Re’uw’ĕl had heard the words of
Mosheh, Re’uw’ĕl said within himself, “I will put this
man into the prison house, whereby I shall appease
the children of Kush, for he has fled from them.”
23 And they took and put him in the prison house, and
Mosheh was in prison ten years. And while Mosheh
was in the prison house, Tsipporah the daughter of
Re’uw’ĕl took pity on him, and supported him with
bread and water all the time.
24 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl were still in the land
of Mitsrayim serving the Mitsrites in all manner of hard
labour, and the hand of Mitsrayim continued in severity
over the children of Yisra’ĕl in those days.
13

986

JASHER

At that time HWHY smote Pharaoh sovereign of
Mitsrayim, and afflicted him with the plague of leprosy
from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.
Because of the cruel treatment of the children of
Yisra’ĕl this plague was at that time from HWHY on
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim.
26 For HWHY had listened to the prayer of His people
the children of Yisra’ĕl, and their cry reached Him for
the sake of their hard labour.
27 Still his wrath did not turn from them, and the hand
of Pharaoh was still outstretched against the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and Pharaoh hardened his neck before
HWHY, and he increased his yoke over the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and embittered their lives with all manner of
hard work.
28 And when HWHY had inflicted the plague upon
Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, he asked his wise
men and sorcerers to cure him.
29 And his wise men and sorcerers said to him that if
the blood of little children were put into the wounds he
would be healed.
30 And Pharaoh listened to them, and sent his
attendants to Goshen to the children of Yisra’ĕl to take
their little children.
31 And Pharaoh’s attendants went and took the
infants of the children of Yisra’ĕl from the bosoms of
their mothers by force, and they brought them to
Pharaoh daily, a child each day, and the physicians
killed them and applied them to the plague; thus they
did all the days.
32 And the number of the children which Pharaoh slew
was three hundred and seventy-five.
33 But HWHY did not listen to the physicians of the
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and the plague went on
increasing greatly.
25

987

YASHAR

And Pharaoh was afflicted ten years with that
plague, still the heart of Pharaoh was more hardened
against the children of Yisra’ĕl.
35 And at the end of ten years HWHY continued to afflict
Pharaoh with destructive plagues.
36 And HWHY smote him with an evil tumor and
sickness of the stomach, and the plague turned into a
severe boil.
37 At that time the two attendants of Pharaoh came
from the land of Goshen where all the children of
Yisra’ĕl were, and went to the house of Pharaoh and
said to him, “We have seen the children of Yisra’ĕl
slacken in their work and are negligent in their labour.”
38 And when Pharaoh heard the words of his
attendants, his wrath was kindled against the children
of Yisra’ĕl exceedingly, for he was greatly grieved at
his bodily pain.
39 And he answered and said, “Now that the children
of Yisra’ĕl know that I am ill, they turn and scoff at us!
Now therefore harness my chariot for me, and I will
take myself to Goshen and will see the scoffing of the
children of Yisra’ĕl with which they are mocking me.”
So his servants harnessed the chariot for him,
40 and they took and made him ride on a horse, for he
was not able to ride by himself.
41 And he took ten horsemen and ten footmen with
him, and went to the children of Yisra’ĕl to Goshen.
42 And when they had come to the border of
Mitsrayim, the sovereign’s horse passed into a narrow
place, elevated in the hollow part of the vineyard,
fenced on both sides; the low, plain country being on
the other side.
43 And the horses ran rapidly in that place and
pressed each other, and the other horses pressed the
sovereign’s horse.
44 And the sovereign’s horse fell into the low plain
while the sovereign was riding on it, and when he fell,
34

988

JASHER

the chariot rolled over the sovereign’s face and the
horse lay upon the sovereign. And the sovereign cried
out, for his flesh was very sore.
45 And the flesh of the sovereign was torn from him,
and his bones were broken and he could not ride, for
this matter was from HWHY on him, for HWHY had heard
the cries of His people the children of Yisra’ĕl and their
affliction.
46 And his servants carried him on their shoulders, a
little at a time, and they brought him back to Mitsrayim,
and the horsemen who were with him also came back
to Mitsrayim.
47 And they placed him in his bed, and the sovereign
knew that his end was come to die, so Aparanith the
sovereigness, his wife came and cried before the
sovereign, and the sovereign wept a great weeping
with her.
48 And all his nobles and servants came on that day
and saw the sovereign in that affliction, and wept a
great weeping with him.
49 And the princes of the sovereign and all his
counsellors advised the sovereign to cause one to
reign in his place in the land, whosoever he should
choose from his sons.
50 And the sovereign had three sons and two
daughters which Aparanith the sovereigness, his wife
had borne to him, besides the sovereign’s children of
concubines.
51 And these were their names: the first-born Othri,
the second Aḏiqam, and the third Morion, and their
sisters, the name of the elder Bathia and of the other
Akuzi.
52 And Othri the first-born of the sovereign was a fool,
hasty and hurried in his words.
53 But Aḏiqam was a cunning and wise man and
knowing in all the wisdom of Mitsrayim, but of ugly
989

YASHAR

appearance, fat fleshed, and very short in stature; his
height was one ammah.
54 And when the sovereign saw Aḏiqam his son
intelligent and wise in all matters, the sovereign
resolved that he should be sovereign in his place after
his death.
55 And he took for him a wife, Geḏuḏah daughter of
Aḇilot, and he was ten years old, and she bore to him
four sons.
56 And afterward he went and took three wives and
brought forth eight sons and three daughters.
57 And the condition greatly prevailed over the
sovereign, and his flesh stank like the flesh of a
carcass cast on the field in summer time, during the
heat of the sun.
58 And when the sovereign saw that his sickness had
greatly strengthened itself over him, he ordered his
son Aḏiqam to be brought to him, and they made him
sovereign over the land in his place.
59 And at the end of three years, the sovereign died,
in shame, disgrace and disgust, and his servants
carried him and buried him in the burial place of the
sovereigns of Mitsrayim in Tso’an Mitsrayim.
60 But they did not embalm him as was usual with
sovereigns, for his flesh was putrid, and they could not
approach to embalm him because of the stench, so
they buried him in haste.
61 For this evil was from HWHY on him, for HWHY had
repaid him evil for the evil which he had done to
Yisra’ĕl in his days.
62 And he died with fear and with shame, and his son
Aḏiqam reigned in his place.

77 Aḏiqam was twenty years old when he reigned
over Mitsrayim. He reigned four years.
2 In the two hundred and sixth year of Yisra’ĕl’s going
down to Mitsrayim Aḏiqam reigned over Mitsrayim, but
990

JASHER

he did not continue long in his reign over Mitsrayim as
his fathers had continued their reigns.
3 For Mĕlol his father reigned ninety-four years in
Mitsrayim, but he was sick ten years and died, for he
had been wicked before HWHY.
4 And all the Mitsrites called the name of Aḏiqam,
Pharaoh like the name of his fathers, as was their
custom to do in Mitsrayim.
5 And all the wise men of Pharaoh called the name
of Aḏiqam, Aḥuz, for aḥuz means short in the Mitsrite
language.
6 And Aḏiqam was exceedingly ugly, and he was an
ammah and a span and he had a great beard which
reached to the soles of his feet.
7 And Pharaoh sat upon his father’s throne to reign
over Mitsrayim, and he conducted the reign of
Mitsrayim in his wisdom.
8 And while he reigned he exceeded his father and
all the preceding sovereigns in wickedness, and he
increased his yoke over the children of Yisra’ĕl.
9 And he went with his servants to Goshen to the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and he strengthened the labour
over them, and he said to them, “Complete your work,
each day’s task, and do not let your hands slacken
from your work from this day onward as you did in the
days of my father.”
10 And he placed officers over them from among the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and over these officers he placed
taskmasters from among his servants.
11 And he placed over them a measure of bricks for
them to do according to that number, day by day, and
he turned back and went to Mitsrayim.
12 At that time the taskmasters of Pharaoh ordered
the officers of the children of Yisra’ĕl according to the
command of Pharaoh, saying,

991

YASHAR

“Thus says Pharaoh, ‘Do your work each day, and
finish your task, and observe the daily measure of
bricks; do not diminish it.’
14 ‘And it shall come to pass that if you are deficient in
your daily bricks, I will put your young children in their
place.’ ”
15 And the task-masters of Mitsrayim did so in those
days as Pharaoh had ordered them.
16 And whenever any deficiency was found in the
children of Yisra’ĕl’s measure of their daily bricks, the
task-masters of Pharaoh would go to the wives of the
children of Yisra’ĕl and take infants of the children of
Yisra’ĕl to the number of bricks deficient. They would
take them by force from their mother’s bosom, and put
them in the building instead of the bricks,
17 while their fathers and mothers were crying over
them and weeping when they heard the weeping
voices of their infants in the wall of the building.
18 And the task-masters prevailed over Yisra’ĕl, that
the Yisra’ĕlites should place their children in the
building, so that a man placed his son in the wall and
put mortar over him, while his eyes wept over him, and
his tears ran down upon his child.
19 And the task-masters of Mitsrayim did so to the
infants of Yisra’ĕl for many days, and no one pitied or
had compassion over the infants of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
20 And the number of all the children killed in the
building was two hundred and seventy, some whom
they had built upon instead of the bricks which had
been left deficient by their fathers, and some whom
they had drawn out dead from the building.
21 And the labour imposed on the children of Yisra’ĕl
in the days of Aḏiqam exceeded in hardship that which
they did in the days of his father.
22 And the children of Yisra’ĕl sighed every day
because of their heavy work, for they had said to
13

992

JASHER

themselves, “See when Pharaoh shall die, his son will
rise up and lighten our work.”
23 But they increased the latter work more than the
former, and the children of Yisra’ĕl sighed at this and
their cry ascended to Elohim because of their labour.
24 And Elohim heard the voice of the children of
Yisra’ĕl and their cry, in those days, and Elohim
remembered His covenant to them which He had
made with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ.
25 And Elohim saw the burden of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and their heavy work in those days, and He
determined to deliver them.
26 And Mosheh son of Amram was still confined in the
dungeon in those days, in the house of Re’uw’ĕl the
Miḏyanite, but Tsipporah the daughter of Re’uw’ĕl
supported him with food secretly day by day.
27 And Mosheh was confined in the dungeon in the
house of Re’uw’ĕl for ten years.
28 And at the end of ten years, which was the first year
of the reign of Pharaoh over Mitsrayim in the place of
his father,
29 Tsipporah said to her father Re’uw’ĕl, “No person
inquires or seeks after the Iḇri, whom you bound in
prison now ten years.
30 “Now therefore, if it is good in your eyes, let us send
and see whether he is living or dead.” But her father
did not know that she had supported him.
31 And Re’uw’ĕl her father answered and said to her,
“Has ever such a matter come to pass that a man
should be shut up in a prison without food for ten years,
and that he should live?”
32 And Tsipporah answered her father, saying,
“Indeed you have heard that the Elohim of the Iḇrim is
great and awesome, and does wonders for them at all
times.
33 “It was He who delivered Aḇraham from Ur of the
Kasdim, and Yitsḥaq from the sword of his father, and
993

YASHAR

Ya’aqoḇ from the Messenger of HWHY who wrestled
with him at the ford of Yabboq.
34 “Also with this man He has done many matters. He
delivered him from the river in Mitsrayim and from the
sword of Pharaoh, and from the children of Kush, so
He can also deliver him from scarcity of food and make
him live.”
35 And the word was good in the eyes of Re’uw’ĕl, and
he did according to the word of his daughter, and sent
to the dungeon to ascertain what became of Mosheh.
36 And he looked, and see, the man Mosheh was
living in the dungeon, standing on his feet, praising and
praying to the Elohim of his ancestors.
37 And Re’uw’ĕl commanded Mosheh to be brought
out of the dungeon, so they shaved him and he
changed his prison garments and ate bread.
38 And afterward Mosheh went into the garden of
Re’uw’ĕl which was behind the house, and there he
prayed to HWHY his Elohim, who had done mighty
wonders for him.
39 And it came to be that while he prayed he looked
opposite to him, and see, an inscribed rod was placed
in the ground, which was planted in the midst of the
garden.
40 And he approached the rod and he looked, and
see, the name of HWHY Elohim of hosts was engraved
on it, written and produced upon the rod.
41 And he read it and stretched out his hand and he
plucked it like a forest tree from the thicket, and the rod
was in his hand.
42 And this is the rod with which all the works of our
Elohim were performed, after He had created the
shamayim and earth, and all the host of them, seas,
rivers and all their fishes.
43 And when Elohim had driven Aḏam from the
garden of Ĕḏen, he took the rod in his hand and went
and tilled the ground from which he was taken.
994

JASHER

And the rod came down to Noaḥ and was given to
Shĕm and his descendants, until it came into the hand
of Aḇraham the Iḇri.
45 And when Aḇraham had given all he had to his son
Yitsḥaq, he also gave to him this rod.
46 And when Ya’aqoḇ had fled to Paddan Aram, he
took it in his hand, and when he returned to his father
he had not left it behind.
47 Also when he went down to Mitsrayim he took it in
his hand and gave it to Yosĕph, one portion above his
brothers, for Ya’aqoḇ had taken it by force from his
brother Ĕsaw.
48 And after the death of Yosĕph, the nobles of
Mitsrayim came into the house of Yosĕph, and the rod
came into the hand of Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite, and
when he went out of Mitsrayim, he took it in his hand
and planted it in his garden.
49 And all the mighty men of the Qĕynites tried to
pluck it when they strove to get Tsipporah his
daughter, but they were unsuccessful
50 so the rod remained planted in the garden of
Re’uw’ĕl, until he who had a right to it came and took
it.
51 And when Re’uw’ĕl saw the rod in the hand of
Mosheh, he was amazed by it, and he gave him his
daughter Tsipporah for a wife.
44

78 At that time Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor, sovereign
of Eḏom died, and was buried in his house in the land
of Eḏom.
2 And after his death the children of Ĕsaw sent to the
land of Eḏom, and took from there a man who was in
Eḏom, whose name was Haḏaḏ, and they made him
sovereign over them in the place of Ba’al-Ḥanan, their
sovereign.
3 And Haḏaḏ reigned over the children of Eḏom fortyeight years,
995

YASHAR

and when he reigned he resolved to fight against
the children of Mo’aḇ, to bring them under the power
of the children of Ĕsaw as they were before, but he
was not able, because the children of Mo’aḇ heard this
matter, and they rose up and hastened to elect a
sovereign over them from among their brothers.
5 And afterward they gathered together a great
people, and sent to the children of Ammon their
brothers for help to fight against Haḏaḏ sovereign of
Eḏom.
6 And Haḏaḏ heard the matter which the children of
Mo’aḇ had done, and was greatly afraid of them, and
refrained from fighting against them.
7 In those days in Miḏyan, Mosheh son of Amram
took Tsipporah, the daughter of Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite
for a wife.
8 And Tsipporah walked in the Ways of the daughters
of Ya’aqoḇ; she was not below the righteousness of
Sarah, Riḇqah, Raḥĕl and Lĕ’ah.
9 And Tsipporah conceived and bore a son and he
called his name Gĕreshom, for he said, “I was a
stranger in a foreign land.” But he did not circumcise
his foreskin, by the command of Re’uw’ĕl his father-inlaw.
10 And she conceived again and bore a son, but
circumcised his foreskin, and called his name El’azar,
for Mosheh said, “Because the Elohim of my fathers
was my help, and delivered me from the sword of
Pharaoh.”
11 And Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim greatly
increased the labour of the children of Yisra’ĕl in those
days, and continued to make his yoke heavier upon
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
12 And he ordered a call to be made in Mitsrayim,
saying, “Give no more straw to the people to make
bricks with; let them go and gather themselves straw
as they can find it.
4

996

JASHER

“Also the amount of bricks which they shall make
let them give each day, and diminish none from them,
for they are idle in their work!”
14 And the children of Yisra’ĕl heard this, and they
mourned and sighed, and they cried out to HWHY
because of the bitterness of their beings.
15 And HWHY heard the cries of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and saw the oppression with which the Mitsrites
oppressed them.
16 And HWHY was jealous for His people and His
inheritance, and heard their voice, and He resolved to
take them out of the affliction of Mitsrayim, to give them
the land of Kena’an for a possession.
13

79 And in those days Mosheh was feeding the flock
of Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite his father-in-law, beyond the
Wilderness of Sin, and the rod which he took from his
father-in-law was in his hand.
2 And it came to be one day that a kid of goats
strayed from the flock, and Mosheh pursued it and it
came to the mountain of Elohim to Ḥorĕḇ.
3 And when he came to Ḥorĕḇ, HWHY appeared there
to him in the bush, and he found the bush burning with
fire, but the fire had no power over the bush to
consume it.
4 And Mosheh was greatly astonished at this sight,
why the bush was not consumed, and he approached
to see this mighty matter. And HWHY called to Mosheh
out of the fire and commanded him to go down to
Mitsrayim, to Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, to send
the children of Yisra’ĕl from his service.
5 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go, return to Mitsrayim,
for all those men who sought your life are dead, and
you shall speak to Pharaoh to send out the children of
Yisra’ĕl from his land.”
6 And HWHY showed him signs and wonders to do in
Mitsrayim before the eyes of Pharaoh and the eyes of
997

YASHAR

his subjects, in order that they might believe that HWHY
had sent him.
7 And Mosheh listened to all that HWHY had
commanded him, and he returned to his father-in-law
and told him the matter, and Re’uw’ĕl said to him, “Go
in peace.”
8 And Mosheh rose up to go to Mitsrayim, and he
took his wife and sons with him. And he was at an inn
on the way, and a messenger of Elohim came down,
and sought an occasion against him,
9 and he wanted to kill him for the sake of his firstborn son, because he had not circumcised him, and
had transgressed the Covenant which HWHY had made
with Aḇraham.
10 For Mosheh had listened to the words of his fatherin-law which he had spoken to him, not to circumcise
his first-born son, therefore he did not circumcise him.
11 And Tsipporah saw the messenger of HWHY
seeking an occasion against Mosheh, and she knew
that this matter was because he had not circumcised
her son Gĕreshom.
12 And Tsipporah hurried and took of the sharp stones
that were there, and she circumcised her son, and
delivered her husband and her son from the hand of
the messenger of HWHY.
13 And Aharon son of Amram, the brother of Mosheh,
was in Mitsrayim walking at the river side on that day.
14 And HWHY appeared to him in that place, and He
said to him, “Go now toward Mosheh in the
wilderness.” And he went and met him at the mountain
of Elohim, and he kissed him,
15 and Aharon lifted up his eyes, and saw Tsipporah
the wife of Mosheh and her children, and he said to
Mosheh, “Who are these to you?”
16 And Mosheh said to him, “They are my wife and
sons, which Elohim gave to me in Miḏyan.” But the
998

JASHER

matter grieved Aharon for the sake of the woman and
her children.
17 And Aharon said to Mosheh, “Send the woman and
her children away that they may go to her father’s
house.” And Mosheh listened to the words of Aharon,
and did so.
18 And Tsipporah returned with her children, and they
went to the house of Re’uw’ĕl, and remained there until
the time arrived when HWHY had visited his people, and
brought them out from Mitsrayim from the hand of
Pharaoh.
19 And Mosheh and Aharon came to Mitsrayim to the
community of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and they spoke
to them all the words of HWHY, and the people rejoiced
an exceedingly great rejoicing.
20 And Mosheh and Aharon rose early on the next
day, and they went to the house of Pharaoh, and they
took in their hands the rod of Elohim.
21 And when they came to the sovereign’s gate, two
young lions were confined there with iron instruments,
and no person went out or came in from before them,
unless those whom the sovereign ordered to come,
when the practisers of witchcraft came and withdrew
the lions by their spells, and thus brought them to the
sovereign.
22 And Mosheh hastened and lifted up the rod upon
the lions, and he loosed them, and Mosheh and
Aharon came into the sovereign’s house.
23 The lions also came with them in joy, and they
followed them and rejoiced as a dog rejoices over his
master when he comes from the field.
24 And when Pharaoh saw this matter he was
astonished at it, and he was greatly afraid at the report,
for their appearance was like the appearance of the
children of Elohim.
25 And Pharaoh said to Mosheh, “What do you
require?” and they answered him, saying, “HWHY
999

YASHAR

Elohim of the Iḇrim has sent us to you, to say, ‘Send
out My people that they may serve Me.’ ”
26 And when Pharaoh heard their words he was
greatly afraid before them, and he said to them, “Go
today and come back to me tomorrow.” And they did
according to the word of the sovereign.
27 And when they had gone Pharaoh sent for Bil’am
the magician and to Yoḥane and Mamrĕ his sons, and
to all the magicians and practisers of witchcraft and
counsellors which belonged to the sovereign, and they
all came and sat before the sovereign.
28 And the sovereign told them all the words which
Mosheh and his brother Aharon had spoken to him,
and the magicians said to the sovereign, “But how did
the men come to you, because of the lions which were
confined at the gate?”
29 And the sovereign said, “Because they lifted up
their rod against the lions and loosed them, and came
to me, and the lions also rejoiced at them as a dog
rejoices to meet his master.”
30 And Bil’am son of Be’or the magician answered the
sovereign, saying, “These are none else than
magicians like ourselves.
31 “Now therefore send for them, and let them come
and we will try them.” And the sovereign did so.
32 And in the morning Pharaoh sent for Mosheh and
Aharon to come before the sovereign, and they took
the rod of Elohim, and came to the sovereign and
spoke to him, saying,
33 “Thus said HWHY Elohim of the Iḇrim, ‘Send My
people that they may serve Me.’ ”
34 And the sovereign said to them, “But who will
believe you that you are the messengers of Elohim and
that you come to me by His order?
35 “Now therefore give a wonder or sign in this matter,
and then the words which you speak will be believed.”
1000

JASHER

And Aharon hastened and threw the rod out of his
hand before Pharaoh and before his servants, and the
rod turned into a serpent.
37 And the sorcerers saw this and each man cast his
rod upon the ground and they became serpents.
38 And the serpent of Aharon’s rod lifted up its head
and opened its mouth to swallow the rods of the
magicians.
39 And Bil’am the magician answered and said, “This
matter has been from the days of old, that a serpent
should swallow its kind, and that living creatures
devour each other.
40 “Now therefore restore it to a rod as it was at first,
and we will also restore our rods as they were at first,
and if your rod shall swallow our rods, then we shall
know that the Ruaḥ of Elohim is in you. But if not, you
are only a practiser of witchcraft like ourselves.
41 And Aharon hastened and stretched out his hand
and caught hold of the serpent’s tail and it became a
rod in his hand, and the sorcerers did likewise with
their rods, and they got hold, each man of the tail of his
serpent, and they became rods as at first.
42 And when they were restored to rods, the rod of
Aharon swallowed up their rods.
43 And when the sovereign saw this matter, he
ordered the book of records that related to the
sovereigns of Mitsrayim to be brought, and they
brought the book of records, the chronicles of the
sovereigns of Mitsrayim, in which all the idols of
Mitsrayim were inscribed, for they thought of finding
the Name of HWHY in it, but they did not find it.
44 And Pharaoh said to Mosheh and Aharon, “Look I
have not found the name of your Elohim written in this
book, and His Name I do not know.”
45 And the counsellors and wise men answered the
sovereign, “We have heard that the Elohim of the Iḇrim
is a son of the wise, the son of ancient sovereigns.”
36

1001

YASHAR

And Pharaoh turned to Mosheh and Aharon and
said to them, “I do not know HWHY whom you have
declared, neither will I send His people.”
47 And they answered and said to the sovereign,
“HWHY Elohim of mighty ones is His Name, and He
proclaimed His Name over us from the days of our
ancestors, and sent us, saying, ‘Go to Pharaoh and
say to him, “Send My people that they may serve Me.”
’
48 “Now therefore send us, that we may take a journey
for three days in the wilderness, and there may
slaughter to Him, for from the days of our going down
to Mitsrayim, He has not taken from our hands either
burnt offering, grain offering or slaughter offering. And
if you will not send us, His wrath will be kindled against
you, and He will smite Mitsrayim either with the plague
or with the sword.”
49 And Pharaoh said to them, “Tell me now His power
and His might.” And they said to him, “He created the
shamayim and the earth, the seas and all their fish. He
formed the light, created the darkness, caused rain
upon the earth and watered it, and made the plants
and grass to sprout. He created man and beast and
the animals of the forest, the birds of the air and the
fish of the sea, and by His mouth they live and die.
50 “Indeed He created you in your mother’s womb,
and put into you the breath of life, and raised you and
placed you on the royal throne of Mitsrayim, and He
will take your breath and being from you, and return
you to the ground from where you were taken.”
51 And the wrath of the sovereign was kindled at their
words, and he said to them, “But who among all the
mighty ones of nations can do this? My river is my own,
and I have made it for myself!”
52 And he drove them from him, and he ordered the
labour upon Yisra’ĕl to be more severe than it was
yesterday and before.
46

1002

JASHER

And Mosheh and Aharon went out from the
sovereign’s presence, and they saw the children of
Yisra’ĕl in an evil condition for the task-masters had
made their labour exceedingly heavy.
54 And Mosheh returned to HWHY and said, “Why have
You mistreated Your people? For since I came to
speak to Pharaoh what You sent me for, he has
exceedingly abused the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
55 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Look you will see that
with an outstretched hand and heavy plagues,
Pharaoh will send the children of Yisra’ĕl from his
land.”
56 And Mosheh and Aharon dwelt among their
brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl in Mitsrayim.
57 And as for the children of Yisra’ĕl, the Mitsrites
embittered their lives with the heavy work which they
imposed on them.
53

80 And at the end of two years, HWHY again sent
Mosheh to Pharaoh to bring out the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and to send them out of the land of Mitsrayim.
2 And Mosheh went and came to the house of
Pharaoh, and he spoke to him the words of HWHY who
had sent him, but Pharaoh would not listen to the voice
of HWHY, and Elohim moved His might in Mitsrayim
upon Pharaoh and his subjects, and Elohim smote
Pharaoh and his people with very great and lasting
plagues.
3 And HWHY sent by the hand of Aharon and turned
all the waters of Mitsrayim into blood, with all their
streams and rivers.
4 And when a Mitsrite came to drink and draw water,
he looked into his pitcher, and see, all the water was
turned into blood. And when he came to drink from his
cup, the water in the cup became blood.

1003

YASHAR

And when a woman kneaded her dough and
cooked her food, their appearance was turned to that
of blood.
6 And HWHY sent again and caused all their waters to
bring forth frogs, and all the frogs came into the houses
of the Mitsrites.
7 And when the Mitsrites drank, their bellies were
filled with frogs and they writhed in their bellies as they
wriggle when in the river.
8 And all their drinking water and cooking water
turned to frogs, also when they lay in their beds their
perspiration bred frogs.
9 Nevertheless the wrath of HWHY did not turn from
them, and His hand was outstretched against all the
Mitsrites to smite them with every heavy plague.
10 And He sent and smote their dust to lice, and the
lice became in Mitsrayim to the height of two ammah
on the earth.
11 The lice were also very numerous, on the flesh of
man and beast, on all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim. On
the sovereign and sovereigness HWHY also sent the
lice, and it grieved Mitsrayim exceedingly because of
the lice.
12 Nevertheless, the wrath of HWHY did not turn away,
and His hand was still outstretched over Mitsrayim.
13 And HWHY sent all kinds of creatures of the field into
Mitsrayim, and they came and destroyed all Mitsrayim,
man and beast, and trees, and all matters that were in
Mitsrayim.
14 And HWHY sent fiery serpents, scorpions, mice,
weasels, toads, together with others creeping in dust.
15 Flies, hornets, fleas, bugs and gnats, each swarm
according to its kind.
16 And all reptiles and winged creatures according to
their kind came to Mitsrayim and grieved the Mitsrites
exceedingly.
5

1004

JASHER

And the fleas and flies came into the eyes and ears
of the Mitsrites.
18 And the hornet came upon them and drove them
away, and they turned back from it into their inner
rooms, and it pursued them.
19 And when the Mitsrites hid themselves because of
the swarm of creatures, they locked their doors after
them, and Elohim ordered the Sulanuth which was in
the sea, to come up and go into Mitsrayim.
20 And it had long arms, ten ammah in length of the
ammah of a man.
21 And it went on the roofs and uncovered the rafters
and flooring and cut them, and stretched out its arm
into the house and removed the lock and the bolt, and
opened the houses of Mitsrayim.
22 Afterward the swarm of creatures came into the
houses of Mitsrayim, and the swarm of creatures
destroyed the Mitsrites, and it grieved them
exceedingly.
23 Nevertheless the wrath of HWHY did not turn away
from the Mitsrites, and His hand was still outstretched
against them.
24 And Elohim sent the pestilence, and the pestilence
filled Mitsrayim; on the horses and donkeys, and on
the camels, on herds of oxen and sheep and on man.
25 And when the Mitsrites rose early in the morning to
take their cattle to pasture they found all their cattle
dead.
26 And there remained of the cattle of the Mitsrites
only one in ten, but of the cattle belonging to Yisra’ĕl
in Goshen, not one died.
27 And Elohim sent a burning inflammation in the flesh
of the Mitsrites, which burst their skins, and it became
a severe itch on all the Mitsrites from the soles of their
feet to the crowns of their heads.
28 And many boils were in their flesh, so that their
flesh wasted away until they became rotten and putrid.
17

1005

YASHAR

Nevertheless the wrath of HWHY did not turn away,
and His hand was still outstretched over all Mitsrayim.
30 And HWHY sent a very heavy hail, which smote their
vines and broke their fruit trees and dried them up so
that they fell on them.
31 Also every green plant became dry and perished,
for a mingling fire fell in the midst of the hail, therefore
the hail and the fire consumed all matters.
32 Also men and beasts that were found around about
perished from the flames of fire and from the hail, and
all the young lions were exhausted.
33 And HWHY sent and brought numerous locusts into
Mitsrayim, the consuming locust, destroying locust,
cricket, and grasshopper, locusts each of its kind,
which devoured all that the hail had left remaining.
34 Then the Mitsrites rejoiced at the locusts, although
they consumed the produce of the field, and they
caught them in great amount and salted them for food.
35 And HWHY turned a mighty wind of the sea which
took away all the locusts, even those that were salted,
and threw them into the Sea of Reeds; not one locust
remained within the borders of Mitsrayim.
36 And Elohim sent darkness upon Mitsrayim, so that
the whole land of Mitsrayim and Pathros became dark
for three days, so that a man could not see his hand
when he lifted it to his mouth.
37 At that time many of the people of Yisra’ĕl died who
had rebelled against HWHY and who would not listen to
Mosheh and Aharon, and did not believe them that
Elohim had sent them,
38 and who had said, “We will not go out from
Mitsrayim lest we perish with hunger in a desolate
wilderness,” and who would not listen to the voice of
Mosheh.
39 And HWHY plagued them in the three days of
darkness, and the Yisra’ĕlites buried them in those
29

1006

JASHER

days, without the Mitsrites knowing of them or rejoicing
over them.
40 And the darkness was very great in Mitsrayim for
three days, and any person who was standing when
the darkness came, remained standing in his place.
And he that was sitting remained sitting, and he that
was lying continued lying in the same state, and he that
was walking remained sitting on the ground in the
same spot. And this matter came to pass on all the
Mitsrites, until the darkness had passed away.
41 And the days of darkness passed, and HWHY sent
Mosheh and Aharon to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“Celebrate your Festival and perform your Pesaḥ, for
see, I come in the midst of the night among all the
Mitsrites, and I will smite all their first-born, from the
first-born of a man to the first-born of a beast, and
when I see your Pesaḥ, I will pass over you.”
42 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did according to all that
HWHY had commanded Mosheh and Aharon, thus did
they on that night.
43 And it came to be in the middle of the night, that
HWHY went out in the midst of Mitsrayim, and smote all
the first-born of the Mitsrites, from the first-born of man
to the first-born of beast.
44 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his
servants and all the Mitsrites, and there was a great
cry throughout Mitsrayim on that night, for there was
not a house in which there was not a dead one.
45 Also the likenesses of the first-born of Mitsrayim,
which were carved in the walls on their houses, were
destroyed and fell to the ground.
46 Even the bones of their first-born who had died
before this and whom they had buried in their houses,
were raked up by the dogs of Mitsrayim on that night
and dragged before the Mitsrites and thrown before
them.
1007

YASHAR

And all the Mitsrites saw this evil which had
suddenly come upon them, and all the Mitsrites cried
out with a loud voice.
48 And all the clans of Mitsrayim wept on that night,
each man for his son and each man for his daughter,
being the first-born, and the tumult of Mitsrayim was
heard at a distance on that night.
49 And Bathia the daughter of Pharaoh went out with
the sovereign on that night to seek Mosheh and
Aharon in their houses, and they found them in their
houses, eating and drinking and rejoicing with all
Yisra’ĕl.
50 And Bathia said to Mosheh, “Is this the reward for
the good which I have done to you, who raised you and
stretched you out? But you have brought this evil upon
me and my father’s house.”
51 And Mosheh said to her, “Indeed HWHY brought ten
plagues on Mitsrayim; did any evil increase upon you
from any of them? Did one of them affect you?” and
she said, “No.”
52 And Mosheh said to her, “Although you are the firstborn to your mother, you shall not die, and no evil shall
reach you in the midst of Mitsrayim.”
53 And she said, “What advantage is it to me, when I
see the sovereign, my brother, and all his household
and subjects in this evil, whose first-born perish with all
the first-born of Mitsrayim?”
54 And Mosheh said to her, “Indeed your brother and
his household, and subjects, the clans of Mitsrayim,
would not listen to the words of HWHY, therefore this
evil came upon them.”
55 And Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim approached
Mosheh and Aharon, and some of the children of
Yisra’ĕl who were with them in that place, and he
prayed to them, saying,
56 “Rise up and take your brothers, all the children of
Yisra’ĕl who are in the land, with their sheep and oxen,
47

1008

JASHER

and all belonging to them, they shall leave nothing
remaining, only pray for me to HWHY your Elohim!”
57 And Mosheh said to Pharaoh, “See though you are
your mother’s first-born, only do not fear, for you will
not die. For HWHY has commanded that you shall live,
in order to show you His great might and strong
outstretched arm.”
58 And Pharaoh ordered the children of Yisra’ĕl to be
sent away, and all the Mitsrites strengthened
themselves to send them, for they said, “We are all
perishing!”
59 And all the Mitsrites sent the Yisra’ĕlites out, with
great riches, sheep and oxen and valuables, according
to the oath of HWHY between Him and our father
Aḇraham.
60 And the children of Yisra’ĕl delayed going out at
night, and when the Mitsrites came to them to bring
them out, they said to them, “Are we thieves, that we
should go out at night?”
61 And the children of Yisra’ĕl asked of the Mitsrites,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments,
and the children of Yisra’ĕl plundered the Mitsrites.
62 And Mosheh hastened and rose up and went to the
river of Mitsrayim, and brought up from there the coffin
of Yosĕph and took it with him.
63 The children of Yisra’ĕl also brought up, each man
his father’s coffin with him, and each man the coffins
of his tribe.

81 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from
Ra’meses to Sukkoth - about six hundred thousand
men on foot, besides the little ones and their wives.
2 Also a mixed multitude went up with them, and
flocks and herds, even much cattle.
3 And the sojourning of the children of Yisra’ĕl, who
dwelt in the land of Mitsrayim in hard labour, was two
hundred and ten years.
1009

YASHAR

And at the end of two hundred and ten years, HWHY
brought out the children of Yisra’ĕl from Mitsrayim with
a strong hand.
5 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from
Mitsrayim and from Goshen and from Ra’meses, and
encamped in Sukkoth on the fifteenth day of the first
month.
6 And the Mitsrites buried all their first-born whom
HWHY had smitten, and all the Mitsrites buried their
slain for three days.
7 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from Sukkoth
and encamped in Ĕtham, at the end of the wilderness.
8 And on the third day after the Mitsrites had buried
their first-born, many men rose up from Mitsrayim and
went after Yisra’ĕl to make them return to Mitsrayim,
for they were sorry that they had sent the Yisra’ĕlites
away from their servitude.
9 And one man said to his neighbour, “Indeed
Mosheh and Aharon spoke to Pharaoh, saying, ‘We
will go a three days’ journey in the wilderness and
slaughter to HWHY our Elohim.’
10 “Now therefore let us rise up early in the morning
and cause them to return, and it shall be that if they
return with us to Mitsrayim to their masters, then we
shall know that there is trust in them, but if they will not
return, then we will fight against them, and make them
come back with great power and a strong hand.”
11 And all the nobles of Pharaoh rose up in the
morning, and with them about seven hundred
thousand men, and they went out from Mitsrayim on
that day, and came to the place where the children of
Yisra’ĕl were.
12 And all the Mitsrites looked and see, Mosheh and
Aharon and all the children of Yisra’ĕl were sitting
before Pi ha’Ḥiroth, eating and drinking and
celebrating the Festival of HWHY.
4

1010

JASHER

And all the Mitsrites said to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“Indeed you said, ‘We will go a journey for three days
in the wilderness and slaughter to our Elohim and
return.’
14 “Now therefore this day makes five days since you
went, why do you not return to your masters?”
15 And Mosheh and Aharon answered them, saying,
“Because HWHY our Elohim has witnessed to us,
saying, ‘You shall no longer return to Mitsrayim, but we
will take ourselves to a land flowing with milk and
honey,’ as HWHY our Elohim had sworn to our
ancestors to give to us.”
16 And when the nobles of Mitsrayim saw that the
children of Yisra’ĕl did not listen to them, to return to
Mitsrayim, they girded themselves to fight against
Yisra’ĕl.
17 And HWHY strengthened the hearts of the children
of Yisra’ĕl over the Mitsrites, that they gave them a
severe beating. And the battle was hard on the
Mitsrites, and all the Mitsrites fled from before the
children of Yisra’ĕl, for many of them perished by the
hand of Yisra’ĕl.
18 And the nobles of Pharaoh went to Mitsrayim and
told Pharaoh, saying, “The children of Yisra’ĕl have
fled, and will no longer return to Mitsrayim, and in this
manner Mosheh and Aharon spoke to us.”
19 And Pharaoh heard this word, and his heart and the
hearts of all his subjects were turned against Yisra’ĕl,
and they were sorry that they had sent out Yisra’ĕl.
And all the Mitsrites advised Pharaoh to pursue the
children of Yisra’ĕl to make them come back to their
burdens.
20 And each man said to his brother, “What is this that
we have done, that we have sent Yisra’ĕl from our
servitude?”
13

1011

YASHAR

And HWHY strengthened the hearts of all the
Mitsrites to pursue the Yisra’ĕlites, for HWHY desired to
overthrow the Mitsrites in the Sea of Reeds.
22 And Pharaoh rose up and harnessed his chariot,
and he ordered all the Mitsrites to assemble, not one
man was left except the women and the little ones.
23 And all the Mitsrites went out with Pharaoh to
pursue the children of Yisra’ĕl, and the army of
Mitsrayim was an exceedingly large and numerous
army - about ten hundred thousand men.
24 And the whole of the army went and pursued the
children of Yisra’ĕl to bring them back to Mitsrayim,
and they reached them encamped by the Sea of
Reeds.
25 And the children of Yisra’ĕl lifted up their eyes, and
saw all the Mitsrites pursuing them, and the children of
Yisra’ĕl were greatly afraid at them, and the children of
Yisra’ĕl cried out to HWHY.
26 And because of the Mitsrites, the children of
Yisra’ĕl divided themselves into four divisions, and
they were divided in their opinions, for they were afraid
of the Mitsrites, and Mosheh spoke to each of them.
27 The first division was of the children of Re’uḇĕn,
Shim’on, and Yissasḵar, and they resolved to cast
themselves into the sea, for they were exceedingly
afraid of the Mitsrites.
28 And Mosheh said to them, “Do not fear! Stand still
and see the deliverance of HWHY which He will
accomplish for you today.”
29 The second division was of the children of Zeḇulun,
Binyamin and Naphtali, and they resolved to go back
to Mitsrayim with the Mitsrites.
30 And Mosheh said to them, “Do not fear, for as you
have seen the Mitsrites today, so you shall see them
no more forever.”
21

1012

JASHER

The third division was of the children of Yahuḏah
and Yosĕph, and they resolved to go to meet the
Mitsrites to fight against them.
32 And Mosheh said to them, “Stand in your places,
for HWHY will fight for you, and you shall remain silent.”
33 And the fourth division was of the children of Lĕwi,
Gaḏ, and Ashĕr, and they resolved to go into the midst
of the Mitsrites to put them to shame. And Mosheh said
to them, “Remain in your positions and do not fear,
only call out to HWHY that He may save you out of their
hands.”
34 After this Mosheh rose up from among the people,
and he prayed to HWHY and said,
35 “O HWHY Elohim of all the earth, save now your
people whom You brought out from Mitsrayim, and do
not let the Mitsrites boast that power and might are
theirs.”
36 So HWHY said to Mosheh, “Why do you cry out to
Me? Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl that they shall
proceed, and you, stretch out your rod over the sea
and divide it, and the children of Yisra’ĕl shall pass
through it.”
37 And Mosheh did so, and he lifted up his rod over
the sea and divided it.
38 And the waters of the sea were divided into twelve
parts, and the children of Yisra’ĕl passed through on
foot, with shoes, as a man would pass through a
prepared way.
39 And HWHY revealed to the children of Yisra’ĕl His
wonders in Mitsrayim and in the sea by the hand of
Mosheh and Aharon.
40 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl had entered the
sea, the Mitsrites came after them, and the waters of
the sea returned upon them, and they all went down in
the water, and not one man was left except Pharaoh,
who gave thanks to HWHY and believed in Him,
31

1013

YASHAR

therefore HWHY did not cause him to perish at that time
with the Mitsrites.
41 And HWHY ordered a messenger to take him from
among the Mitsrites, who cast him into the land of
Ninewĕh and he reigned over it for a long time.
42 And on that day HWHY saved Yisra’ĕl from the hand
of Mitsrayim, and all the children of Yisra’ĕl saw that
the Mitsrites had perished, and they saw the great
hand of HWHY, in what He had performed in Mitsrayim
and in the sea.
43 Then Mosheh and the children of Yisra’ĕl sang this
song to HWHY, on the day when HWHY caused the
Mitsrites to fall before them.
44 And all Yisra’ĕl sang together saying, “I will sing to
HWHY for He is greatly exalted, the horse and his rider
He has cast into the sea.” Look, it is written in the Book
of the Torah of Elohim.
45 After this the children of Yisra’ĕl proceeded on their
journey, and camped in Marah, and HWHY gave to the
children of Yisra’ĕl Laws and Right-Rulings in that
place in Marah. And HWHY Commanded the children of
Yisra’ĕl to walk in all His Ways and to serve Him.
46 And they journeyed from Marah and came to Ĕlim,
and in Ĕlim were twelve springs of water and seventy
palm trees, and the children encamped there by the
waters.
47 And they journeyed from Ĕlim and came to the
Wilderness of Sin, on the fifteenth day of the second
month after their departure from Mitsrayim.
48 At that time HWHY gave the manna to the children
of Yisra’ĕl to eat, and HWHY caused food to rain from
the shamayim for the children of Yisra’ĕl day by day.
49 And the children of Yisra’ĕl ate the manna for forty
years, all the days that they were in the wilderness,
until they came to the land of Kena’an to possess it.
50 And they proceeded from the Wilderness of Sin and
encamped in Alush.
1014

JASHER

And they proceeded from Alush and encamped in
Rephiḏim.
52 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl were in Rephiḏim,
Amalĕq son of Eliphaz, son of Ĕsaw, the brother of
Tsepho, came to fight against Yisra’ĕl.
53 And he brought with him eight hundred and one
thousand men, magicians and diviners, and he
prepared for battle with Yisra’ĕl in Rephiḏim.
54 And they maintained a great and fierce battle
against Yisra’ĕl, and HWHY delivered Amalĕq and his
people into the hands of Mosheh and the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and into the hand of Yahoshua, son of Nun,
the Ephrathite, the servant of Mosheh.
55 And the children of Yisra’ĕl smote Amalĕq and his
people with the edge of the sword, but the battle was
very hard upon the children of Yisra’ĕl.
56 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Write this word as a
memorial for you in a Book, and place it in the hand of
Yahoshua, son of Nun, your servant, and you shall
command the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘When you
come to the land of Kena’an, you shall utterly blot out
the remembrance of Amalĕq from under the
shamayim.’ ”
57 And Mosheh did so, and he took the Book and
wrote in it these words, saying,
58 “Remember what Amalĕq has done to you on the
way when you departed from Mitsrayim.
59 “Who met you on the way and smote your rear,
even those that were feeble behind you when you
were faint and weary.
60 “Therefore it shall be when HWHY your Elohim has
given you rest from all your enemies round about in the
land which HWHY your Elohim gives you for an
inheritance, to possess it, that you shall blot out the
remembrance of Amalĕq from under the shamayim,
you shall not forget it.
51

1015

YASHAR

“And the sovereign who shall have pity on Amalĕq,
or upon his memory or upon his seed, see, I will require
it of him, and I will cut him off from among his people.”
62 And Mosheh wrote all these words in a Book, and
he commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl regarding all
these words.
61

82 And the children of Yisra’ĕl continued from
Rephiḏim and they camped in the Wilderness of Sinai,
in the third month of their going out from Mitsrayim.
2 At that time Re’uw’ĕl the Miḏyanite, the father-inlaw of Mosheh, came with Tsipporah his daughter and
her two sons, for he had heard of the wonders of HWHY
which He had done to Yisra’ĕl, that He had delivered
them from the hand of Mitsrayim.
3 And Re’uw’ĕl came to Mosheh to the wilderness
where he was encamped, where the mountain of
Elohim was.
4 And Mosheh went out to meet his father-in-law with
great honour, and all Yisra’ĕl was with him.
5 And Re’uw’ĕl and his children remained among the
Yisra’ĕlites for many days, and Re’uw’ĕl knew HWHY
from then onward.
6 And in the third month from the children of Yisra’ĕl’s
departure from Mitsrayim, on the sixth day thereof,
HWHY gave to Yisra’ĕl the Ten Words on Mount Sinai.
7 And all Yisra’ĕl heard all these Commands, and all
Yisra’ĕl rejoiced exceedingly in HWHY on that day.
8 And the esteem of HWHY rested on Mount Sinai,
and He called to Mosheh, and Mosheh came in the
midst of a cloud and went up the mountain.
9 And Mosheh was upon the mountain forty days and
forty nights; he ate no bread and drank no water, and
HWHY instructed him in the Laws and Right-Rulings in
order to teach the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 And HWHY wrote the Ten Words which He had
commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl upon two tablets
1016

JASHER

of stone, which He gave to Mosheh to command the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
11 And at the end of forty days and forty nights, when
HWHY had finished speaking to Mosheh on Mount
Sinai, then HWHY gave to Mosheh the tablets of stone,
written with the finger of Elohim.
12 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl saw that Mosheh
was so long in coming down from the mountain, they
gathered around Aharon, and said, “As for this man
Mosheh, we do not know what has become of him.
13 “Now therefore rise up, make for us a mighty one
who shall go before us, so that you shall not die.”
14 And Aharon was greatly afraid of the people, and
he ordered them to bring him gold, and he made it into
a moulded calf for the people.
15 And HWHY said to Mosheh, before he had come
down from the mountain, “Get down, for your people
whom you brought out from Mitsrayim have corrupted
themselves.
16 “They have made for themselves a moulded calf,
and have bowed down to it. Now therefore leave me,
that I may consume them from off the earth, for they
are a stiff-necked people!”
17 And Mosheh sought the face of HWHY, and he
prayed to HWHY for the people for the sake of the calf
which they had made. And afterward he went down
from the mountain and in his hands were the two
tablets of stone, which Elohim had given him to
Command the Yisra’ĕlites.
18 And when Mosheh approached the camp and saw
the calf which the people had made, the wrath of
Mosheh was kindled and he broke the tablets at the
foot of the mountain.
19 And Mosheh came to the camp and he took the calf
and burned it with fire, and ground it till it became fine
dust, and scattered it upon the water and gave it to the
Yisra’ĕlites to drink.
1017

YASHAR

And there died of the people by the swords of each
other about three thousand men who had made the
calf.
21 And on the next day Mosheh said to the people, “I
will go up to HWHY, if I might make atonement for your
sins which you have sinned against HWHY.”
22 And Mosheh again went up to HWHY, and he
remained with HWHY forty days and forty nights.
23 And during the forty days Mosheh entreated HWHY
on behalf of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and HWHY listened
to the prayer of Mosheh, and HWHY was entreated by
him on behalf of Yisra’ĕl.
24 Then HWHY spoke to Mosheh to hew two stone
tablets and to bring them up to HWHY, who would write
on them the Ten Words.
25 Now Mosheh did so, and he came down and hewed
the two tablets and went up to Mount Sinai to HWHY,
and HWHY wrote the Ten Words on the tablets.
26 And Mosheh remained with HWHY forty days and
forty nights, and HWHY instructed him in Laws and
Right-Rulings to give to Yisra’ĕl.
27 And HWHY commanded him regarding the children
of Yisra’ĕl that they should make a Miqdash for HWHY,
that His Name might rest therein. And HWHY showed
him the likeness of the Miqdash and the likeness of all
its utensils.
28 And at the end of the forty days, Mosheh came
down from the mountain and the two tablets were in
his hand.
29 And Mosheh came to the children of Yisra’ĕl and
spoke to them all the Words of HWHY, and he taught
them Torot, Laws and Right-Rulings which HWHY had
taught him.
30 And Mosheh told the children of Yisra’ĕl the Word
of HWHY, that a Miqdash should be made for Him, to
dwell among the children of Yisra’ĕl.
20

1018

JASHER

And the people rejoiced greatly at all the good
which HWHY had spoken to them, through Mosheh, and
they said, “We will do all that HWHY has spoken to you.”
32 And the people rose up as one man and they made
generous offerings for the Miqdash of HWHY, and each
man brought the offering of HWHY for the work of the
qodesh place, and for all its service.
33 And each man of all the children of Yisra’ĕl brought
of all that was found in his possession for the work of
the qodesh place of HWHY, gold, silver and brass, and
every matter that was of service for the qodesh place.
34 And all the wise men who were skilled in work came
and made the Miqdash of HWHY, according to all that
HWHY had commanded, every man in the work in which
he was skilled. And all the wise-hearted men made the
Miqdash, and its furnishings and all the utensils for the
qodesh service, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
35 And the work of the qodesh place of the Mishkan
was completed at the end of five months, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl did all that HWHY had commanded
Mosheh.
36 And they brought the Miqdash and all its
furnishings to Mosheh. According to the likeness which
HWHY had shown to Mosheh, so the children of Yisra’ĕl
did.
37 And Mosheh saw the work, and see, they did it as
HWHY had commanded him, so Mosheh baraḵ them.
31

83 And in the twelfth month, in the twenty-third day
of the month, Mosheh took Aharon and his sons, and
he dressed them in their garments, and anointed them
and did to them as HWHY had commanded him, and
Mosheh brought all the offerings which HWHY had
commanded him on that day.
2 After this Mosheh took Aharon and his sons and
said to them, “For seven days you shall remain at the
door of the Mishkan, for so am I commanded.”
1019

YASHAR

And Aharon and his sons did all that HWHY had
commanded them through Mosheh, and they
remained for seven days at the door of the Mishkan.
4 And on the eighth day, being the first day of the first
month, in the second year from the Yisra’ĕlites
departure from Mitsrayim, Mosheh erected the
Miqdash. And Mosheh put up all the furnishings of the
Mishkan and all the furnishings of the qodesh place,
and he did all that HWHY had commanded him.
5 And Mosheh called to Aharon and his sons, and
they brought the burnt offering and the sin offering for
themselves and the children of Yisra’ĕl, as HWHY had
commanded Mosheh.
6 On that day the two sons of Aharon, Naḏaḇ and
Aḇihu, took strange fire and brought it before HWHY
who had not commanded them, and a fire went out
from before HWHY, and consumed them, and they died
before HWHY on that day.
7 Then on the day when Mosheh had completed
putting up the Miqdash, the leaders of the children of
Yisra’ĕl began to bring their offerings before HWHY for
the dedication of the altar.
8 And they brought their offerings, each leader for
one day, a leader each day for twelve days.
9 And all the offerings which they brought, each man
in his day: one silver dish weighing one hundred and
thirty sheqels, one silver bowl of seventy sheqels after
the sheqel of the qodesh place, both of them full of fine
flour, mixed with oil as a grain offering,
10 one ladle, weighing ten sheqels of gold, full of
incense,
11 one young bull, one ram, one lamb a year old as a
burnt offering,
12 and male goats as a sin offering.
13 And as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old.
3

1020

JASHER

Thus did the twelve princes of Yisra’ĕl day by day,
each man in his day.
15 And it came to be after this, in the thirteenth day of
the month, that Mosheh commanded the children of
Yisra’ĕl to observe the Pesaḥ.
16 And the children of Yisra’ĕl kept the Pesaḥ in its
season in the fourteenth day of the month, as HWHY
had commanded Mosheh, so the children of Yisra’ĕl
did.
17 And in the second month, on the first day, HWHY
spoke to Mosheh, saying,
18 “Number the heads of all the males of the children
of Yisra’ĕl from twenty years old and upward, you and
your brother Aharon and the twelve leaders of
Yisra’ĕl.”
19 And Mosheh did so, and Aharon came with the
twelve leaders of Yisra’ĕl, and they numbered the
children of Yisra’ĕl in the Wilderness of Sinai.
20 And the numbers of the children of Yisra’ĕl by their
fathers houses, from twenty years old and above, were
six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.
21 But the children of Lĕwi were not numbered among
their brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl.
22 And the number of all the males of the children of
Yisra’ĕl from one month old and upward, was twentytwo thousand, two hundred and seventy-three.
23 And the number of the children of Lĕwi from one
month old and above, was twenty-two thousand.
24 And Mosheh appointed the kohenim and the
Lĕwites, each man to his service and to his burden to
serve the qodesh place of the Mishkan, as HWHY had
commanded Mosheh.
25 And on the twentieth day of the month, the cloud
was taken away from the Mishkan of Witness.
26 At that time the children of Yisra’ĕl continued their
journey from the Wilderness of Sinai, and they took a
journey of three days, and the cloud rested upon the
14

1021

YASHAR

wilderness of Paran. There the wrath of HWHY was
kindled against Yisra’ĕl, for they had provoked HWHY in
asking him for meat, that they might eat.
27 And HWHY listened to their voice, and gave them
meat which they ate for one month.
28 But after this the wrath of HWHY was kindled against
them, and He smote them with a great slaughter, and
they were buried there in that place.
29 And the children of Yisra’ĕl called that place
Qiḇroth ha’Tta’awah, because there they buried the
people that lusted flesh.
30 And they departed from Qiḇroth ha’Tta’awah and
pitched in Ḥatsĕroth, which is in the wilderness of
Paran.
31 And while the children of Yisra’ĕl were in Ḥatsĕroth,
the wrath of HWHY was kindled against Miryam for the
sake of Mosheh, and she became leprous, white as
snow.
32 And she was confined outside the camp for seven
days, until she had recovered again after her leprosy.
33 The children of Yisra’ĕl afterward departed from
Ḥatsĕroth, and pitched at the end of the wilderness of
Paran.
34 At that time, HWHY spoke to Mosheh to send twelve
men from the children of Yisra’ĕl, one man of each
tribe, to go and spy out the land of Kena’an.
35 And Mosheh sent the twelve men, and they came
to the land of Kena’an to search and examine it, and
they spied out the entire land from the Wilderness of
Sin to Reḥoḇ as you come to Ḥammath.
36 And at the end of forty days they came to Mosheh
and Aharon, and they brought him word as it was in
their hearts. And ten of the men brought an evil report
of the land to the children of Yisra’ĕl, which they had
explored, saying, “It is better for us to return to
Mitsrayim than to go into this land, a land that
consumes its inhabitants.”
1022

JASHER

But Yahoshua son of Nun, and Kalĕḇ son of
Yephunneh, who were of those that spied out the land,
said, “The land is exceedingly good.
38 “If HWHY delights in us, then He will bring us into this
land and give it to us, for it is a land flowing with milk
and honey!”
39 But the children of Yisra’ĕl would not listen to them,
and they listened to the words of the ten men who had
brought an evil report of the land.
40 And HWHY heard the murmurings of the children of
Yisra’ĕl and He was wroth and swore, saying,
41 “Indeed not one man of this wicked generation from
twenty years old and upward shall see the land except
Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh and Yahoshua son of Nun.
42 “But this wicked generation shall indeed perish in
this wilderness, and their children shall come to the
land and they shall possess it.” So the wrath of HWHY
was kindled against Yisra’ĕl, and He made them
wander in the wilderness for forty years until the end
of that wicked generation, because they did not follow
HWHY.
43 And the people dwelt in wilderness of Paran a long
time, and afterward they proceeded to the wilderness
by the way of the Sea of Reeds.
37

84 At that time Qoraḥ son of Yĕtser son of Qehath
son of Lĕwi, took many men of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and they rose up and disputed with Mosheh and
Aharon and the whole congregation.
2 And HWHY was wroth with them, and the earth
opened its mouth, and swallowed them up, with their
households and all belonging to them, and all the men
belonging to Qoraḥ.
3 And after this Elohim made the people go around
by the way of Mount Sĕ’ir for a long time.
4 At that time HWHY said to Mosheh, “Do not provoke
a battle against the children of Ĕsaw, for I will not give
1023

YASHAR

to you any matter belonging to them, as much as the
sole of the foot could tread upon, for I have given
Mount Sĕ’ir as an inheritance to Ĕsaw,”
5 because the children of Ĕsaw had fought against
the children of Sĕ’ir in former times, and HWHY had
delivered the children of Sĕ’ir into the hands of the
children of Ĕsaw, and destroyed them from before
them. And the children of Ĕsaw dwell in their place to
this day.
6 Therefore HWHY said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “Do
not fight against the children of Ĕsaw your brothers, for
nothing in their land belongs to you, but you may buy
food from them for silver and eat it, and you may buy
water from them for silver and drink it.”
7 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did according to the
word of HWHY.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl went about the
wilderness, going around by the way of Mount Sinai for
a long time, and did not touch the children of Ĕsaw,
and they continued in that region for nineteen years.
9 At that time Latinus sovereign of the children of the
Ḥittites died, in the forty-fifth year of his reign, which is
the fourteenth year of the children of Yisra’ĕl’s
departure from Mitsrayim.
10 And they buried him in his place which he had built
for himself in the land of the Ḥittites, and Aḇimnas
reigned in his place for thirty-eight years.
11 And the children of Yisra’ĕl passed the boundary of
the children of Ĕsaw in those days, at the end of
nineteen years, and they came and passed by the way
of the wilderness of Mo’aḇ.
12 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Do not besiege Mo’aḇ,
and do not fight against them, for I will give you none
of their land.”
13 And the children of Yisra’ĕl passed the way of the
wilderness of Mo’aḇ for nineteen years, and they did
not fight against them.
1024

JASHER

And in the thirty-sixth year of the children of
Yisra’ĕl’s departure from Mitsrayim, HWHY smote the
heart of Siḥon, sovereign of the Amorites, and he
waged battle, and went out to fight against the children
of Mo’aḇ.
15 And Siḥon sent messengers to Be’or son of
Yanĕas, son of Bil’am, counsellor to the sovereign of
Mitsrayim, and to Bil’am his son, to curse Mo’aḇ, in
order that it might be delivered into the hand of Siḥon.
16 And the messengers went and brought Be’or son of
Yanĕas, and Bil’am his son, from Pethor in Aram
Naharayim. So Be’or and Bil’am his son came to the
city of Siḥon and they cursed Mo’aḇ and their
sovereign in the presence of Siḥon sovereign of the
Amorites.
17 So Siḥon went out with his whole army, and he
went to Mo’aḇ and fought against them, and he
subdued them, and HWHY delivered them into his
hands. And Siḥon slew the sovereign of Mo’aḇ,
18 and Siḥon took all the cities of Mo’aḇ in battle. He
also took Ḥeshbon from them, for Ḥeshbon was one of
the cities of Mo’aḇ, and Siḥon placed his princes and
his nobles in Ḥeshbon, and Ḥeshbon belonged to
Siḥon in those days.
19 Therefore the parable was spoken: Be’or and
Bil’am his son uttered these words saying, “Come to
Hessian, the city of Siḥon will be built and established.
20 “Woe to you Mo’aḇ! You are lost, O people of
Kemosh! See, it is written in the Book of the Torah of
Elohim.”
21 And when Siḥon had conquered Mo’aḇ, he placed
guards in the cities which he had taken from Mo’aḇ,
and a considerable number of the children of Mo’aḇ fell
in battle into the hand of Siḥon, and he made a great
capture of them, sons and daughters, and he slew their
sovereign. So Siḥon turned back to his own land,
14

1025

YASHAR

and Siḥon gave numerous presents of silver and
gold to Be’or and Bil’am his son, and he dismissed
them, and they went to Aram-Naharayim to their home
and country.
23 At that time all the children of Yisra’ĕl passed from
the way of the wilderness of Mo’aḇ, and returned and
surrounded the wilderness of Eḏom.
24 So the whole congregation came to the Wilderness
of Sin in the first month of the fortieth year of their
departure from Mitsrayim, and the children of Yisra’ĕl
dwelt there in Qaḏĕsh, of the Wilderness of Sin, and
Miryam died there and she was buried there.
25 At that time Mosheh sent messengers to Haḏaḏ
sovereign of Eḏom, saying, “Thus says your brother
Yisra’ĕl, please let me pass through your land. We will
not pass through field or vineyard, we will not drink the
water of the well, we will walk in the sovereign’s way.”
26 And Eḏom said to him, “You shall not pass through
my country.” and Eḏom went out to meet the children
of Yisra’ĕl with a mighty people.
27 And the children of Ĕsaw refused to let the children
of Yisra’ĕl pass through their land, so the Yisra’ĕlites
turned back from them and did not fight against them.
28 For before this HWHY had commanded the children
of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “You shall not fight against the
children of Ĕsaw.” Therefore the Yisra’ĕlites turned
back from them and did not fight against them.
29 So the children of Yisra’ĕl departed from Qaḏĕsh,
and all the people came to Mount Hor.
30 At that time HWHY said to Mosheh, “Tell your brother
Aharon that he shall die there, for he shall not come to
the land which I have given to the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
31 And Aharon went up, at the command of HWHY, to
Mount Hor, in the fortieth year, in the fifth month, on
the first day of the month.
32 And Aharon was one hundred and twenty-three
years old when he died on Mount Hor.
22

1026

JASHER

85 And sovereign Araḏ the Kena’anite, who dwelt in
the Negeḇ, heard that the Yisra’ĕlites had come by the
way of Atharim, and he arrayed his armies to fight
against the Yisra’ĕlites.
2 And the children of Yisra’ĕl were greatly afraid of
him, for he had a great and numerous army, so the
children of Yisra’ĕl resolved to return to Mitsrayim.
3 And the children of Yisra’ĕl turned back about the
distance of three days’ journey to Ma’arath Benĕi
Ya’aqan, for they were greatly afraid because of the
sovereign Araḏ.
4 And the children of Yisra’ĕl would not go back to
their places, so they remained in Benĕi Ya’aqan for
thirty days.
5 And when the children of Lĕwi saw that the children
of Yisra’ĕl would not turn back, they were jealous for
the sake of HWHY, and they rose up and fought against
the Yisra’ĕlites their brothers, and slew of them a great
body, and forced them to turn back to their place,
Mount Hor.
6 And when they returned, sovereign Araḏ was still
arranging his army for battle against the Yisra’ĕlites.
7 And Yisra’ĕl vowed a vow, saying, “If You will
deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly
destroy their cities.”
8 And HWHY listened to the voice of Yisra’ĕl, and He
delivered the Kena’anites into their hand, and He
utterly destroyed them and their cities, and He called
the name of the place Ḥormah.
9 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from Mount
Hor and pitched in Oḇoth, and they journeyed from
Oḇoth and they pitched at lyĕ ha’Aḇarim, on the border
of Mo’aḇ.
10 And the children of Yisra’ĕl sent to Mo’aḇ, saying,
“Let us pass now through your land into our place.” But
the children of Mo’aḇ would not allow the children of
1027

YASHAR

Yisra’ĕl to pass through their land, for the children of
Mo’aḇ were greatly afraid lest the children of Yisra’ĕl
should do to them as Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites
had done to them, who had taken their land and had
slain many of them.
11 Therefore Mo’aḇ would not allow the Yisra’ĕlites to
pass through his land, and HWHY commanded the
children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “You do not fight against
Mo’aḇ.” So the Yisra’ĕlites turned back from Mo’aḇ.
12 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from the
border of Mo’aḇ, and they came to the other side of
Arnon, the border of Mo’aḇ, between Mo’aḇ and the
Amorites, and they camped on the border of Siḥon,
sovereign of the Amorites, in the wilderness of
Qeḏĕmoth.
13 And the children of Yisra’ĕl sent messengers to
Siḥon, sovereign of the Amorites, saying,
14 “Let us pass through your land. We will not turn into
the fields or into the vineyards, we will go along by the
sovereign’s highway until we have passed your
border.” But Siḥon would not allow the Yisra’ĕlites to
pass.
15 So Siḥon collected all the people of the Amorites
and went out into the wilderness to meet the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and he fought against Yisra’ĕl in Yahats.
16 And HWHY delivered Siḥon sovereign of the
Amorites into the hand of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
Yisra’ĕl smote all the people of Siḥon with the edge of
the sword and avenged the cause of Mo’aḇ.
17 And the children of Yisra’ĕl took possession of the
land of Siḥon from Aram to Yabboq, to the children of
Ammon, and they took all the spoil of the cities.
18 And Yisra’ĕl took all these cities, and Yisra’ĕl dwelt
in all the cities of the Amorites.
19 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl resolved to fight
against the children of Ammon, to take their land also.
1028

JASHER

So HWHY said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “Do not
besiege the children of Ammon, neither stir up battle
against them, for I will give none of their land to you.”
And the children of Yisra’ĕl listened to the word of
HWHY, and did not fight against the children of Ammon.
21 And the children of Yisra’ĕl turned and went up by
the way of Bashan to the land of Oḡ, sovereign of
Bashan. And Oḡ the sovereign of Bashan went out to
meet the Yisra’ĕlites in battle, and he had with him
many mighty men, and a very strong army from the
people of the Amorites.
22 And Oḡ sovereign of Bashan was a very powerful
man, but Na’aran his son was exceedingly powerful,
even stronger than he was.
23 And Oḡ said in his heart, “See now the whole camp
of Yisra’ĕl takes up a space of three parsa, now I will
smite them at once without sword or spear.”
24 And Oḡ went up Mount Yahats, and took from there
one large stone, the length of which was three parsa,
and he placed it on his head, and resolved to throw it
onto the camp of the children of Yisra’ĕl, to smite all
the Yisra’ĕlites with that stone.
25 And the messenger of HWHY came and struck the
stone on the head of Oḡ, and the stone fell on the neck
of Oḡ so that Oḡ fell to the earth because of the weight
of the stone upon his neck.
26 At that time HWHY said to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“Do not be afraid of him, for I have given him and all
his people and all his land into your hand, and you shall
do to him as you did to Siḥon.”
27 And Mosheh went down to him with a small number
of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and Mosheh smote Oḡ with
a rod at the ankles of his feet and slew him.
28 After this the children of Yisra’ĕl pursued the
children of Oḡ and all his people, and they beat and
destroyed them till there was no remnant left of them.
20

1029

YASHAR

Mosheh afterward sent some of the children of
Yisra’ĕl to spy out Ya’zĕr, for Ya’zĕr was a city of
name.
30 And the spies went to Ya’zĕr and spied it out, and
the spies trusted in HWHY, and they fought against the
men of Ya’zĕr.
31 And these men took Ya’zĕr and its villages, and
HWHY delivered them into their hand, and they drove
out the Amorites who had been there.
32 And the children of Yisra’ĕl took the land of the two
sovereigns of the Amorites, sixty cities which were on
the other side of Yardĕn, from the wadi of Arnon to
Mount Ḥermon.
33 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed and came
into the plain of Mo’aḇ which is on the side of Yardĕn,
by Yeriḥo.
34 And the children of Mo’aḇ heard all the evil which
the children of Yisra’ĕl had done to the two sovereigns
of the Amorites, to Siḥon and Oḡ, so all the men of
Mo’aḇ were greatly afraid of the Yisra’ĕlites.
35 And the elders of Mo’aḇ said, “Look, the two
sovereigns of the Amorites, Siḥon and Oḡ, who were
more powerful than all the sovereigns of the earth,
could not stand against the children of Yisra’ĕl, how
then can we stand before them?
36 “Indeed they sent us a message before now to pass
through our land on their way, and we would not allow
them, now they will turn on us with their heavy swords
and destroy us!” And Mo’aḇ was distressed because
of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and they were greatly afraid
of them, and they counselled together what was to be
done to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
37 And the elders of Mo’aḇ resolved and took one of
their men, Balaq son of Tsippor the Mo’aḇite, and
made him sovereign over them at that time, and Balaq
was a very wise man.
29

1030

JASHER

And the elders of Mo’aḇ rose up and sent to the
children of Miḏyan to make peace with them, for a
great battle and enmity had been in those days
between Mo’aḇ and Miḏyan, from the days of Haḏaḏ
son of Beḏaḏ sovereign of Eḏom, who smote Miḏyan
in the field of Mo’aḇ, unto these days.
39 And the children of Mo’aḇ sent to the children of
Miḏyan, and they made peace with them, and the
elders of Miḏyan came to the land of Mo’aḇ to make
peace on behalf of the children of Miḏyan.
40 And the elders of Mo’aḇ counselled with the elders
of Miḏyan what to do in order to save their lives from
Yisra’ĕl.
41 And all the children of Mo’aḇ said to the elders of
Miḏyan, “Now therefore the children of Yisra’ĕl lick up
all that are around about us, as the ox licks up the
grass of the field, for thus they did to the two
sovereigns of the Amorites who are stronger than we
are.”
42 And the elders of Miḏyan said to Mo’aḇ, “We have
heard that at the time when Siḥon sovereign of the
Amorites fought against you, when he prevailed over
you and took your land, he had sent to Be’or son of
Yanĕas and to Bil’am his son from Aram-Naharayim,
and they came and cursed you; that is why the hand
of Siḥon prevailed over you, so that he took your land.
43 “Now therefore you send also to Bil’am his son, for
he still remains in his land, and give him his payment,
that he may come and curse all the people of whom
you are afraid.” So the elders of Mo’aḇ heard this word,
and it pleased them to send to Bil’am son of Be’or.
44 So Balaq son of Tsippor sovereign of Mo’aḇ sent
messengers to Bil’am, saying,
45 “Look there is a people come out from Mitsrayim,
see, they cover the face of the earth, and they are
settling next to me!
38

1031

YASHAR

“Now therefore come and curse this people for me,
for they are too mighty for me. Maybe I shall prevail to
fight against them, and drive them out, for I heard that
he whom you baraḵ is baruḵ, and whom you curse is
cursed.”
47 So the messengers of Balaq went to Bil’am and
brought Bil’am to curse the people to fight against
Mo’aḇ.
48 And Bil’am came to Balaq to curse Yisra’ĕl, and
HWHY said to Bil’am, “Do not curse this people for it is
baruḵ.”
49 And Balaq urged Bil’am day by day to curse
Yisra’ĕl, but Bil’am did not listen to Balaq because of
the word of HWHY which He had spoken to Bil’am.
50 And when Balaq saw that Bil’am would not do
according to his desire, he rose up and went home,
and Bil’am also returned to his land and he went from
there to Miḏyan.
51 And the children of Yisra’ĕl journeyed from the plain
of Mo’aḇ, and camped by the Yardĕn from Bĕyth
Yeshimoth even to Aḇĕl ha’Shittim, at the end of the
plains of Mo’aḇ.
52 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl dwelt in the plain
of Shittim, they began to commit whoring with the
daughters of Mo’aḇ.
53 And the children of Yisra’ĕl approached Mo’aḇ, and
the children of Mo’aḇ pitched their tents opposite to the
camp of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
54 But the children of Mo’aḇ were afraid of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and the children of Mo’aḇ took all their
daughters and their wives of good looks and lovely
appearance, and dressed them in gold and silver and
costly garments.
55 And the children of Mo’aḇ seated those women at
the door of their tents, in order that the children of
Yisra’ĕl might see them and turn to them, and not fight
against Mo’aḇ.
46

1032

JASHER

And all the children of Mo’aḇ did this matter to the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and every man placed his wife and
daughter at the door of his tent, and all the children of
Yisra’ĕl saw the act of the children of Mo’aḇ, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl turned to the daughters of Mo’aḇ
and coveted them, and they went to them.
57 And it came to be that when an Iḇri came to the
door of the tent of Mo’aḇ, and saw a daughter of Mo’aḇ
and desired her in his heart, and spoke with her at the
door of the tent that which he desired, while they were
speaking together the men of the tent would come out
and speak to the Iḇri words such as these:
58 “Indeed you know that we are brothers, we are all
the descendants of Lot and the descendants of
Aḇraham his brother, why then will you not remain with
us, and why will you not eat our bread and our
offering?”
59 And when the children of Mo’aḇ had thus
overwhelmed him with their speeches, and enticed him
by their flattering words, they seated him in the tent
and cooked and offered for him, and he ate of their
offering and of their bread.
60 They then gave him wine and he drank and became
drunk, and they placed before him a good-looking
maiden, and he did with her as he pleased, for he did
not know what he was doing, as he had drunk
plentifully of wine.
61 Thus the children of Mo’aḇ did to Yisra’ĕl in that
place, in the plain of Shittim. And the wrath of HWHY
was kindled against Yisra’ĕl because of this matter,
and He sent a pestilence among them, and there died
of the Yisra’ĕlites twenty-four thousand men.
62 Now there was a man of the children of Shim’on
whose name was Zimri, son of Salu, who joined
himself with the Miḏyanite Kozbi, the daughter of Tsur,
sovereign of Miḏyan, in the sight of all the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
56

1033

YASHAR

And Pineḥas son of El’azar, son of Aharon the
kohĕn, saw this wicked matter which Zimri had done,
and he took a spear and rose up and went after them,
and pierced them both and slew them, and the
pestilence ceased from the children of Yisra’ĕl.
63

86 At that time after the pestilence, HWHY spoke to
Mosheh, and to El’azar son of Aharon the kohĕn,
saying,
2 “Number the heads of the whole community of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, from twenty years old and upward,
all that go out to the army.”
3 And Mosheh and El’azar numbered the children of
Yisra’ĕl after their clans, and the number of all Yisra’ĕl
was seven hundred thousand, seven hundred and
thirty.
4 And the number of the children of Lĕwi, from one
month old and upward, was twenty-three thousand,
but among these there was not a man of those
numbered by Mosheh and Aharon in the Wilderness of
Sinai.
5 For HWHY had told them that they would die in the
wilderness, so they all died, and not one had been left
of them except Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh, and
Yahoshua son of Nun.
6 And it came to be after this that HWHY said to
Mosheh, “Say to the children of Yisra’ĕl to avenge
upon Miḏyan the cause of their brothers the children of
Yisra’ĕl.”
7 And Mosheh did so, and the children of Yisra’ĕl
chose from among them twelve thousand men, being
one thousand to a tribe, and they went to Miḏyan.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl fought against Miḏyan,
and they slew every male, also the five princes of
Miḏyan, and Bil’am son of Be’or they slew with the
sword.
1034

JASHER

And the children of Yisra’ĕl took the wives of
Miḏyan captive, with their little ones and their cattle,
and all belonging to them.
10 And they took all the spoil and all the booty, and
they brought it to Mosheh and to El’azar to the plains
of Mo’aḇ.
11 And Mosheh and El’azar and all the princes of the
congregation went out to meet them with joy.
12 And they divided all the spoil of Miḏyan, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl had been avenged upon Miḏyan for
the cause of their brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl.
9

87 At that time HWHY said to Mosheh, “See your days
are approaching to an end, take now Yahoshua son of
Nun your servant and place him in the Mishkan, and I
will command him.” And Mosheh did so.
2 And HWHY appeared in the Mishkan in a pillar of
cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood at the entrance of
the Mishkan.
3 And HWHY commanded Yahoshua son of Nun and
said to him, “Be strong and courageous, for you shall
bring the children of Yisra’ĕl to the land which I swore
to give them, and I will be with you.”
4 And Mosheh said to Yahoshua, “Be strong and
courageous, for you will make the children of Yisra’ĕl
inherit the land, and HWHY will be with you, he will not
leave you nor forsake you, be not afraid nor
disheartened.”
5 And Mosheh called to all the children of Yisra’ĕl and
said to them, “You have seen all the good which HWHY
your Elohim has done for you in the wilderness.
6 “Now therefore observe all the words of this Torah,
and walk in the Way of HWHY your Elohim. Do not turn
from the Way which HWHY has commanded you, either
to the right or to the left.”

1035

YASHAR

And Mosheh taught the children of Yisra’ĕl Laws
and Right-Rulings and Torot to do in the land as HWHY
had commanded him.
8 And he taught them the Way of HWHY and His Torot;
see, they are written upon the Book of the Torah of
Elohim which he gave to the children of Yisra’ĕl by the
hand of Mosheh.
9 And Mosheh finished commanding the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and HWHY spoke to him, saying, “Go up to the
Mount Aḇarim and die there, and be gathered to your
people as Aharon your brother was gathered.”
10 And Mosheh went up as HWHY had commanded
him, and he died there in the land of Mo’aḇ by the
command of HWHY, in the fortieth year from the
Yisra’ĕlites going out from the land of Mitsrayim.
11 And the children of Yisra’ĕl wept for Mosheh in the
plains of Mo’aḇ for thirty days, and the days of weeping
and mourning for Mosheh were completed.
7

88 And it came to be after the death of Mosheh that
HWHY spoke to Yahoshua son of Nun, saying,
2 “Rise up and pass over the Yardĕn to the land
which I have given to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and you
shall make the children of Yisra’ĕl inherit the land.
3 “Every place on which the sole of your feet shall
tread shall belong to you, from the wilderness of
Leḇanon to the great river - the river of Perath - shall
be your boundary.
4 “No man shall stand against you all the days of your
life. As I was with Mosheh, so I will be with you, only
be strong and of good courage to observe all the Law
which Mosheh commanded you. Do not turn from the
Way either to the right or to the left, in order that you
may prosper in all that you do.”
5 And Yahoshua commanded the officers of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “Pass through the camp and command the
people, saying, ‘Prepare for yourselves provisions, for
1036

JASHER

in three days more you will pass the Yardĕn to possess
the land.’ ”
6 And the officers of the children of Yisra’ĕl did so,
and they commanded the people and they did all that
Yahoshua had commanded.
7 And Yahoshua sent two men to spy out the land of
Yeriḥo, and the men went and spied out Yeriḥo.
8 And at the end of seven days they came to
Yahoshua in the camp and said to him, “HWHY has
delivered the whole land into our hand, and the
inhabitants thereof are melted with fear because of
us.”
9 And it came to be after that, that Yahoshua rose up
in the morning and all Yisra’ĕl with him, and they
journeyed from Shittim, and Yahoshua and all Yisra’ĕl
with him passed the Yardĕn. And Yahoshua was
eighty-two years old when he passed the Yardĕn with
Yisra’ĕl.
10 And the people went up from Yardĕn on the tenth
day of the first month, and they camped in Gilgal at the
eastern corner of Yeriḥo.
11 And the children of Yisra’ĕl kept the Pesaḥ in Gilgal,
in the plains of Yeriḥo, on the fourteenth day at the
month, as it is written in the Torah of Mosheh.
12 And the manna ceased at that time on the morrow
of the Pesaḥ, and there was no more manna for the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and they ate of the produce of the
land of Kena’an.
13 And Yeriḥo was entirely closed against the children
of Yisra’ĕl, no one came out or went in.
14 And it came to be in the second month, on the first
day of the month, that HWHY said to Yahoshua, “Rise
up, see, I have given Yeriḥo into your hand with all the
people thereof. And all your fighting men shall go
round the city, once each day, thus shall you do for six
days.
1037

YASHAR

“And the kohenim shall blow on trumpets, and
when you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall give a great shouting - that the walls of the
city shall fall down, all the people shall go up, every
man against his opponent.”
16 And Yahoshua did so according to all that HWHY
had commanded him.
17 And on the seventh day they went around the city
seven times, and the kohenim blew on trumpets.
18 And at the seventh round, Yahoshua said to the
people, “Shout, for HWHY has delivered the whole city
into our hands!”
19 “Only the city and all that it contains shall be under
the ban to HWHY, and keep yourselves from that which
is under the ban, lest you make the camp of Yisra’ĕl
accursed and trouble it.
20 “But all the silver and gold and brass and iron shall
be qadosh to HWHY, they shall come into the treasury
of HWHY.”
21 And the people blew on trumpets and made a great
shouting, and the walls of Yeriḥo fell down, and all the
people went up, every man straight before him. And
they took the city and utterly destroyed all that was in
it, both man and woman, young and old, ox and sheep
and donkey, with the edge of the sword,
22 and they burned the whole city with fire. Only the
vessels of silver and gold, and brass and iron, they put
into the treasury of HWHY.
23 And Yahoshua swore at that time, saying, “Cursed
be the man who builds Yeriḥo. He lays the foundation
thereof with his first-born, and with his youngest son
he puts up the gates thereof.”
24 And Aḵan son of Karmi, son of Zaḇdi, son of Zeraḥ,
son of Yahuḏah, dealt treacherously in the accursed
matter, and he took of that which is under the ban and
hid it in the tent, and the wrath of HWHY was kindled
against Yisra’ĕl.
15

1038

JASHER

And it came to be after this when the children of
Yisra’ĕl had returned from burning Yeriḥo, Yahoshua
also sent men to spy out Ai, and to fight against it.
26 And the men went up and spied out Ai, and they
returned and said, “Let not all the people go up with
you to Ai, only let about three thousand men go up and
smite the city, for the men thereof are but few.”
27 And Yahoshua did so, and there went up with him
of the children of Yisra’ĕl about three thousand men,
and they fought against the men of Ai.
28 And the battle was fierce against Yisra’ĕl, and the
men of Ai smote thirty-six men of Yisra’ĕl, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl fled from before the men of Ai.
29 And when Yahoshua saw this matter, he tore his
garments and fell on his face to the ground before
HWHY, he, with the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and they put dust
on their heads.
30 And Yahoshua said, “Why O HWHY did You bring
this people over the Yardĕn? What shall I say after the
Yisra’ĕlites have turned their backs against their
enemies?
31 “Now therefore all the Kena’anites, inhabitants of
the land, will hear this matter, and surround us and cut
off our name.”
32 And HWHY said to Yahoshua, “Why are you fallen
upon your face? Rise, get up, for the Yisra’ĕlites have
sinned, and taken of that which is under the ban. I will
no longer be with them unless they destroy that which
is under the ban from among them.”
33 And Yahoshua rose up and assembled the people,
and brought the Urim by the command of HWHY, and
the tribe of Yahuḏah was taken, and Aḵan son of Karmi
was taken.
34 And Yahoshua said to Aḵan, “Tell me my son, what
have you done?” And Aḵan said, “I saw amongst the
spoil a lovely garment of Shin’ar and two hundred
sheqels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty sheqels
25

1039

YASHAR

weight. I coveted them and took them, and see, they
are all hidden in the earth in the midst of the tent.”
35 And Yahoshua sent men who went and took them
from the tent of Aḵan, and they brought them to
Yahoshua.
36 And Yahoshua took Aḵan and these items, and his
sons and daughters and all belonging to him, and they
brought them to the valley of Aḵor.
37 And Yahoshua burned them there with fire, and all
the Yisra’ĕlites stoned Aḵan with stones, and they
raised a heap of stones over him; that is why he called
that place the valley of Aḵor. So the wrath of HWHY was
appeased, and after this Yahoshua came to the city
and fought against it.
38 And HWHY said to Yahoshua, “Fear not, neither be
dismayed, see, I have given Ai into your hand, its
sovereign and its people, and you shall do to them as
you did to Yeriḥo and its sovereign. Only the spoil
thereof and the cattle thereof you take for booty for
yourselves. Lay an ambush for the city behind it.”
39 So Yahoshua did according to the word of HWHY,
and he chose from among the sons of battle thirty
thousand mighty men, and he sent them, and they lay
in ambush for the city.
40 And he commanded them, saying, “When you see
us we will flee before them with cunning, and they will
pursue us. You shall then rise out of the ambush and
take the city.” And they did so.
41 And Yahoshua fought, and the men of the city went
out toward Yisra’ĕl, not knowing that they were lying in
ambush for them behind the city.
42 And Yahoshua and all the Yisra’ĕlites pretended
they were wearied before them, and they fled by the
way of the wilderness with cunning.
43 And the men of Ai gathered all the people who were
in the city to pursue the Yisra’ĕlites, and they went out
and were drawn away from the city - not one remained
1040

JASHER

- and they left the city open and pursued the
Yisra’ĕlites.
44 And those who were lying in ambush rose up out of
their places, and hastened to come to the city and took
it and lit it on fire. And the men of Ai turned back, and
see, the smoke of the city ascended to the skies, and
they had no means of retreating either one way or the
other.
45 And all the men of Ai were in the midst of Yisra’ĕl,
some on this side and some on that side, and they
smote them so that not one of them remained.
46 And the children of Yisra’ĕl took Mĕlosh sovereign
of Ai alive, and they brought him to Yahoshua, and
Yahoshua hanged him on a tree and he died.
47 And the children of Yisra’ĕl returned to the city after
having burned it, and they smote all those that were in
it with the edge of the sword.
48 And the number of those that had fallen of the men
of Ai, both man and woman, was twelve thousand.
Only the cattle and the spoil of the city they took for
themselves, according to the word of HWHY to
Yahoshua.
49 And all the sovereigns on this side of the Yardĕn,
all the sovereigns of Kena’an, heard of the evil which
the children of Yisra’ĕl had done to Yeriḥo and to Ai,
and they gathered themselves together to fight against
Yisra’ĕl.
50 Only the inhabitants of Giḇ’on were greatly afraid of
fighting against the Yisra’ĕlites lest they should perish,
so they acted cunningly, and they came to Yahoshua
and to all Yisra’ĕl, and said to them, “We have come
from a distant land, now therefore make a covenant
with us.”
51 And the inhabitants of Giḇ’on deceived the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and the children of Yisra’ĕl made a
covenant with them, and they made peace with them,
and the princes of the congregation swore to them.
1041

YASHAR

And afterward the children of Yisra’ĕl knew that they
were neighbours to them and were dwelling among
them.
52 But the children of Yisra’ĕl did not slay them, for
they had sworn to them by HWHY, and they became
hewers of wood and drawers of water.
53 And Yahoshua said to them, ‘Why did you deceive
me, to do this matter to us?” And they answered him,
saying, “Because it was told to your servants all that
you had done to all the sovereigns of the Amorites, and
we were greatly afraid for our lives, and we did this
matter.”
54 And Yahoshua appointed them on that day to hew
wood and to draw water, and he divided them for
slaves to all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
55 And
when
Aḏoni-Tseḏeq
sovereign
of
Yerushalayim heard all that the children of Yisra’ĕl had
done to Yeriḥo and to Ai, he sent to Hoham sovereign
of Ḥeḇron and to Piram sovereign at Yarmuth, and to
Yaphiya sovereign of Laḵish and to Deḇir sovereign of
Eḡlon, saying,
56 “Come up to me and help me, that we may smite
the children of Yisra’ĕl and the inhabitants of Giḇ’on
who have made peace with the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
57 And they gathered themselves together, and the
five sovereigns of the Amorites went up with all their
camps, a mighty people numerous as the sand of the
sea shore.
58 And all these sovereigns came and encamped
before Giḇ’on, and they began to fight against the
inhabitants of Giḇ’on. And all the men of Giḇ’on sent to
Yahoshua, saying, “Come up quickly to us and help us,
for all the sovereigns of the Amorites have gathered
together to fight against us!”
59 And Yahoshua and all the men of battle went up
from Gilgal, and Yahoshua came suddenly upon them,
1042

JASHER

and smote these five sovereigns with a great
slaughter.
60 And HWHY put them to shame before the children at
Yisra’ĕl, who smote them with a terrible slaughter in
Giḇ’on, and pursued them along the way that goes up
to Bĕyth Ḥoron to Maqqĕḏah, and they fled from before
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
61 And while they were fleeing, HWHY sent hailstones
on them from the shamayim, and more of them died by
the hailstones, than by the slaughter of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
62 And the children of Yisra’ĕl pursued them, and they
continued to smote them on the way, going on and
smiting them.
63 And when they were smiting, the day was declining
toward evening, and Yahoshua said in the sight of all
the people, “Sun, stand still on Giḇ’on, and moon, in
the valley of Ayalon, until the nation has avenged itself
upon its enemies.”
64 And HWHY listened to the voice of Yahoshua, and
the sun stood still in the midst of the shamayim, and it
stood still six and thirty moments, and the moon also
stood still and did not hastened to go down a whole
day.
65 And there was no day like that, before it or after it,
that HWHY listened to the voice of a man, for HWHY
fought for Yisra’ĕl.

89 Then Yahoshua spoke this song, on the day that
HWHY had given the Amorites into the hand of
Yahoshua and the children of Yisra’ĕl, and he said in
the sight of all Yisra’ĕl,
2 “You have done mightily, O HWHY.
You have performed great deeds!
Who is like You?
My lips shall sing to Your Name.
1043

YASHAR

“My goodness and my fortress, my high tower,
I will sing a new song to You.
With thanksgiving I will sing to You,
You are the strength of my salvation.
4 “All the sovereigns of the earth shall praise You,
The princes of the world shall sing to You,
The children of Yisra’ĕl shall rejoice in Your salvation.
They shall sing and praise Your power.
5 “To You, O HWHY, did we confide,
We said, ‘You are our Elohim,
For You are our shelter and strong tower against our
enemies.’
6 “To You we cried and were not ashamed,
In You we trusted and were delivered.
When we cried to You, You heard our voice,
You delivered our beings from the sword,
You showed to us Your favour,
You gave to us Your salvation,
You rejoiced our hearts with Your strength.
7 “You went forth for our salvation,
With Your arm You redeemed Your people.
You answered us from the shamayim of Your
qodeshah,
You saved us from ten thousands of people.
8 “The sun and moon stood still in the shamayim,
And You stood in Your wrath against our oppressors
and commanded Your RightRulings over them.
9 “All the princes of the earth stood up,
The sovereigns of the nations had gathered
themselves together,
They were not moved at Your presence, they desired
Your battles.
10 “You rose against them in Your wrath,
And brought down Your wrath upon them,
You destroyed them in Your wrath, and cut them off
in Your heart.
3

1044

JASHER

“Nations have been consumed with Your fury,
Reigns have declined because of Your wrath,
You crushed sovereigns in the day of Your wrath.
12 “You poured out Your fury upon them,
Your burning displeasure took hold of them.
You turned their iniquity upon them, and cut them off
in their wickedness.
13 “They spread a trap, they fell therein,
In the net they hid, their foot was caught.
14 “Your hand was ready for all Your enemies who
said,
Through their sword they possessed the land,
Through their arm they dwelt in the city.
You filled their faces with shame,
You brought their horns down to the ground,
You frightened them in Your rage, and destroyed
them in Your wrath.
15 “The earth trembled and shook at the sound of
Your storm over them,
You did not withhold their beings from death, and
brought down their lives to the grave.
16 “You pursued them in Your storm,
You consumed them in Your whirlwind,
You turned their rain into hail,
They fell in deep pits so that they could not rise.
17 “Their carcasses were like rubbish cast out in the
middle of the streets.
18 “They were consumed and destroyed in Your
wrath,
You saved Your people with Your might.
19 “Therefore our hearts rejoice in You,
Our beings exalt in Your salvation.
20 “Our tongues shall relate Your might,
We will sing and praise Your wondrous works.
21 “For You saved us from our enemies,
You delivered us from those who rose up against us,
11

1045

YASHAR

You destroyed them from before us and crushed
them beneath our feet.
22 “Thus shall all Your enemies perish O HWHY,
And the wicked shall be like chaff driven by the wind,
And Your beloved shall be like trees planted by the
waters.”
23 So Yahoshua and all Yisra’ĕl with him returned to
the camp in Gilgal, after having smitten all the
sovereigns, so that not a remnant was left of them.
24 And the five sovereigns fled alone on foot from
battle, and hid themselves in a cave, and Yahoshua
sought for them in the field of battle, but did not find
them.
25 And afterward it was told to Yahoshua, saying, “The
sovereigns are found and see, they are hidden in a
cave.”
26 And Yahoshua said, “Appoint men to be at the
mouth of the cave, to guard them, lest they take
themselves away.” And the children of Yisra’ĕl did so.
27 And Yahoshua called to all Yisra’ĕl and said to the
officers of battle, “Place your feet upon the necks of
these sovereigns.” And Yahoshua said, “So shall HWHY
do to all your enemies.”
28 And afterward Yahoshua commanded that they
should slay the sovereigns and cast them into the
cave, and to put great stones at the mouth of the cave.
29 And afterward Yahoshua went with all the people
that were with him on that day to Maqqĕḏah, and he
smote it with the edge of the sword.
30 And he utterly destroyed the beings and all
belonging to the city, and he did to the sovereign and
people of there as he had done to Yeriḥo.
31 And he passed from there to Liḇnah and he fought
against it, and HWHY delivered it into his hand. And
Yahoshua smote it with the edge of the sword, and all
the beings of there, and he did to it and to the
sovereign of there as he had done to Yeriḥo.
1046

JASHER

And from there he passed on to Laḵish to fight
against it, and Horam sovereign of Gaza went up to
assist the men of Laḵish, and Yahoshua smote him
and his people until there was none left to him.
33 And Yahoshua took Laḵish and all the people of
there, and he did to it as he had done to Liḇnah.
34 And Yahoshua passed from there to Eḡlon, and he
took that also, and he smote it and all the people of
there with the edge of the sword.
35 And from there he passed to Ḥeḇron and fought
against it and took it and utterly destroyed it. And he
returned from there with all Yisra’ĕl to Deḇir and fought
against it and smote it with the edge of the sword.
36 And he destroyed every being in it, he left none
remaining, and he did to it and the sovereign of there
as he had done to Yeriḥo.
37 And Yahoshua smote all the sovereigns of the
Amorites from Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa to Azzah, and he took
their country at once, for HWHY had fought for Yisra’ĕl.
38 And Yahoshua with all Yisra’ĕl came to the camp to
Gilgal.
39 When at that time Yaḇin sovereign of Ḥatsor heard
all that Yahoshua had done to the sovereigns of the
Yaḇin sent to Yoḇath of Miḏyan, and to Laḇan of
Shimron, to Yephal sovereign of Aḵshaph, and to all
the sovereigns of the Amorites, saying,
40 “Come quickly to us and help us, that we may smite
the children of Yisra’ĕl, before they come upon us and
do to us as they have done to the other sovereigns of
the Amorites.”
41 And all these sovereigns listened to the words of
Yaḇin, sovereign of Ḥatsor, and they went out with all
their camps, seventeen sovereigns, and their people
were as numerous as the sand on the sea shore,
together with horses and chariots innumerable, and
they came and camped together at the waters of
32

1047

YASHAR

Mĕrom, and they were met together to fight against
Yisra’ĕl.
42 And HWHY said to Yahoshua, “Do not fear them, for
tomorrow about this time I will deliver them up all slain
before you, you shall hamstring their horses and burn
their chariots with fire.”
43 And Yahoshua with all the men of battle came
suddenly upon them and smote them, and they fell into
their hands, for HWHY had delivered them into the
hands of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
44 So the children of Yisra’ĕl pursued all these
sovereigns with their camps, and smote them until
there was none of them left, and Yahoshua did to them
as HWHY had spoken to him.
45 And at that time Yahoshua returned to Ḥatsor and
smote it with the sword and destroyed every being in it
and burned it with fire. And from Ḥatsor, Yahoshua
passed over to Shimron and smote it and utterly
destroyed it.
46 From there he passed over to Aḵshaph and he did
to it as he had done to Shimron.
47 From there he passed to Aḏullam and he smote all
the people in it, and he did to Aḏullam as he had done
to Aḵshaph and to Shimron.
48 And he passed from them to all the cities of the
sovereigns which he had smitten, and he smote all the
people that were left of them and he utterly destroyed
them.
49 Only their plunder and cattle the Yisra’ĕlites took for
themselves as booty, but every human being they
smote, they did not allow a being to live.
50 As HWHY had commanded Mosheh so Yahoshua
did and all Yisra’ĕl, they did not fail in any word.
51 So Yahoshua and all the children of Yisra’ĕl smote
the whole land of Kena’an as HWHY had commanded
them, and smote all their sovereigns - being thirty-one
1048

JASHER

sovereigns. And the children of Yisra’ĕl took their
whole country,
52 besides the reigns of Siḥon and Oḡ which are on
the other side of the Yardĕn, of which Mosheh had
smitten many cities. And Mosheh gave them to the
Re’uḇĕnites and the Gaḏites and to half the tribe of
Menashsheh.
53 And Yahoshua smote all the sovereigns that were
on this side of Yardĕn to the west, and gave them for
an inheritance to the nine tribes and to the half tribe of
Yisra’ĕl.
54 For five years Yahoshua continued the battle with
these sovereigns, and he gave their cities to the
Yisra’ĕlites, and the land had peace from battle
throughout the cities of the Amorites and the
Kena’anites.

90 At that time in the fifth year after the children of
Yisra’ĕl had passed over the Yardĕn, after the children
of Yisra’ĕl had rested from their battle with the
Kena’anites, great and fierce battles arose at that time
between Eḏom and the children of the Ḥittites, and the
children of the Ḥittites fought against Eḏom.
2 And Aḇiyanath sovereign of the Ḥittites went out in
that year, that is in the thirty-first year of his reign, and
a great army with him of the mighty men of the children
of the Ḥittites, and he went to Sĕ’ir to fight against the
children of Ĕsaw.
3 And Haḏaḏ the sovereign of Eḏom heard of his
report, and he went out to meet him with a numerous
people and strong army, and engaged in battle with
him in the field of Eḏom.
4 And the hand of the Ḥittites prevailed over the
children of Ĕsaw, and the children of the Ḥittites slew
of the children of Ĕsaw, twenty-two thousand men, and
all the children of Ĕsaw fled from before them.
1049

YASHAR

And the children of the Ḥittites pursued them and
they reached Haḏaḏ sovereign of Eḏom, who was
running before them and they caught him alive, and
brought him to Aḇiyanath sovereign of the Ḥittites.
6 And Aḇiyanath ordered him to be slain, and Haḏaḏ
sovereign of Eḏom died in the forty-eighth year of his
reign.
7 And the children of the Ḥittites continued their
pursuit of Eḏom, and they smote them with a great
slaughter and Eḏom became subject to the children of
the Ḥittites.
8 And the children of the Ḥittites ruled over Eḏom,
and Eḏom became under the hand of the children of
the Ḥittites and became one reign from that day.
9 And from that time they could no longer lift up their
heads, and their reign became one with the children of
the Ḥittites.
10 And Aḇiyanath placed officers in Eḏom and all the
children of Eḏom became subject and compulsory
labour to Aḇiyanath, and Aḇiyanath turned back to his
own land of the Ḥittites.
11 And when he returned he renewed his reign and
built for himself a spacious and fortified palace for a
royal residence, and reigned safely over the children
of the Ḥittites and over Eḏom.
12 In those days, after the children of Yisra’ĕl had
driven away all the Kena’anites and the Amorites,
Yahoshua was old and advanced in years.
13 And HWHY said to Yahoshua, “You are old,
advanced in life, and a great part of the land remains
to be possessed.
14 “Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance to
the nine tribes and to the half tribe of Menashsheh.”
And Yahoshua rose up and did as HWHY had spoken
to him.
15 And he divided the whole land to the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl as an inheritance according to their divisions.
5

1050

JASHER

But to the tribe at Lĕwi he gave no inheritance. The
offerings of HWHY are their inheritance as HWHY had
spoken of them by the hand of Mosheh.
17 And Yahoshua gave Mount Ḥeḇron to Kalĕḇ son of
Yephunneh, one portion above his brothers, as HWHY
had spoken through Mosheh.
18 Therefore Ḥeḇron became an inheritance to Kalĕḇ
and his children to this day.
19 And Yahoshua divided the whole land by lots to all
Yisra’ĕl for an inheritance, as HWHY had commanded
him.
20 And the children of Yisra’ĕl gave cities to the
Lĕwites from their own inheritance, and portions for
their cattle, and property. As HWHY had commanded
Mosheh so the children of Yisra’ĕl did, and they divided
the land by lot whether great or small.
21 And they went to inherit the land according to their
boundaries, and the children of Yisra’ĕl gave to
Yahoshua son of Nun an inheritance among them.
22 By the word of HWHY they gave to him the city which
he requested - Timnath Seraḥ in Mount Ephrayim, and
he built the city and dwelt in it.
23 These are the inheritances which El’azar the kohĕn
and Yahoshua son of Nun and the heads of the fathers
of the tribes portioned out to the children of Yisra’ĕl by
lot in Shiloh, before HWHY, at the door of the Mishkan,
and they left off dividing the land.
24 And HWHY gave the land to the Yisra’ĕlites, and
they possessed it as HWHY had spoken to them, and
as HWHY had sworn to their ancestors.
25 And HWHY gave to the Yisra’ĕlites rest from all their
enemies around them, and no man stood up against
them. And HWHY delivered all their enemies into their
hands, and not one word failed of all the good which
HWHY had spoken to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and HWHY
performed every word.
16

1051

YASHAR

And Yahoshua called to all the children of Yisra’ĕl
and he baraḵ them, and commanded them to serve
HWHY,and he afterward sent them away, and they went
each man to his city, and each man to his inheritance.
27 And the children of Yisra’ĕl served HWHY all the
days of Yahoshua, and HWHY gave them rest from all
around them, and they dwelt safely in their cities.
28 And it came to be in those days, that Aḇiyanath
sovereign of the Ḥittites died, in the thirty-eighth year
of his reign, that is the seventh year of his reign over
Eḏom, and they buried him in his palace which he had
built for himself, and Latinus reigned in his place fifty
years.
29 And during his reign he brought out an army, and
he went and fought against the inhabitants of Britannia
and Kernania, the children of Elisha son of Yawan, and
he prevailed over them and made them compulsory
labour.
30 He then heard that Eḏom had revolted from under
the hand of the Ḥittites, and Latinus went to them and
smote them and subdued them, and placed them
under the hand of the children of the Ḥittites, and Eḏom
became one reign with the children of the Ḥittites all
the days.
31 And for many years there was no sovereign in
Eḏom, and their reign was with the children of the
Ḥittites and their sovereign.
32 And it came to be in the twenty-sixth year after the
children of Yisra’ĕl had passed over the Yardĕn, that
is the sixty-sixth year after the children of Yisra’ĕl had
departed from Mitsrayim, that Yahoshua was old,
advanced in years, being one hundred and eight years
old in those days.
33 And Yahoshua called to all Yisra’ĕl, to their elders,
their judges and leaders, after HWHY had given to all
the Yisra’ĕlites rest from all their enemies round about.
And Yahoshua said to the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and to
26

1052

JASHER

their judges, “Look, I am old, advanced in years, and
you have seen what HWHY has done to all the nations
whom He has driven away from before you, for it is
HWHY who has fought for you.
34 “Now therefore, strengthen yourselves to guard
and to do all the Words of the Torah of Mosheh. Not to
turn from it to the right or to the left, and not to come
among those nations who are left in the land. Neither
shall you make mention of the name of their mighty
ones, but you shall cling to HWHY your Elohim, as you
have done to this day.”
35 And Yahoshua greatly encouraged the children of
Yisra’ĕl to serve HWHY all their days.
36 And all the Yisra’ĕlites said, “We will serve HWHY
our Elohim all our days, we and our children, and our
children’s children, and our seed forever.”
37 And Yahoshua made a covenant with the people
on that day, and he sent the children of Yisra’ĕl away,
and they went each man to his inheritance and to his
city.
38 And it came to be in those days, when the children
of Yisra’ĕl were dwelling safely in their cities, that they
buried the coffins of the tribes of their ancestors, which
they had brought up from Mitsrayim, each man in the
inheritance of his children. The twelve sons of Ya’aqoḇ
the children of Yisra’ĕl buried, each man in the
possession of his children.
39 And these are the names of the cities wherein they
buried the twelve sons of Ya’aqoḇ, whom the children
of Yisra’ĕl had brought up from Mitsrayim:
40 And they buried Re’uḇĕn and Gaḏ on this side of
the Yardĕn, in Romia, which Mosheh had given to their
children.
41 And Shim’on and Lĕwi they buried in the city
Mauda, which he had given to the children of Shim’on,
and the surrounding area of the city was for the
children of Lĕwi.
1053

YASHAR

And Yahuḏah they buried in the city of Binyamin
opposite Bĕyth Leḥem.
43 And the bones of Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun they
buried in Tsiḏon, in the portion which fell to their
children.
44 And Dan was buried in the city of his children in
Eshta’ol, and Naphtali and Ashĕr they buried in
Qaḏĕsh Naphtali, each man in his place which he had
given to his children.
45 And the bones of Yosĕph they buried in Sheḵem,
in the part of the field which Ya’aqoḇ had purchased
from Ḥamor, and which came to Yosĕph as an
inheritance.
46 And they buried Binyamin in Yerushalayim
opposite the Yeḇusite, which was given to the children
of Binyamin. The children of Yisra’ĕl buried their
fathers, each man in the city of his children.
47 And at the end of two years, Yahoshua son of Nun
died, one hundred and ten years old. And the time
which Yahoshua judged Yisra’ĕl was twenty-eight
years, and Yisra’ĕl served HWHY all the days of his life.
48 And the rest of the acts of Yahoshua and his battles
and his reproofs with which he reproved Yisra’ĕl, and
all which he had commanded them, and the names of
the cities which the children of Yisra’ĕl possessed in
his days, see, they are written in the Book of the words
of Yahoshua to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and in the Book
of the wars of HWHY, which Mosheh and Yahoshua and
the children of Yisra’ĕl had written.
49 And the children of Yisra’ĕl buried Yahoshua in the
border of his inheritance, in Timnath Seraḥ, which was
given to him in Mount Ephrayim.
50 And El’azar son of Aharon died in those days, and
they buried him in a hill belonging to Pineḥas his son,
which was given to him in Mount Ephrayim.
42

1054

JASHER

91 At that time, after the death of Yahoshua, the
children of the Kena’anites were still in the land, and
the Yisra’ĕlites resolved to drive them out.
2 And the children of Yisra’ĕl asked of HWHY, saying,
“Who shall go up first for us to the Kena’anites to fight
against them?” And HWHY said, “Yahuḏah shall go up.”
3 And the children of Yahuḏah said to Shim’on, “Go
up with us into our lot, and we will fight against the
Kena’anites, and we likewise will go up with you, into
your lot.” So the children of Shim’on went with the
children of Yahuḏah.
4 And the children of Yahuḏah went up and fought
against the Kena’anites, so HWHY delivered the
Kena’anites into the hands of the children of Yahuḏah,
and they smote them in Bezeq, ten thousand men.
5 And they fought with Aḏoni-Ḇezeq in Bezeq, and he
fled from before them, and they pursued him and
caught him, and they took hold of him and cut off his
thumbs and big toes.
6 And Aḏoni-Ḇezeq said, “Seventy sovereigns having
their thumbs and big toes cut off gathered their meat
under my table. As I have done, so Elohim has repaid
me.” And they brought him to Yerushalayim and he
died there.
7 And the children of Shim’on went with the children
of Yahuḏah, and they smote the Kena’anites with the
edge of the sword.
8 And HWHY was with the children of Yahuḏah, and
they possessed the mountain. And the children of
Yosĕph went up to Bĕyth Ĕl - the same is Luz - and
HWHY was with them.
9 And the children of Yosĕph spied out Bĕyth Ĕl, and
the watchmen saw a man going out from the city, and
they caught him and said to him, “Show us now the
entrance of the city and we will show kindness to you.”
1055

YASHAR

And the man showed them the entrance of the city,
and the children of Yosĕph came and smote the city
with the edge of the sword.
11 And they sent away the man with his clan, and he
went to the Ḥittites and he built a city, and he called
the name of it Luz. So all the Yisra’ĕlites dwelt in their
cities, and the children at Yisra’ĕl dwelt in their cities,
and the children of Yisra’ĕl served HWHY all the days of
Yahoshua, and all the days of the elders, who had
lengthened their days after Yahoshua, and saw the
great work of HWHY, which he had performed for
Yisra’ĕl.
12 And the elders judged Yisra’ĕl after the death of
Yahoshua for seventeen years.
13 And all the elders also fought the battles of Yisra’ĕl
against the Kena’anites and HWHY drove the
Kena’anites from before the children of Yisra’ĕl, in
order to place the Yisra’ĕlites in their land.
14 And He accomplished all the words which He had
spoken to Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ, and the
oath which He had sworn, to give to them and to their
children, the land of the Kena’anites.
15 And HWHY gave to the children of Yisra’ĕl the whole
land of Kena’an, as He had sworn to their ancestors,
and HWHY gave them rest from those around them, and
the children of Yisra’ĕl dwelt safely in their cities.
16 Baruḵ be HWHY forever! Amĕn, and amĕn!
17 Strengthen yourselves, and let the hearts of all you
that trust in HWHY be of good courage.
10

1056

ADDITIONS TO PSALMS

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS
‫ תהלים‬mYLht

151 HalleluYah! A Psalm of Dawiḏ, son of Yishai.
I was smaller than my brothers,
And the youngest of my father’s sons,
So he made me shepherd of his flock
And ruler over his little goats.
2 My hands fashioned a reed pipe,
And my fingers a lyre;
And so I gave esteem to HWHY.
I said in my heart:
3 “The mountains cannot witness to Him,
Nor can the hills proclaim Lift up my words, you trees,
And my compositions, you sheep.
4 For who can announce, and who can declare,
And who can recount my deeds?”
The Aḏon of all has seen,
The Elohim of all has heard,
And He has paid attention.
5 He sent His naḇi to anoint me,
Shemu’ĕl to raise me up.
My brothers went out to meet him,
Handsome of figure, handsome in appearance.
6 Although they were tall of stature
And handsome because of their hair,
HWHY Elohim did not choose them.
7 But he sent and fetched me from behind the flock
And anointed me with the oil.
And He made me prince of His people
And ruler over the sons of His Covenant.
1

152 Spoken by Dawiḏ, when he was contending
with the lion and the wolf which took a sheep from his
flock.
1057

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS

O Elohim, O Elohim, come to my aid;
Help me, save me, and deliver my being from the
slayer.
2 Shall I go down to She’ol by the mouth of the lion?
Shall the wolf be the end of me?
3 Was it not enough for those who lay in wait for my
father’s flock,
And tore a sheep of my father’s flock.
Must they also wish the destruction of my own being?
4 Have pity, O HWHY, and save Your kind one from
destruction,
So that he may rehearse Your esteem for all of his
days,
And may praise Your great Name,
5 When You have delivered him from the hands of
the destroying lion and of the ravenous wolf,
And when You have delivered my captivity from the
hands of the wild beasts.
6 Quickly, Aḏonai, send from Yourself a deliverer,
And draw me out of the gaping pit which
imprisons me in its depths.
1

153 Spoken by Dawiḏ, giving thanks to Elohim for
deliverance from the lion and the wolf, after he had
slain them both.
1 Praise HWHY, all you nations;
Esteem Him, and baraḵ His Name.
2 He has rescued the being of His chosen from the
hands of death,
And delivered His kind one from destruction.
3 He has delivered me from the nets of She’ol,
And my being from the pit that cannot be fathomed.
4 Before my deliverance could go forth from Him,
I was very nearly torn in two pieces by two wild
beasts;

1058

ADDITIONS TO PSALMS

But He sent His messenger, and closed up for me
the gaping mouths,
And rescued my life from destruction.
6 My being shall esteem Him and exalt Him,
Because of all His kindnesses which He has done to
me,
And shall continue to do to me.
5

154 A prayer of Ḥizqiyahu, when he was
surrounded by his enemies.
1 Give esteem to Elohim with a loud voice,
And proclaim His esteem in the assembly of many.
2 Exalt His praise among the multitude of the
upright,
And speak of His esteem with the righteous.
3 Join your beings to the good and to the perfect,
To esteem the Most High Elohim.
4 Gather yourselves together to make known His
strength,
And do not be slow in showing forth His deliverance,
His strength, and His esteem to all who are young.
5 Wisdom has been given that the esteem of HWHY
may be known,
And it has been made known to men to tell of His
works:
6 To make known to children His strength,
And to cause those who lack understanding to
understand His esteem,
7 Who are far from His entrances and distant from
His gates;
8 For the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ is exalted,
And His esteem is upon all His works.
9 He takes pleasure in a man who esteems the
Most High,
As in one who offers fine flour.
10 And as in one who offers male goats and calves,
And as in one who makes the altar fat with a
1059

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS

multitude of burnt offerings,
And as the smell of incense from the hands of the
righteous.
11 His voice shall be heard from Your upright gates,
And admonition from the voice of the upright.
12 In their eating and their drinking, when they share
together,
They shall be satisfied in truth.
13 Their mind dwells on the Torah of the Most High
Elohim,
And their words are to make known His strength.
14 How far from the wicked are the words of Him,
And from all transgressors to know Him!
15 See; the eye of HWHY shows favour to the good!
He increases favour to those who esteem Him,
And He delivers their being from the time of evil.
16 Baruḵ be HWHY, who has delivered the oppressed
from the hand of the wicked;
Who raises up a horn out of Ya’aqoḇ,
And a Judge of the nations out of Yisra’ĕl,
17 That He may prolong His dwelling in
Tsiyon,
And may adorn our age in Yerushalayim.

155 A prayer of thanksgiving, when the people
obtained permission from Koresh to return home.
1 O HWHY, I have cried to You;
Hear me.
2 I have lifted up my hands to Your qodesh dwelling
place;
Incline Your ear to me.
3 Grant me my request;
Do not withhold my prayer from me.
4 Build up my being, and do not destroy it,
And do not lay it bare before the wicked.
5 Those who reward wickedness turn You away
from me, O Judge of truth.
1060

ADDITIONS TO PSALMS

O HWHY, do not judge me according to my sins,
Because no flesh is innocent before You.
7 Make Your Torah plain to me, O HWHY,
And teach me Your Right-Rulings.
8 Many shall hear of Your works,
And the nations shall praise Your esteem.
9 Remember me, and do not forget me;
And do not lead me into that which is too difficult for
me.
10 Cause the sins of my youth to pass from me,
And remember my discipline against me no longer.
11 Cleanse me, O HWHY, from the evil leprosy,
And do not let it come against me any longer.
12 Dry up its roots from within me,
And do not let its leaves sprout within me.
13 You are great, O HWHY;
Therefore, my request shall be fulfilled in You.
14 To whom do I complain that He may give to me?
What help can be found in the strength of men?
15 From You, O HWHY, is my confidence;
I cried to HWHY, and He heard me,
And healed the breaking of my heart.
16 I slumbered and slept;
I dreamed and was helped, and HWHY sustained me.
17 They grieved my heart;
I return thanks because HWHY delivered me.
18 Now I rejoice in their shame;
I have waited on You, and I am not ashamed.
19 May You be given honor forever,
Even forever and ever.
20 Deliver Yisra’ĕl, Your elect,
And those of the house of Ya’aqoḇ, Your proven one.
6

156 A plea for deliverance.
A worm does not thank You,
Nor does a maggot recount Your kindness.
1

1061

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS

Only the living thank You,
All those whose feet stumble thank You,
When You make Your kindness known to them,
And cause them to understand Your righteousness;
3 For the being of all the living is in Your hand,
And You have given breath to all flesh.
4 O HWHY, do to us according to Your goodness,
According to the greatness of Your compassion,
And according to the greatness of Your righteous
deeds.
5 HWHY listens to the voice of all who love His
Name,
And He does not permit His kindness to depart from
them.
6 Baruḵ be HWHY, who does righteous deeds,
Who crowns His qodeshim with kindness and
favours.
7 My being shouts to praise Your Name,
To praise Your compassion with joy,
To announce Your trustworthiness;
For there is no limit to Your praises.
8 I belonged to death because of my sins,
And my wickednesses had sold me to She’ol;
9 But You saved me, O HWHY,
According to the greatness of Your compassion,
And according to the greatness of Your righteous
deeds.
10 I have, indeed, loved Your Name,
And have taken refuge in Your shadow.
11 My heart is strengthened when I remember Your
power,
And I rely on Your compassion.
12 Forgive my sins, O HWHY,
And cleanse me of my wickedness.
13 Grant me a spirit of faithfulness and knowledge;
Let me not be ashamed in ruin.
2

1062

ADDITIONS TO PSALMS

Do not allow the wicked one or an unclean spirit to
overtake me,
And do not allow affliction or evil inclination to
possess my bones;
15 For You, O HWHY, are my praise,
And I wait on You every day.
16 My brothers rejoice with me,
And the house of my father is awed by Your favour.
17 I shall always rejoice in You.
14

157 A song to Tsiyon.
I shall remember you, O Tsiyon, for a beraḵah.
I love you with all My strength;
For your remembrance is to be baraḵ forever.
2 Your expectancy is great, O Tsiyon; Peace and
your awaited deliverance shall come.
3 Generation after generation shall dwell in you,
And generations of the righteous shall be your
ornament.
4 They who long for the day of your deliverance
Shall rejoice in the greatness of your esteem.
5 They shall be nursed on the fullness of your
esteem,
And in your lovely streets they shall make tinkling
sounds.
6 You shall remember the righteous deeds of your
neḇi’im,
And shall esteem yourself in the deeds of your
righteous ones.
7 Cleanse violence from your midst;
May lying and wickedness be cut off from you.
8 Your sons shall rejoice within you,
And your loved ones shall be joined to you.
How much have they waited on your deliverance?
9 How much have your perfect ones mourned for
you?
1

1063

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS

Your expectancy, O Tsiyon, shall not perish,
And your expectation shall not be forgotten.
11 Is there a righteous man who has perished?
Is there a man who has escaped his wickedness?
12 Man is tried according to his way,
Each is repaid according to his deeds.
13 Your oppressors shall be cut off from around you,
O Tsiyon,
And all who hate you shall be dispersed.
14 Your praise is pleasing, O Tsiyon;
It rises up in all the world.
15 I remember you many times for a beraḵah,
And I baraḵ you with all My heart.
16 You shall attain to everlasting righteousness,
And shall receive bireḵoth from the noble.
17 Take the vision which speaks of you,
And the dreams of the neḇi’im requested for you.
18 Be exalted and increase, O Tsiyon,
And praise the Most High, your Redeemer!
May my being rejoice in Your esteem!
10

158 A song to the Name of HWHY.
In the midst of the congregation they shall praise
the Name of HWHY,
2 For He has come to judge every action,
To remove the wicked from the earth,
So that the children of wickedness shall not be found.
3 The shamayim shall give their dew,
And there shall be no drought within their boundaries.
4 The earth shall give its fruit in its time,
And its produce shall not fail.
5 The fruit trees shall give of the fruit of its
vineyards,
And the ground shall not deprive of its produce.
6 The poor shall eat, and those who revere Elohim
shall be filled.
1

1064

ADDITIONS TO PSALMS

159 A song to Yahuḏah.
The shamayim and earth shall give praise
together.
Let all the stars of the evening twilight give praise!
2 Rejoice, Yahuḏah; rejoice!
Rejoice, rejoice and be glad with gladness!
3 Celebrate your Feasts, and pay your vows;
For there is no wickedness in your midst.
4 Raise your hand, and fortify your right hand!
5 Behold, the enemy shall perish,
And all the workers of wickedness shall be dispersed;
6 But You, O HWHY, are forever,
And Your esteem shall be forever and ever.
HalleluYah!
1

160 A song to the Creator.
HWHY is great and qodesh,
The most qodesh for generation after generation.
2 Excellency goes before Him,
And abundance of many waters comes after Him.
3 Kindness and truth surround His face;
Truth, right-ruling, and righteousness are the pedestal
of His throne.
4 He divides light from the unknown,
And He establishes the dawn by the knowledge of
His heart.
5 All His messengers sang when they saw it;
For He showed them that which they had not known.
6 He crowns the mountains with fruit,
With good food for all the living.
7 May the Aḏon of the earth be baraḵ, along with
His power;
For He establishes the world by His wisdom.
8 He stretched out the shamayim by His
understanding,
And brought forth wind from His stores.
1

1065

TEHILLIM ADDITIONS

He made lightnings for the rain,
And raised mist from the end of the earth.
9

1066

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

ḤAḴMAH
‫ חכמה השלמה‬hmLvh hmKX

1 Love righteousness, you that are rulers of the
earth.
Think of HWHY in goodness and seek Him in integrity
of heart.
2 For He is found by those who do not try Him,
And reveals Himself to those who do not distrust Him.
3 For perverse thoughts separate from Elohim,
And His power, when it is tried, reproves the unwise.
4 For wisdom does not enter into a malicious being,
Nor dwell in the body that is subject to sin.
5 For the qodesh spirit of discipline flees deceit,
And turns away from thoughts that are without
understanding,
And does not remain when unrighteousness comes
in.
6 For wisdom is a loving spirit,
But a blasphemer shall not go unpunished for his
words.
For Elohim is witness of his kidneys,
And a true watcher of his heart, and a hearer of his
tongue.
7 For the Ruaḥ of HWHY fills the world,
And that which sustains all knows what is said.
8 Therefore he who speaks unrighteous words is
not hidden,
Nor does vengeance pass him by when it punishes.
9 For a search shall be made into the counsels of
the wicked,
And the words of his voice shall come to HWHY to
reveal his wicked deeds.
10 For a jealousy ear hears all words,
And the sound of grumbling is not hidden.
11 Therefore beware of grumbling, which is useless,
And keep your tongue from secrecy.
For no secret word is without evil,
And a lying mouth destroys the being.
1067

ḤAḴMAH

Do not seek death in the straying of your life,
And do not pull destruction upon yourself with the
works of your hands.
13 For Elohim did not make death,
Nor does He delight in the destruction of the living.
14 For He created all to have their life;
And the creations of the world were perfect,
And no poison of destruction in them,
Nor the reign of death upon the earth;
15 For righteousness is immortal.
16 But wicked men with their works and words called
it to them,
For when they thought to have it their friend, they
perished to naught,
And made a covenant with it,
Because they deserve to receive a share in it.
12

2 For the wicked, reasoning with themselves, but not
rightly said,
“Our life is short and tedious,
And of the death of a man there is no healing;
Neither was there any man known to have returned
from the grave.
2 “For we are all born by chance,
And after this we shall be as though we had never
been;
For the breath of our nostrils is as smoke,
And a little spark in the moving of our heart;
3 Which being extinguished, our body shall be
turned into ashes,
And our spirit shall vanish as the soft air.
4 “And our name shall be forgotten in time,
And no man shall remember our works,
And our life shall pass away as the traces of a cloud,
And shall be dispersed as a mist,
That is driven away with the rays of the sun,
And overcome by its heat.
5 “For our time is but a shadow that passes away;
And after our end there is no returning:
For it is sealed up so that no man comes again.
1068

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

“Come therefore, let us enjoy the good that is
found,
And let us hasten to use the creation as in youth.
7 “Let us fill ourselves with costly wine and
ointments,
And let no flower of the spring pass by us.
8 “Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds, before
they wither.
9 “Let none of us go without his part of our luxuries;
Let us leave signs of our joy in every place,
For this is our portion, and this is our lot.
10 “Let us oppress the poor, righteous man;
Let us not spare the widow,
Nor regard the old grey hairs of the aged.
11 “Let our strength be the law of righteousness,
For that which is feeble is found to be worthless.
12 “Therefore let us lie in wait for the righteous;
For he is not for our way, and he is clearly opposed to
our actions;
He reproaches us with our guilt of the Law,
And to our shame, accuses of the sins against our
teaching.
13 “He professes to have the knowledge of Elohim,
And calls himself the child of HWHY!
14 “He has become a reproof to our thoughts.
15 “He is a burden to us to even look at,
For his life is not like other men,
His ways are a different way.
16 “We are regarded by him as false,
He abstains from our ways as from filthiness,
He pronounces the end of the righteous to be baruḵ,
And makes his boast that Elohim is his Father!
17 “Let us see if his words are true,
And let us prove what shall befall him in the end.
18 “For if the righteous man is the son of Elohim,
He shall help him, and deliver him from the hand of
his enemies.
6

1069

ḤAḴMAH

“Let us try him with mocking and torture,
So that we may know his humility,
And prove his patience.
20 “Let us condemn him with a shameful death;
For by his own words, he shall be favoured.”
21 Such as these they devised, and were deceived;
For their own wickedness has blinded them.
22 As for the secrets of Elohim, they did not know
them;
Neither did they expect the wages of righteousness,
Nor discern a reward for blameless lives.
23 For Elohim created man to be immortal,
And made him to be an image of His own immortality.
24 Nevertheless death came into the world through
envy of the devil,
And those who hold to His side find it.
19

3 But the beings of the righteous are in the hand of
Elohim,
And no torture shall touch them.
2 In the eyes of the unwise they seemed to die,
And their departure is taken for misery,
3 And their going from us to be utter destruction:
But they are at peace.
4 For though they are punished in the eyes of men,
Yet their expectancy is full of immortality.
5 And having been discipled a little, they shall be
rewarded greatly;
For Elohim proved them, and found them worthy for
Himself.
6 He has tried them as gold in the furnace,
And received them as a burnt offering.
7 And in the time of their visitation they shall shine,
And run to and fro like sparks among the stubble.
8 They shall judge the nations, and reign over the
people,
And their Aḏon shall reign forever.
9 Those that put their trust in Him shall understand
the truth;
And those who are trustworthy in love shall abide with
1070

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Him;
For favour and kindness is upon His qodeshim,
And he looks after His elect.
10 But the wicked shall be punished according to
their own schemes,
Who have neglected the righteous, and forsaken
HWHY.
11 For whoever despises wisdom and instruction is
miserable,
And their expectancy is vain, their labours unfruitful,
And their works unprofitable.
12 Their wives are foolish, and their children wicked;
13 Their offspring are cursed.
Therefore baruḵ is the barren one who is undefiled,
Who has not known the sinful bed;
She shall bear fruit in the visitation of lives.
14 And baruḵ is the eunuch, who has done no evil
with his hands,
Nor devised wickedness against Elohim;
For unto him shall be given the special gift of belief,
And an inheritance more desired by his being in the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
15 For the fruit of good labours is esteemed,
And the root of wisdom shall never fail.
16 As for the children of adulterers, they shall not
come to their perfection,
And the seed of an unrighteous bed shall be
uprooted.
17 For though they live long, yet they shall be
regarded as naught,
And their end shall be without esteem.
18 Or, if they die quickly, they have no expectancy,
Nor comfort in the day of trial.
19 For the end of the unrighteous generation is
terrible.

4 It is better to have no children, and to have virtue,
For the remembrance of it is forever;
Because it is known with Elohim, and with men.
1071

ḤAḴMAH

When it is present, men take example from it;
And when it is gone, they desire it.
It wears a crown, and overcomes forever,
Having overcome, striving for undefiled rewards.
3 But the multiplying brood of the wicked shall not
thrive,
Nor take deep root by illegitimate seed,
Nor lay any lasting foundation.
4 For though they flourish as branches for a time;
Though standing - not last, they shall be shaken by
the wind,
And through the force of winds they shall be
uprooted.
5 The imperfect branches shall be broken off,
Their fruit unprofitable - not ripe to eat,
Also of no use.
6 For children brought forth by lawless beds are
witnesses of wickedness against their parents in their
trial.
7 But though the righteous be prevented by death,
Yet he shall be at rest.
8 For esteemed age is not that which stands in
length of time,
Nor measured by number of years.
9 But wisdom is the grey hair unto men,
And an unstained life is old age.
10 He pleased Elohim, and was loved by Him;
So that living among sinners he was translated.
11 Indeed, was he taken away speedily,
Lest wickedness should alter his understanding,
Or deceit deceive his being.
12 For the enticement of greed obscures that which
is honest;
And the wandering of desire undermines the simple
minded.
13 He, being made perfect in a short time, filled a
long time;
2

1072

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For his being pleased HWHY,
Therefore He hastened to take him away from among
the wicked.
15 This the people saw, but did not understand,
Neither did they lay up this in their minds:
That His favour and kindness is with His qodeshim,
And that He shows respect to His chosen.
16 Thus the righteous who are dead shall condemn
the wicked who are living;
And youth that is soon perfected;
The many years and old age of the unrighteous.
17 For they shall see the end of the wise,
And shall not understand what Elohim in His counsel
has decreed for Him,
And to what end HWHY has put Him in safety.
18 They shall see Him, and despise Him;
But Elohim shall laugh them to scorn.
And from then on they shall be an insignificant
carcass,
And a reproach among the dead forever.
19 For He shall tear them, and throw them down
headlong, that they shall be speechless;
And He shall shake them from the foundation;
And they shall be utterly laid waste, and be in sorrow;
And their remembrance shall perish.
20 And when they draw up the account of their sins,
they shall come with fear;
And their own wickednesses shall convict them to
their face.
14

5 Then the righteous shall stand in great boldness
2

3

before the face of those who have afflicted Him,
and taken no account of His works.
When they see it, they shall be troubled with
awesome fear, and shall be amazed at the
mystery of His salvation, so far beyond all that
they looked for.
And they, repenting and groaning for anguish of
spirit, shall say within themselves, “This was He,
1073

ḤAḴMAH

whom we once mocked, and a proverb of
reproach.
4 “We fools accounted His ḥai madness, and His
end to be without esteem.
5 “How is He numbered among the children of
Elohim, and His lot is among the qodeshim?
6 “Therefore we have strayed from the Way of truth,
and the light of righteousness has not shined upon
us, and the brilliance of righteousness did not rise
upon us.
7 “We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness
and destruction; we have also gone through
deserts where there was no path; but as for the
Way of HWHY, we have not known it.
8 “What has pride profited us, or what good has
wealth with our boasting brought us?”
9 All these have passed away like a shadow,
And as a rumour that hastened away.
10 And as a ship that passes over the waves of the
water,
Which when it has passed, the trace of it is unable to
be found,
Neither the pathway of the keel in the waves.
11 Or as when a bird has flown through the air,
There is no sign of its way to be found,
But the air being lightly beaten with the stroke of its
wings and parted with the rapid noise and motion
of them is passed through;
And after passing there is no sign of it to be found.
12 Or as when an arrow is shot at a mark,
It parts the air, which immediately comes together
again,
So one cannot know where it went through.
13 Even so, we also, as soon as we were born,
Began to draw to our end and had no sign of
uprightness to show,
But were consumed in our wickedness.
14 For the expectancy of the unrighteous is like dust
that is blown away with the wind;
1074

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Like a thin frost that is driven away with the storm;
As the smoke which is dispersed here and there with
a storm,
And passes like the remembrance of a guest who
stays but a day.
15 But the righteous live forever;
Even so, their reward is with HWHY,
And the Most High looks after them.
16 Therefore they shall receive an esteemed reign,
and a lovely crown from the hand of HWHY:
For with His right hand He shall cover them,
And with His arm He shall protect them.
17 He shall take his ardour as complete armour,
And make creation His weapon for the vengeance of
His enemies.
18 He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate,
And true judgment in place of a helmet.
19 He shall take qodeshah for an invincible shield.
20 He shall sharpen His severe wrath as a sword,
And the earth shall fight with Him against the foolish.
21 Then the thunderbolts aimed true shall go out;
And from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow,
They shall fly to the mark.
22 And hailstones filled with wrath shall be thrown as
a stone out of bow,
And the water of the sea shall rage against them,
And the floods shall cruelly drown them.
23 A mighty wind shall also stand up against them,
And blow them away like a storm:
So wickedness shall lay waste the whole earth,
And evil works shall overthrow the thrones of the
mighty.

6 Hear therefore, O you sovereigns, and understand;
Learn, you who are judges to the ends of the earth.
2 Listen, you who rule the people,
And boast in the multitude of nations.
3 For power is given to you from HWHY,
And rulership from the Most High,
1075

ḤAḴMAH

Who shall try your works, and search out your
purposes.
4 For being overseers of His reign, you have not
ruled rightly,
Nor guarded the Law,
Nor walked after the counsel of Elohim;
5 He shall come upon you terribly and speedily;
For a sharp judgment shall be to those who are in
high places.
6 For kindness shall soon pardon the harshest,
But great men shall be greatly tortured.
7 For He who is Aḏon over all shall show no
partiality,
Neither shall he stand in awe of any man’s greatness;
For he has made the small and great,
And is concerned for all alike.
8 But a severe trial shall come upon the mighty.
9 I speak unto you therefore, O sovereigns,
That you may learn wisdom, and not fall away.
10 For those who guard qodeshah righteously shall
be judged qodesh;
And those who have learned such matters shall find
what to answer.
11 Therefore lay your heart upon my words;
Desire them, and you shall be instructed.
12 Wisdom is esteemed, and never fades away:
Also, she is easily seen by those who love her,
And found by those who seek her.
13 She prevents those who desire her,
In making herself first known to them.
14 Whoever seeks her early shall have no great
hardship:
For he shall find her sitting at his doors.
15 Therefore to think upon her is perfection of
wisdom;
And whoever watches for her shall quickly be without
worry.
16 For she goes about seeking those who are worthy
of her,
1076

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Showing herself favourably to those in the Way,
And meets them in every thought.
17 For the very true beginning of her is the desire of
discipline;
And the concern of discipline is love;
18 And love is the keeping of her Laws; and guarding
her Laws is the assurance of incorruption;
19 And incorruption makes us near to Elohim:
20 Therefore the desire of wisdom leads to a reign.
21 If your delight then is in thrones and sceptres,
O rulers of the people, esteem wisdom,
That you may reign for forever.
22 As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came to
be,
I shall tell you, and shall not hide mysteries from you;
But shall seek her out from the beginning of her
creation,
And bring the knowledge of her into light,
And shall not pass over the truth.
23 Neither shall I go with consuming envy;
For such a man shall have no fellowship with wisdom.
24 But the multitude of the wise is the welfare of the
world:
And a wise sovereign is the upholding of the people.
25 Receive therefore instruction through my words,
And it shall do you good.

7 I myself am also a mortal man like all,
And the offspring of he who was first made from the
earth.
2 And was fashioned in my mother’s womb to be
flesh in the time of ten months,
Being compacted in blood, of the seed of man,
And the pleasure that came with sleep.
3 And when I was born, I drew in the common air,
And fell upon the earth, which is of like nature,
And the first voice which I uttered was crying, as all
others do.
4 I was nursed with compassion, and wrapped in
garments.
1077

ḤAḴMAH

For there is no sovereign that had any other
beginning of birth.
6 For all men have one entrance into life,
And the same going out.
7 Therefore I prayed, and understanding was given
to me.
I called upon Elohim, and the spirit of wisdom came
to me.
8 I preferred her before sceptres and thrones,
And deemed wealth naught in comparison to her.
9 Neither did I compare her to any precious stone,
Because all gold in respect to her is as a little sand,
And silver is counted as clay before her.
10 I loved her above health and loveliness,
And chose to have her instead of light;
For the light that comes from her never goes out.
11 All good came to me together with her,
And much wealth in her hands.
12 And I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom goes
before them;
And I did not know that she was the mother of them.
13 I learned diligently, and speak of her freely.
I do not hide her wealth,
14 For she is a treasure unto men that never fails;
Which those who use become the friends of Elohim,
Being commended for the gifts that come from
learning.
15 Elohim has granted me to speak as I would,
And to conceive what is right for that which has been
given to me;
Because it is He who leads unto wisdom, and directs
the wise.
16 For in His hand are both we and our words;
All wisdom also, and knowledge of workmanship.
17 For He has given me certain knowledge of that
which exists,
Namely, to know how the world was made,
And the operation of the elements.
5

1078

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

The beginning, ending, and middle of the times;
The alterations of the turning of the sun,
And the change of seasons.
19 The circuits of years, and the positions of stars.
20 The nature of living creatures, and the raging of
wild beasts;
The violence of winds, and the reasonings of men;
The diversities of plants and the power of roots.
21 And all that which is either secret or revealed,
these I know.
22 For wisdom, which is the worker of all matters,
taught me;
For in her is an understanding spirit: qodesh, unique,
manifold, wise, lively, clear, undefiled, clean,
strong, loving the good, alive, irresistible, ready to
do good,
23 kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from worry, all
powerful, overseeing all, and penetrating all spirits
most wise, understanding, and pure.
24 For wisdom is more moving than any motion:
She passes and penetrates all because of her purity.
25 For she is the breath of the power of Elohim,
And a pure force flowing from the esteem of the
Almighty;
Therefore no uncleanness shall come upon her.
26 For she is the brightness of the everlasting Light,
The unspotted reflection of the power of Elohim,
And an image of His goodness.
27 And although one, she does all matters:
And remaining in herself, she renews all matters.
And entering into qodesh beings of all generations,
She makes them friends of Elohim, and neḇi’im.
28 For Elohim loves none but he who dwells with
wisdom.
29 For she is more lovely than the sun,
And above all the order of stars:
Compared with the light, she is found before it.
30 For after this comes night,
But evil shall not prevail against wisdom.
18

1079

ḤAḴMAH

8 Wisdom reaches from one end to another mightily;
And she rightly orders all matters.
2 I loved her, and sought her out from my youth,
I desired to make her my bride, and I was a lover of
her comeliness.
3 She increases her nobility for she accompanies
Elohim;
Indeed, the Aḏon of all loved her.
4 For she knows the secrets of the knowledge of
Elohim,
And is a lover of His works.
5 If wealth is a possession to be desired in this life;
What is wealthier than wisdom, the doer of all?
6 And if insight works;
Who of all that is a more skilled worker than she?
7 And if a man loves righteousness, her works are
good;
For she teaches self-control and insight,
righteousness and endurance;
Of which there is naught more profitable than men
may have in their life.
8 If a man desires much experience, she knows the
ways of old,
And concludes rightly what is to come:
She knows the wisdom of words, and expounds
hidden riddles.
She foresees signs and wonders, and the events of
seasons and times.
9 Therefore I purposed to take her to me to live with
me,
Knowing that she would be a counsellor of good,
And a comfort in worries and grief.
10 Because of her I have esteem among the
multitude,
And esteem with the elders, although I am young.
11 I shall be found alert in judgment,
And shall be admired in the sight of great men.
12 When I hold my tongue, they shall await me,
And when I speak, they shall give good ear to me;
1080

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

If I talk much, they shall lay their hands upon their
mouth.
13 And by the means of her I shall obtain immortality,
And leave an everlasting remembrance behind me to
those that come after me.
14 I shall put the people in order,
And the nations shall be subject to me.
15 Horrible tyrants shall be afraid, when they hear of
me;
I shall be found good among the multitude,
And courageous in battle.
16 After I have come into my house, I shall find rest
with her:
For her ways are not bitter;
And to live with her has no sorrow, but gladness and
joy.
17 Now when I thought on these matters within
myself,
And considered them in my heart,
That to be allied with wisdom is immortality;
18 And it is great pleasure to have her friendship;
And in the works of her hands are wealth without
limit;
And walking in her company, insight;
And in talking with her, a good report;
I went about seeking how to take her to me.
19 For I was a lively child, and had a good spirit.
20 Indeed, being good, I came into a body undefiled.
21 Nevertheless, when I perceived that I could not
otherwise obtain her, except Elohim gave her me;
And that was a point of wisdom also to know whose
gift she was;
I prayed to HWHY, and pleaded with Him,
And with my whole heart I said,

9 “O Elohim of my fathers, and Aḏon of kindness,
who has made all by Your Word,
2 and ordained man through Your wisdom,
That he should reign over the creatures which You
have made.
1081

ḤAḴMAH

“And order the world according to straightness
and righteousness,
And execute right-ruling with an upright heart:
4 “Give me wisdom, that sits by Your throne;
And do not reject me from among your children.
5 “For I, Your servant and son of Your female
servant am a weak man, and short-lived,
And too young for the understanding of Right- Ruling
and Laws.
6 “For though a man be ever so perfect among the
children of men,
Yet if Your wisdom is not with him, he shall be
regarded as naught.
7 “You have chosen me to be a sovereign of Your
people,
And a judge of Your sons and daughters.
8 “You have commanded me to build a Hĕyḵal upon
Your qodesh mountain,
And an altar in the city in which You dwell,
A resemblance of the qodesh Mishkan, which You
have prepared from the beginning.
9 “And wisdom was with You; who knows Your
works,
And was present when You made the world,
And knew what was acceptable in Your sight,
And right by Your Commands.
10 “O send her out of Your qodesh shamayim,
And from the throne of Your esteem,
That being present she may labour with me,
That I may know what is pleasing to You.
11 “For she knows and understands all matters,
And she shall lead me sensibly in my doings,
And preserve me in her power.
12 “So shall my works be acceptable,
And then shall I judge Your people righteously,
And be worthy to sit in my father’s seat.”
13 For what man is he who knows the counsel of
Elohim?
Or who knows the desire of HWHY?
3

1082

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

“For the thoughts of mortal men are wretched,
And our plans are of uncertainty.
15 For the corruptible body presses down the being,
And this earthly tent weighs down the mind that
thinks upon many matters.
16 And we could hardly guess rightly at that which is
on earth,
And with labour we find that which is before us;
But that which is in the shamayim who has searched
out?
17 And Your counsel who has known, except You
give wisdom,
And send Your Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh from above?
18 For so the ways of those who lived on the earth
were instructed,
And men were taught that which is pleasing to You,
And were saved through wisdom.
14

10 She preserved the first formed father of the
world,
Who was created alone, and brought him out from his
fall,
2 And gave him power to rule all creatures.
3 But when the unrighteous went away from her in
his wrath,
He also perished in the fury with which he murdered
his brother.
4 For whose cause the earth being drowned with
the flood,
Wisdom again preserved it,
And directed the course of the righteous within a
piece of wood of little value.
5 And the nations being confounded in their wicked
conspiracy,
She found out the righteous,
And preserved him blameless before Elohim,
And kept him strong despite his tender compassion
toward his son.
6 When the wicked perished, she delivered the
righteous man,
1083

ḤAḴMAH

Who fled from the fire which fell down upon the five
cities.
7 Of whose wickedness the smoking
wasteland is a witness even to this day,
And plants bearing fruit that never come to ripeness;
And a standing pillar of salt is a monument of an
unbelieving being.
8 For not regarding wisdom, they not only received
this evil;
That they did not know that which was good;
But also left behind them a remembrance to the world
of their foolishness;
So that the matters in which they sinned could not so
much as be hidden.
9 But wisdom delivered those who attended to her
from pain.
10 When the righteous fled from his brother’s wrath
she guided him in right paths,
Showed him the reign of Elohim, and gave him
knowledge of qodesh matters,
Made him wealthy in his travels, and multiplied the
fruit of his labours.
11 In the covetousness of those who oppressed him
she stood by him, and made him wealthy.
12 She defended him from his enemies, and kept him
safe from those that lay in wait,
And in heavy conflict she gave him the deliverance;
That he might know that good is stronger than all.
13 When the righteous was sold, she did not forsake
him,
But delivered him from sin:
She went down with him into the pit,
14 And did not leave him in chains, till she brought
him the sceptre of the reign,
And power against those who oppressed him:
As for those who had accused him, she showed them
to be liars,
And gave him everlasting esteem.
1084

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

She delivered the righteous people and blameless
seed from the nation that oppressed them.
16 She entered into the being of the servant of HWHY,
And withstood awesome sovereigns with wonders
and signs;
17 Rendered to the righteous a reward for their
labours,
Guided them in a marvellous way, and was a cover
unto them by day,
And a light by stars in the night time;
18 Brought them through the Sea of Reeds,
And led them through deep waters.
19 But she drowned their enemies, and threw them
up from the depth of the sea.
20 Therefore the righteous plundered the wicked,
And praised Your qodesh Name, O HWHY,
And with one accord exalted Your hand, that fought
for them.
21 For wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb,
And taught the tongues of those who could not
speak.
15

11 She prospered their works in the hand of the
qodesh naḇi.
2 They went through the wilderness that was
uninhabited,
And pitched tents in places where there lay no way.
3 They stood against their enemies,
And were avenged of their adversaries.
4 When they were thirsty, they called upon You,
And water was given them out of the flinty rock,
And their thirst was quenched out of the solid rock.
5 For in what matters their enemies were punished,
By the same they in their need were benefited.
6 For instead of a constant running river troubled
with foul blood,
7 For a visible reproof of that command, whereby
the infants were slain,
You gave to them abundance of water by means of
which they had no expectancy;
1085

ḤAḴMAH

Revealing by that thirst at that time how you had
punished their adversaries.
9 For when they were tried although chastised in
kindness,
They knew how the wicked were judged in wrath and
tortured,
Thirsting in a different manner than the righteous.
10 For these You admonish and try, as a Father,
But the other, as a severe Sovereign, You condemn
and punish.
11 Whether they were absent or present,
They were punished alike.
12 For a double grief came upon them,
And a groaning for the remembrance of what was
past.
13 For when they heard through their own
punishments the other had benefited,
They sensed that it was from HWHY.
14 For whom they treated with scorn,
When he was sent out long before the throwing out of
the infants,
In the end, when they saw what came to be, they
admired him.
15 But for the foolish schemes of their wickedness,
Being deceived, they worshipped serpents empty of
reason, and vile beasts,
You sent a multitude of beastly creatures upon them
for vengeance;
16 That they might know, that in all the ways a man
sins,
By the same he shall also be punished.
17 For Your Almighty hand, that made the world of
formless matter,
Did not lack the means to send a multitude of bears
or fierce lions among them,
18 Or newly created, unknown wild beasts full of
rage,
Breathing out either fiery breath, or a filthy stench of
8

1086

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

billowing smoke,
Or shooting scorching sparks out of their eyes;
19 From which not only the damage might kill them at
once,
But also the terrible sight utterly destroy them.
20 And even without all these they might have
collapsed with one blast,
Being punished by vengeance, and scattered abroad
through the breath of Your power;
But You have ordered all in measure and number and
weight.
21 For You show Your great power at all times when
you desire;
And who withstands the strength of Your arm?
22 For the whole world is like a small grain in the
balance before You,
Even as a drop of the morning dew that falls down
upon the earth.
23 But You show favour upon all;
For You do all,
And overlook the sins of men, that they should
repent.
24 For You love all that exist, and loathe none whom
You have made;
For You would never have made any matter, if You
had hated it.
25 And how could any matter have endured, if it had
not been Your desire?
Or been preserved, if not called by You?
26 But You spare all: for they are Yours, O HWHY,
You lover of the living.

12 For Your incorruptible Ruaḥ is in all.
Therefore little by little You discipline those who
offend,
And warn them by keeping them in remembrance of
that in which they have sinned,
So that turning from their wickedness they believe on
You, O HWHY.
2

1087

ḤAḴMAH

By the hands of our fathers You determined to
destroy both those old inhabitants of Your qodesh
land,
4 Whom You hated for doing most abominable
works of witchcraft and wicked slaughterings;
5 And also those cruel murderers of children,
And devourers of the flesh of man, and the feasts of
blood,
6 With their priests from among their idolatrous
group,
And the parents, that killed helpless lives with their
own hands;
7 So that the land, which You esteemed above all
other,
Might receive a worthy assembly of children of
Elohim.
8 Nevertheless even those You spared, being but
men,
And sent hornets - forerunners of your host - to
destroy them little by little.
9 Not that You were unable to bring the wicked
under the hand of the righteous in battle,
Or to destroy them at once with cruel beasts, or with
one stern word;
10 But executing Your judgments upon them little by
little,
You gave them place for repentance, not being
ignorant that they were a wicked generation,
And that their evil was inherited, and that their minds
could never be changed.
11 For it was a cursed seed from the beginning;
Neither for fear of any man did You pardon them for
those matters in which they sinned.
12 For who shall say, “What have You done?”
Or who shall withstand Your judgment?
Or who shall accuse You for the nations that perish,
whom You made?
Or who shall come to stand against You, to be
avenged for the unrighteous?
3

1088

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For neither is there any Elohim but You that looks
after all,
To whom You might show that Your judgment is not
unrighteous.
14 Neither shall sovereign or ruler be able to turn his
face against you for any whom You have
punished.
15 Even as You Yourself are righteous,
You order all righteously;
Determining it not agreeable within Your power to
condemn he who does not deserve to be
punished.
16 For Your power is the beginning of righteousness,
And because You are Aḏon of all, it causes You to
show favour to all.
17 For when men shall not believe that You are all
powerful,
You show Your strength,
And among those who know it You make their
boldness manifest.
18 But You, mastering Your power, rightly rule with
straightness,
And command us with great favour;
For You determine when You use Your power.
19 But by such works You have taught Your people
that the righteous man should be kind,
And have prepared Your children with good
expectancy that You allow repentance for sins.
20 For if You punished the enemies of Your children,
And those condemned to death, with such
deliberation, giving them time and place,
Whereby they might be delivered from their evil;
21 With what great discernment You rightly ruled
Your own children,
Unto whose fathers You have sworn,
And made Covenants of good promises?
22 Therefore, whereas You discipline us,
You scourge our enemies one thousand times more,
To the intent that, when we judge, we should carefully
13

1089

ḤAḴMAH

think of Your goodness,
And when we ourselves are judged, we should look
for kindness.
23 Wherefore, whereas men have lived corruptly and
unrighteously,
You have punished them with their own
abominations.
24 For they went very far astray in the ways of
straying,
And upheld for mighty ones, the beasts which even
among their enemies were despised,
Being deceived, as children of no understanding.
25 Therefore unto them, as children without the use
of reason,
You sent a judgment to mock them.
26 But those who would not repent by that correction,
in which He scolded them,
Shall feel a deserved judgment from Elohim.
27 See, for what matters they grumbled, when they
were punished,
That is, from those which they thought to be mighty
ones;
Being punished because of them, when they saw it,
They acknowledged Him to be the true Elohim, whom
before they refused to know:
And therefore severe judgment came upon them.

13 Surely all men who are ignorant of Elohim, are
worthless by nature,
And could not know Him from the good which is seen;
Neither by considering the works did they
acknowledge the Craftsman;
2 But supposed either fire, or wind, or the swift air,
Or the circle of the stars, or the raging water,
Or the lights of the shamayim to be the mighty ones
which govern the world.
3 If they, being delighted with their loveliness, took
them to be mighty ones;
Let them know how much better their Aḏon is;
For the first Author of loveliness has created them.
1090

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

But if they were astonished at their power and
excellence,
Let them understand by them, how much mightier He
is that made them.
5 For the greatness and loveliness of the creation is
seen in proportion to the maker of them.
6 But yet for this they are the less to be blamed:
For perhaps they stray, seeking Elohim,
And desire to find him.
7 For being accompanied with His works they
search Him diligently, and believe their sight;
Because that which is seen is lovely.
8 However neither are they to be pardoned.
9 For if they were able to know so much, that they
could examine the world;
How did they not sooner find out the Aḏon of such?
10 But they are miserable, and their expectancy is in
dead objects,
Who call them mighty ones, which are the works of
men’s hands,
Gold and silver fashioned with skill and likeness of
beasts,
Or a stone good for naught - the work of an aged
hand.
11 Now a carpenter that cuts timber, after he has
hewed down a tree suited for the purpose,
And taken off all the bark round about with skill,
And has fashioned it elegantly, and made a vessel
from it fit for the service of man’s life;
12 And after using the remains of his work to prepare
his food, has filled himself;
13 And taking the very waste among that which
served no use,
Being a crooked piece of wood, and full of knots,
Has carved it diligently, when he had none else to do,
And formed it by the skill of his knowledge,
And fashioned it into the image of a man;
14 Or made it like some lowly beast,
Laying it over with scarlet, and with paint colouring it
4

1091

ḤAḴMAH

red,
And covering every blemish with it;
15 And when he has made a suitable space for it,
Positioned it on a wall, and fastened it with
iron –
16 For he prepared for it that it might not fall,
Knowing that it was unable to help itself;
For it is an image, and has need of help –
17 Then he makes a prayer for his possessions, for
his wife and children,
And is not ashamed to speak to that which has no
life.
18 For health he calls upon that which is weak;
For life he prays to that which is dead;
For help he humbly pleads that which has the least
means to help;
And for a good journey he asks of that which cannot
put a foot forward;
19 And for gaining and getting, and for good success
of his hands,
Asks ability to do from that which is most unable to do
any deed.

14 Again, one preparing himself to sail,
And about to pass through the raging waves,
Calls upon a piece of wood more rotten than the
vessel that carries him.
2 For truly this was planned by desire for gain,
And the workman built it by his skill.
3 But Your providence, O Father, guides it;
For You have made a path in the sea, and a safe way
in the waves;
4 Showing that You save from every danger:
Even though a man went to sea without regard.
5 Nevertheless You do not want that the works of
Your wisdom should be idle,
And therefore men committing their lives to a small
piece of wood,
And passing the rough sea in a weak vessel are
saved.
1092

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For also in ages past, when the proud giants
perished,
The expectancy of the world governed by Your hand
escaped in a weak vessel,
And left a seed of generation to all ages.
7 For baruḵ is the wood by which righteousness
comes.
8 But an idol made with hands is cursed, as well as
he who made it; He, because he made it;
And it, because, being corruptible, it was called a
mighty one.
9 For the wicked and his wickedness alike are both
hateful to Elohim.
10 For that which is made shall be punished together
with he who made it.
11 Therefore there shall even be a reckoning upon
the idols of the gentiles:
For in the creation of Elohim they have become an
abomination,
And stumbling-blocks to the beings of men,
And a snare to the feet of the unwise.
12 For the devising of idols was the beginning of
spiritual whoring,
And the creation of them the corruption of life.
13 For neither were they from the beginning,
Nor shall they be forever.
14 For by the conceit of men they entered into the
world,
And therefore shall they come quickly to an end.
15 For a father afflicted with untimely mourning,
When he has made an image of his child soon taken
away,
Now esteemed him as a mighty one, which was then
a dead one,
And delivered to those beneath him ceremonies and
offerings.
16 Thus over time an evil custom grew strong being
kept as a law,
6

1093

ḤAḴMAH

And graven images were worshipped by the
commands of sovereigns.
17 When men could not esteem in presence,
because they dwelt far away,
They took the likeness of his image from afar,
And made an exact likeness of a sovereign whom
they esteemed,
So that through their ardour they might flatter he who
was absent, as if he were present.
18 The skill of the craftsman also helped to impel the
ignorant to increased worship.
19 For he, perhaps willing to please one in authority,
Forced all his skill to make the likeness in the best
fashion.
20 And so the multitude, attracted by the appeal of
the work,
Accepted him now as a mighty one, Who a little
before was only esteemed.
21 And this was an occasion to deceive the world:
For men, serving either calamity or authority,
Ascribed unto stones and stocks the Name not to be
shared.
22 And this was not enough for them, that they
strayed in the knowledge of Elohim;
But while they lived in the great struggle of ignorance,
Those great calamities they called peace.
23 For while they slew their children in offerings,
Or performed secret ceremonies, or held wild
festivals of strange rituals;
24 No longer did they keep lives nor marriages
undefiled;
But each one slew another in betrayal, or grieved him
through adultery.
25 So that there ruled in all men without exception:
Blood, murder, theft, and hypocrisy,
Corruption, unbelief, confusion, falsehood,
26 Distress of good men, forgetfulness of good,
defilement of beings,
1094

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Changing of kind, disorder in marriages, adultery, and
shameless uncleanness.
27 For the worshipping of idols not to be named Is
the beginning, the cause, and the end of all evil.
28 For either they rave when they exult, or
prophesy lies,
Or live unrighteously,
Or else readily contradict themselves.
29 For because their trust is in idols, which have no
life;
Though they swear falsely, yet they expect no harm.
30 However for both causes they shall be rightly
punished:
Both because they did not think well of Elohim,
Giving heed to idols, and also unrighteously swore
in deceit,
Despising qodeshah.
31 For it is not the power of them by whom they
swear:
But it is the righteous vengeance of sinners,
That always punishes the offense of the wicked.

15 But you, O Elohim, showing favour and truth,
Patient, and ruling all in kindness,
2 For if we sin, we are Yours, knowing Your power;
But we shall not sin, knowing that we are considered
Yours.
3 For to know You, is perfect righteousness,
Also to know Your power is the root of immortality.
4 For neither did the evil intention of men deceive
us,
Nor an image spotted with various colours,
The painter’s fruitless labour;
5 The sight of which entices fools to lust after it,
And so they desire the form of a lifeless image that
has no breath.
6 Both those who make them, those who desire
them, and those who worship them,
Are lovers of evil, and are worthy to have such to
trust upon.
1095

ḤAḴMAH

For the potter, kneading soft earth, fashions every
vessel with much labour for our service;
Indeed, of the same clay he makes both the vessels
that serve for clean uses,
And likewise also all those who serve the contrary.
But to what is the use of either, the potter himself is
the judge.
8 And using his labours wickedly, he makes a vain
mighty one of the same clay,
Even he which a little before was made of earth
himself,
And within a little while after returns to the same,
When his life which was loaned to him shall be
demanded.
9 But his concern is, not that he shall have much
labour,
Nor that his life is short;
But strives to outdo goldsmiths and silversmiths,
And endeavours to do like the workers in bronze,
And counts it his esteem to make that which is
counterfeit.
10 His heart is ashes, his expectancy is cheaper than
dirt,
And his life of less value than clay.
11 Because he did not know his Maker,
And He who inspired into him an active being,
And breathed in a living spirit.
12 But they reckoned our life a game,
And our time here a market-place for gain;
For they say, “We must acquire every way.”
Though it be by evil means.
13 For this man, of earthly matter knows he is
stumbling above all else,
Making frail vessels and graven images.
14 And all the enemies of Your people, that hold
them in subjection, are most foolish,
And are more miserable than an infant.
15 For they reckoned all the idols of the gentiles to be
mighty ones;
7

1096

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Which neither have the use of eyes to see,
Nor noses to draw breath,
Nor ears to hear,
Nor fingers of hands to touch;
And as for their feet, they are slow to move.
16 For man made them, and he who borrowed his
own spirit fashioned them:
But no man makes a mighty one that is like himself.
17 For being mortal, he makes that which is dead
with wicked hands;
For he himself is better than that which he worships;
Whereas he lived once, but they never.
18 Also, they worshipped those beasts that are also
most hateful;
For being compared together, some are worse than
others.
19 Neither do they look good, so much as to be
desired regarding beasts:
But they went without the praise of Elohim and His
beraḵah.

16 Therefore by these they were rightly punished,
And tortured by a multitude of beasts.
2 Instead of this punishment, dealing favourably
with Your own people,
You prepared for them delicacies for food,
Even quails to arouse their appetite;
3 So that they, desiring food,
Due to the ugly sight of the beasts sent among them,
Might loathe even that which they desired.
But these, suffering hardship for a short time,
Might be made partakers of delicacies.
4 For it was necessary, that upon those oppressors
suffering should come, which they could not avoid.
But to these it should only be shown how their
enemies were punished.
5 For when the fearful fierceness of beasts came
upon them,
And they perished with the stings of writhing
1097

ḤAḴMAH

serpents,
Your wrath did not endure forever.
6 But they were troubled for a little while that they
might be warned,
Receiving a sign of deliverance, to remind them of
the Command of Your Law.
7 For he who turned himself toward it was not saved
by that which he saw,
But by You, who are the Saviour of all.
8 And in this You made Your enemies confess,
That it is You who delivers from all evil.
9 For the biting of locusts and flies killed them,
Neither was there found any healing for their life:
For they deserved to be punished by such.
10 But Your sons were not overcome by the very
fangs of venomous serpents,
For Your kindness was continually upon them, and
healed them.
11 For they were pierced, that they should remember
Your Words,
And were quickly delivered,
So not to fall into deep forgetfulness,
That they remember Your goodness.
12 For it was neither herb, nor poultice, that healed
them,
But Your Word, O HWHY, that heals all.
13 For You have power of life and death.
You lead to the gates of She’ol, and bring up
again.
14 Because of his evil a man kills,
And the spirit, when it is gone, does not return;
Neither the being that is taken up comes again.
15 But it is impossible to escape Your hand.
16 For the wicked, that denied to know You,
Were beaten by the strength of Your arm;
They were pursued with strange rains, hail and
showers that they could not avoid,
And they were consumed by fire.
1098

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For the fire - which is most astounding - had more
force in the water, that quenches all;
For the world fights for the righteous.
18 For at one time the flame was restrained,
That it might not consume the beasts that were sent
against the wicked;
But seeing this they might see that they were
punished with the judgment of Elohim.
19 And at another time it burns stronger than fire
even in the midst of water,
That it might destroy the increase of an
unrighteous land.
20 Instead You fed Your own people with food of
messengers,
And sent them bread from the shamayim prepared
without their labour,
Able to content every delight, and pleasant to every
taste.
21 For your sustenance revealed Your sweetness
toward Your children,
And serving to the appetite of the eater,
Rendered itself to every man’s liking.
22 But snow and ice endured the fire, without
melting,
That they might know that fire burning in the hail, and
flashing in the rain,
Destroyed the increase of their enemies.
23 But this again forgot even its own strength,
That the righteous might be nourished.
24 For the creation that serves You, the Maker,
Increases its strength against the unrighteous for
their punishment.
And diminishes its strength for the benefit of those
who put their trust in You.
25 Therefore even then was it changed into all forms.
And was obedient to Your favour, who sustains all,
According to the desire of those who had need;
26 That Your children, O HWHY, whom You love,
might know,
17

1099

ḤAḴMAH

That it is not the growing of crops that nourishes
man;
But that it is Your Word, that preserves those who put
their trust in You.
27 For that which was not destroyed by the fire,
Being warmed with a few rays of sun, soon melted
away,
28 That it might be known that we must rise before
the sun and give You thanks,
And pray to you at the daybreak.
29 For the expectancy of the unthankful shall melt
away as the winter frost,
And shall run away as useless water.

17 For Your judgments are great, and cannot be
expressed;
Therefore beings not instructed have strayed.
2 For when unrighteous men thought to oppress the
qodesh nation;
They, being shut up in their houses, the prisoners of
darkness,
And shackled in the bonds of a long night,
Lay exiled from the anticipation of eternity.
3 For while they thought to lie hidden in their secret
sins,
They were scattered under a dark veil of
forgetfulness,
Being greatly astonished, and troubled with visions.
4 For neither could the corner that held them keep
them from fear:
But noises falling down sounded about them,
And mournful visions appeared to them with a heavy
presence.
5 No power of the fire could give them light:
Nor could the bright flames of the stars endure to
lighten that horrible night.
6 Only a very dreadful fire kindled by itself appeared
to them;
For being greatly afraid, they thought that which they
saw to be worse than the sight they did not see.
1100

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

As for the illusions of magic, they were brought to
naught,
And their boasting in wisdom was reproved with
shame.
8 For those who promised to drive away fear and
troubles from a sick being,
Were sick themselves of fear, worthy to be laughed
at.
9 For though no fearsome matter frightened them;
Yet being scared of beasts that passed by, and
hissing of serpents,
10 They perished from fear,
Denying that they saw the air, which could in no way
be avoided.
11 For wickedness, condemned by her own witness,
Is very fearful, and being pressured by conscience,
always foresees difficulties.
12 For fear is naught but a betrayal of the support
which reason offers.
13 And the expectation from within, being lesser,
Counts the ignorance greater than the cause which
brings the torment.
14 But they sleeping the same sleep that night, which
was indeed unbearable,
And which came upon them out of the imminent
depths of She’ol,
15 Were on one hand tortured with fearsome visions,
And on the other hand fainted, their heart failing
them;
For a sudden unexpected fear came upon them.
16 So then whoever fell down there was thus kept,
shut up in a prison without iron bars,
17 For whether he were a farmer, or shepherd,
Or a labourer in the field,
He was overtaken, and endured that unavoidable
necessity;
For they were all bound with one chain of darkness.
18 Whether it wore a whistling wind,
Or a melodious noise of birds among the spreading
7

1101

ḤAḴMAH

branches.
Or a pleasant waterfall running forcefully.
19 Or a terrible sound of stones thrown down,
Or a stampeding of beasts that could not be seen,
Or a roaring voice of most savage wild beasts,
Or a rebounding echo from the hollow mountains;
These made them to faint for fear.
20 For the whole world shone with radiant light,
And none were hindered in their labour;
21 Over them alone was spread a heavy night,
An image of that darkness which would afterward
receive them;
But they were even more grievous unto themselves
than the darkness.

18 Nevertheless, your qodeshim had a very great
light,
Whose voice they heard, but did not see their shape,
They also counted them baruḵ, for they had not
likewise suffered.
2 And because of this, they did not harm those by
whom they had been wronged before, they thanked
them,
And pleaded for their forgiveness that they had been
enemies.
3 Instead of this You gave them a burning pillar of
fire,
Both to be a guide for the unknown journey,
And a harmless sun to comfort them in esteem.
4 For they deserved to be deprived of light and
imprisoned in darkness,
Who had kept Your sons imprisoned,
By whom the incorruptible light of the Law was to be
given unto the world.
5 And when they had determined to slay the infants
of the qodeshim,
One child being thrown forth, but saved,
To reprove them, You took away the multitude of their
children,
And destroyed them altogether in a mighty flood.
1102

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

Of that night our fathers were informed before,
That knowing with certainty unto what promises they
had trusted,
They might afterwards be of good courage.
7 So both the salvation of the righteous,
And destruction of their enemies was accepted by
Your people.
8 For by which You punished our adversaries,
By the same You esteemed us, whom You had
called.
9 For the righteous children of good men made
offerings secretly,
And with one accord made a qodesh law,
That the qodeshim should likewise be partakers of
the same good and evil,
The fathers now singing out the songs of praise.
10 But on the other side was the sound of a
despairing cry of the enemies,
And a grievous noise was spread abroad for children
that were bewailed.
11 The master and the servant were
punished after one manner;
And the sovereign suffered the same as the
common person.
12 So altogether they had innumerable dead with one
kind of death;
Nor were the living sufficient to bury them;
For in one moment the most noble of their offspring
was destroyed.
13 For although they would not believe by reason of
their magic;
Upon the destruction of the firstborn, they
acknowledged these people to be the sons of
Elohim.
14 For while all was in quiet silence,
And that night was in the midst of its swift course,
15 Your mighty Word leaped out of the shamayim
from Your royal throne,
6

1103

ḤAḴMAH

As a fierce man of battle into the midst of a land of
destruction,
16 And brought Your sincere Command as a sharp
sword,
And stood filling all with death;
And it touched the shamayim, but stood upon the
earth.
17 Then suddenly visions of horrible dreams troubled
them greatly.
And fears not sought for came upon them.
18 And one thrown here, and another there half
dead,
Revealed the cause of his death.
19 For the dreams that troubled them forewarned
this,
Lest they should perish, and not know why they were
afflicted.
20 Indeed, the taste of death touched the righteous
also,
And there was a destruction of the multitude in the
wilderness;
But the wrath did not endure long.
21 For then a blameless man hurried,
And stood forth to defend them;
And bringing the shield of his own service,
Even prayer, and the atonement of incense,
Opposed the wrath, and brought the calamity to an
end,
Declaring that he was Your servant.
22 So he overcame the destroyer, not with strength
of body,
Nor with force of arms,
But with a word subdued He who punished,
Declaring the oaths and Covenants made with the
fathers.
23 For when the dead had fallen down in heaps one
upon another,
Standing between, he held back the wrath,
And parted the way to the living.
1104

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For in the long garment was the whole world,
And in the four rows of the stones was engraved the
esteem of the fathers,
And Your excellence upon the turban of his head.
25 To these the destroyer yielded, and feared;
For it was enough that they only tasted the
wrath.
24

19 As for the wicked, wrath came upon them
without kindness to their end;
For He knew before what they would do;
2 How having allowed them to depart, and sent
them away in haste,
They would reconsider and pursue them.
3 For while they were still mourning and lamenting
at the graves of the dead,
They added another foolish scheme, and pursued as
fugitives,
Those whom they had begged to leave.
4 For the expectancy of which they were worthy,
drew them toward this end,
And made them forget that which had already come
to be,
That they might fill the punishment of their torment
which was lacking;
5 And that Your people might travel an extraordinary
way,
But they would find a strange death.
6 For the whole creation in its kind was renewed in
fashion,
Serving Your Commands that were given to them,
That Your children might be guarded without harm;
7 As a cloud overshadowing the camp.
And where water stood before, dry land appeared,
And out of the Sea of Reeds, an unobstructed way;
And out of the raging river, a green field,
8 Where all the people went through that were
defended by Your hand,
Seeing Your marvelous, awesome wonders.
1105

ḤAḴMAH

For they reared like horses, and leaped like
lambs,
Praising you, O HWHY, who had delivered them.
10 For they still remembered what was done while
they sojourned in the strange land,
How the ground brought forth flies instead of cattle,
And how the river threw up multitudes of frogs
instead of fish.
11 But afterwards they saw a new offspring of birds,
When being led with their appetite, they asked for
luxurious meats.
12 For quails came up to them from the sea for their
satisfaction.
13 And punishments came upon the sinners,
Not without former signs of the power of thunder;
For they suffered rightly according to their own
wickedness,
Because they exercised a harder and hateful
behaviour toward sojourners.
14 For the Seḏomites did not receive those who were
unknown when they came,
But these brought friends into slavery, that deserved
good from them.
15 And not only so, but supposed some respect
would be had of those,
Because they treated sojourners hatefully.
16 But they afflicted those grievously, whom they had
received with feasting,
And had already shared in the same laws with them.
17 Therefore they were stricken with blindness,
As those at the doors of the righteous man;
When being surrounded with great, horrible darkness,
Every one sought to pass by his own doors.
18 For the elements were changed in themselves by
a kind of harmony,
As notes change the name of the tune on a harp
And yet are always sounds;
Which are understood by the sight of that which has
been done.
9

1106

WISDOM OF SOLOMON

For those of the earth were turned into watery,
And that which before swam in the water, now moved
on the earth.
20 The fire had power in the water, forgetting its own
ability;
And the water forgot its own quenching nature.
21 On the contrary, the flames did not destroy the
flesh of the corruptible living matters, though they
walked in them;
Neither melted the frosty food from the shamayim
that would naturally melt.
22 For in all matters O HWHY,
You exalted Your people and esteemed them,
Neither did You lightly regard them,
But assisted them at every time and place.
19

1107

ECCLESIASTICUS

SIRACH
‫ סירא‬ARYs

1 The Prologue: Whereas many and great matters
have been delivered to us through the Torah and the
neḇi’im and by others that have followed their paths,
for which Yisra’ĕl ought to be commended for
learning and wisdom; and of which not only the
readers need to become competent themselves, but
also those who desire to learn be able to benefit
those who are outside, both by speaking and writing.
My grandfather Yahoshua, when he had applied
himself greatly to the reading of the Law, and the
neḇi’im, and other Books of our fathers, and had
acquired good judgment from them, was himself also
led to write somewhat pertaining to learning and
wisdom; to the intent that those who desire to learn,
and are drawn to such, might profit much more in
living according to the Law. Therefore let me plead
that you read it with good intent and attention, and to
pardon us for where we may seem to come short in
some words, which we have laboured to interpret. For
the same words spoken in Iḇri, and translated into
another tongue, do not have the same force in them;
and not only this, but the Law itself, and the neḇi’im,
and the rest of the Books, have great difference,
when they are spoken in their own language. For in
the thirty-eighth year of coming into Mitsrayim, when
Euergetĕs was sovereign, and continuing there some
time, I found a book of great learning; therefore I
thought it necessary for me to devote some diligence
and labour to interpret it; using great vigilance and
skill in that time to complete the book, and also
publish it for those in a foreign land who are willing to
learn, being prepared before in manners to live after
the Law.
1108

SIRACH

1 All wisdom comes from HWHY, and is with Him
forever.
2 Who may number the sand of the sea and the
drops of rain,
And the days of eternity?
3 Who may search out the height of the shamayim,
And the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and
wisdom?
4 Wisdom has been created before all,
And the understanding of insight from everlasting.
5 The Word of Elohim Most High is the fountain of
wisdom;
And her ways are everlasting Commands.
6 To whom has the root of wisdom been revealed?
Or who has known her wise counsels?
7 Unto whom has the knowledge of wisdom been
made manifest?
And who has understood her great experience?
8 There is One wise and greatly to be revered:
HWHY sitting upon His throne.
9 He created her, and saw her, and measured her,
And poured her out upon all His works.
10 She is with all flesh according to His gift,
And He has given her to those who love Him.
11 The reverence of HWHY is esteem and splendour
and gladness,
And a crown of rejoicing.
12 The reverence of HWHY makes a glad heart,
And gives joy, and gladness, and a long life.
13 It shall go well to the end for he who reveres
HWHY,
And he shall find favour in the day of his death.
14 To revere HWHY is the beginning of wisdom:
And it was created with the trustworthy in the womb.
15 She has built an everlasting foundation with men,
And she shall continue with their seed.
1109

ECCLESIASTICUS

To revere HWHY is fullness of wisdom,
And fills men with her fruits.
17 She fills all their house with that which is
desirable,
And the gatherers with her increase.
18 The reverence of HWHY is a crown of wisdom,
Making peace and perfect health to flourish;
Both of which are gifts of Elohim;
And it increases the rejoicing of those that love Him.
19 Wisdom rains down skill and knowledge of
understanding,
And exalts to esteem those who hold her fast.
20 The root of wisdom is to revere HWHY,
And the branches thereof are long life.
21 The reverence of HWHY drives away sins,
And where it is present, it turns away wrath.
22 A wrathful man cannot be declared right;
For the sway of his wrath shall be his destruction.
23 A patient man shall weep for a time,
And afterward joy shall spring up in him.
24 He shall hold his words for a time,
And the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.
25 The parables of knowledge are in the treasures of
wisdom:
But reverence is an abomination to a sinner.
26 If you desire wisdom, guard the Commands,
And HWHY shall give her to you.
27 For the reverence of HWHY is wisdom and
instruction;
And belief and meekness are his delight.
28 Do not doubt the reverence of HWHY when you are
poor:
And do not come to him with a double mind.
29 Do not be a hypocrite in the sight of men,
And take heed what you speak.
30 Do not exalt yourself, lest you fall, and bring
shame upon yourself,
16

1110

SIRACH

And so Elohim uncover your secrets, and throw you
down in the midst of the assembly,
Because you did not come in truth to the reverence of
HWHY,
But your heart is full of deceit.

2 My son, if you come to serve HWHY,
Prepare your being for trial.
2 Prepare your heart, and constantly endure,
And do not hasten in time of trouble.
3 Cling to Him, and do not depart,
That you may be increased at your latter end.
4 Whatsoever is brought upon you, accept
cheerfully,
And be patient when you are brought low.
5 For gold is tried in the fire,
And acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.
6 Believe in Him, and He shall help you;
Establish your way, and trust in Him.
7 You who revere HWHY, wait for His kindness;
And do not turn aside, lest you fall.
8 You who revere HWHY, believe Him;
And your reward shall not fail.
9 You who revere HWHY, have expectancy for good,
And for everlasting joy and kindness.
10 Look at the generations of old and see;
Did any ever trust in HWHY, and were put to shame?
Or did any remain in His reverence, and were
forsaken?
Or whom did He ever despise, that called upon Him?
11 For HWHY is full of compassion and kindness,
Patient, and very tender-hearted, and forgives sins,
And saves in time of affliction.
12 Woe unto fearful hearts, and faint hands,
And the sinner that goes two ways!
1111

ECCLESIASTICUS

Woe unto he who is fainthearted!
For he is unbelieving;
Therefore he shall not be defended.
14 Woe unto you that have lost patience!
And what shall you do when HWHY shall punish you?
15 Those who HWHY shall not disobey His Word;
And those who love Him guard His Ways.
16 Those who revere HWHY seek that which is wellpleasing to Him;
And those who love Him shall be filled with the Torah.
17 Those who revere prepare HWHY their hearts,
And humble their beings in His sight,
18 Saying, “We shall fall into the hands of HWHY, and
not into the hands of men;
For as His excellence is, so is His kindness.”
13

3 Hear me your father, O children, and do
accordingly, that you may be safe.
2 For HWHY has given the father esteem over the
children,
And has confirmed the authority of the mother over
the sons.
3 Whoever esteems his father makes an atonement
for his sins;
4 And he who esteems his mother is as one who
stores up treasure.
5 Whoever esteems his father shall have joy from
his own children;
And when he makes his prayer, he shall be heard.
6 He who esteems his father shall have a long life;
And he who is obedient to HWHY shall be a comfort to
his mother.
7 He who reveres HWHY shall esteem his father,
And shall do service unto his parents, as to his
masters.
1112

SIRACH

Esteem your father and mother both in word and
deed,
That a beraḵah may come upon you from them.
9 For the beraḵah of the father establishes the
houses of children;
But the curse of the mother roots out foundations.
10 Do not rejoice in the shame of your father;
For your father’s shame is no esteem unto you.
11 For the esteem of a man is from the esteem of his
father;
And a mother in shame is a reproach to the children.
12 My son, help your father in his age,
And do not grieve him as long as he lives.
13 And if his understanding fails, have patience with
him;
And do not despise him when you are in your full
strength.
14 For the relief for your father shall not be forgotten;
And instead of sin, it shall be added to build you up.
15 In the day of your affliction it shall be
remembered;
Your sins also shall melt away, as the ice in the fair
warm weather.
16 He who forsakes his father is as a blasphemer;
And he who displeases his mother is cursed of
Elohim.
17 My son, go on with your business in meekness;
So you shall be beloved of He who approves.
18 The greater you are, the more you humble
yourself,
And you shall find favour before HWHY.
19 Many are in high places, and of name;
But mysteries are revealed to the meek.
20 For the power of HWHY is great,
And He is esteemed by the lowly.
21 Do not search out that which is too hard for you,
Neither seek that which is above your strength.
8

1113

ECCLESIASTICUS

But what is Commanded, think upon this with
reverence,
For it is not necessary for you to see with your eyes
that which is secret.
23 Do not be curious in unnecessary matters:
For more is revealed to you than men understand.
24 For many are deceived by their own worthless
opinion;
And evil suspicion has overthrown their judgment.
25 Without eyes there is no light;
Do not profess the knowledge which you do not have.
26 A stubborn heart shall suffer evil in the end;
And he who loves danger shall perish in it.
27 A hard heart shall be loaded with sorrows;
And the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin.
28 In the punishment of the proud there is no
remedy;
For the plant of wickedness has taken root in him.
29 The heart of the clever shall understand a parable;
And an attentive ear is the desire of a wise man.
30 Water shall quench a flaming fire;
And kind deeds make an atonement for sins.
31 And he who repays good deeds remembers that
which may come after;
And when he falls, he shall find a support.
22

4 My son, do not rob the poor of his living,
And do not allow the needy eyes to wait long.
2 Do not make a hungry being sorrowful;
Neither provoke a man in his distress.
3 Do not add more trouble to a heart that is tortured;
And do not delay to give to he who is in need.
4 Do not reject the supplication of the afflicted;
Neither turn away your face from a poor man.
5 Do not turn away your eye from the needy,
And give him no occasion to curse you;
1114

SIRACH

For if he curses you in the bitterness of his being,
His prayer shall be heard by He who made him.
7 Earn for yourself the love of the assembly,
And bow your head to a great man.
8 Let it not grieve you to bend your ear to the poor,
And give him a friendly answer with meekness.
9 Deliver he who suffers wrong from the hand of the
oppressor;
And do not be faint-hearted when you sit in judgment.
10 Be as a father to the fatherless,
And like a husband to their mother;
So you shall be as the Ben of the Most High,
And He shall love you more than your mother does.
11 Wisdom exalts her children,
And lays hold of those who seek her.
12 He who loves her loves ḥai;
And those who seek her early shall be filled with joy.
13 He who holds her fast shall inherit esteem;
And wherever she enters, HWHY shall baraḵ.
14 Those who serve her serve the Qadosh One:
And those who love her HWHY loves.
15 Whoever gives ear to her shall judge the nations:
And he who attends to her shall dwell securely.
16 If a man commits himself to her, he shall inherit
her;
And his generation shall hold her in possession.
17 For at first she shall walk by him in crooked ways,
And bring fear and dread upon him,
And punish him with her discipline,
Until she may trust his being, and try him by her laws.
18 Then she shall return him to the straight way,
And comfort him, and show him her secrets.
19 But if he goes wrong, she shall forsake him,
And give him over to his own ruin.
20 Watch for opportunity, and beware of evil;
And do not be ashamed when it concerns your being.
6

1115

ECCLESIASTICUS

For there is shame that brings sin;
And there is shame which is esteem and favour.
22 Do not show partiality against your being,
And do not let the fear of any man cause you to fall.
23 And do not refrain to speak, when there is
occasion to do good,
And do not hide your wisdom in her loveliness.
24 For by speech wisdom shall be known;
And learning by the word of the tongue.
25 By no means speak against the truth;
But be ashamed of the straying of your ignorance.
26 Do not be ashamed to confess your sins;
And do not force the course of the river.
27 Do not make yourself a servant to a foolish man;
Neither show partiality to the mighty.
28 Strive for the truth unto death,
And HWHY shall fight for you.
29 Do not be hasty with your tongue,
Or slack and negligent in your deeds.
30 Do not be as a lion in your house,
Nor wroth among your servants.
31 Do not let your hand be stretched out to receive,
And closed when you should repay.
21

5 Do not lay your heart upon your goods;
And do not say, “I have enough for my life.”
2 Do not follow your own mind and strength,
To walk in the ways of your heart:
3 And do not say, “Who shall control me in my
deeds?”
For HWHY shall surely punish your pride.
4 Do not say, “I have sinned, and what harm has
befallen me?
For HWHY is patient, He shall by no means let you go.
5 Concerning atonement,
Do not be without reverence to add sin unto sin;
1116

SIRACH

And do not say, “His kindness is great;
He shall be appeased for the multitude of my sins.”
For kindness and wrath come from Him,
And His wrath rests upon sinners.
7 Do not delay to turn to HWHY, and do not put off
from day to day;
For suddenly the wrath of HWHY shall come forth,
And in your security you shall be destroyed,
And perish in the day of vengeance.
8 Do not lay your heart upon goods acquired
unrighteously,
For they shall not profit you in the day of calamity.
9 Do not winnow with every wind, and do not go into
every way:
For so does the sinner that has a double tongue.
10 Be steadfast in your understanding;
And let your word be the same.
11 Be swift to hear; and let your being be sincere;
And give answer with patience.
12 If you have understanding, answer your
neighbour;
If not, put your hand over your mouth.
13 Esteem and shame is in speech;
And the tongue of man is his downfall.
14 Do not be a whisperer, and do not lie in wait with
your tongue;
For foul shame is upon the thief, and an evil
condemnation upon the double- tongued.
15 Do not be ignorant of any matter, great or a small.
6

6 Do not become an enemy instead of a friend;
For you shall inherit an evil name, shame, and
reproach;
Even as a sinner that has a double tongue.
2 Do not exalt yourself in the counsel of your own
heart;
That your being be not torn in pieces as a bull.
1117

ECCLESIASTICUS

You shall consume your leaves, and lose your
fruit,
And leave yourself as a dry tree.
4 A wicked being shall destroy he who possesses,
And shall cause him to be laughed to scorn by his
enemies.
5 Sweet words shall multiply friends,
And a favourable tongue shall increase kind
greetings.
6 Be at peace with many;
But have just one counsellor in a thousand.
7 If you would get a friend, prove him first and do
not be hasty to trust him.
8 For a certain man is a friend for his own occasion,
And shall not remain in the day of your trouble.
9 And there is a friend, who being turned to enmity,
shall cause strife and uncover your reproach.
10 Again, there is a friend, a companion at the table,
But shall not continue in the day of your affliction.
11 When you are prosperous he shall be as you are,
And shall be bold over your servants.
12 If you are brought low, he shall be against you,
And shall hide himself from your face.
13 Separate yourself from your enemies,
And be on guard with your friends.
14 A trustworthy friend is a strong defence;
And he who has found such a one has found a
treasure.
15 There is none that makes up for a trustworthy
friend,
And his worth is invaluable.
16 A trustworthy friend is the healing of life;
And those who revere HWHY shall find Him.
17 Whoever reveres HWHY directs his friendship well;
For as he is, so shall his neighbour be also.
3

1118

SIRACH

My son, gather instruction from your youth
onward;
So you shall gain wisdom till your old age.
19 Come to her as one that plows and sows, and wait
for her good fruit;
For you shall not toil much in labouring over her,
But you shall eat of her fruit soon enough.
20 She is very unpleasant to the unlearned;
He who is without understanding shall not remain
with her.
21 She shall lay upon him as a mighty stone of trial;
And he shall throw her from him before long.
22 For wisdom is according to her name,
And she is not revealed to many.
23 Listen my son, receive my advice,
And do not refuse my counsel,
24 And put your feet into her shackles,
And your neck into her chain.
25 Bow down your shoulder, and bear her,
And do not be grieved with her bonds.
26 Come to her with your whole heart,
And guard her ways with all your strength.
27 Search and seek, and she shall be made known
unto you;
And when you have taken hold of her, do not let her
go.
28 For in the end you shall find her rest,
And that shall turn out for your joy.
29 Then her shackles shall be a strong defence for
you,
And her chains a robe of esteem.
30 For there is a golden ornament upon her,
And her bands are purple lace.
31 You shall put her on as a robe of esteem,
And shall lay her upon you as a crown of joy.
32 My son, if you allow, you shall be taught;
And if you apply your mind, you shall be clever.
18

1119

ECCLESIASTICUS

If you love to listen, you shall receive
understanding;
And if you bow your ear, you shall be wise,
34 Stand in the group of the elders;
And cling to he who is wise.
35 Be willing to hear every worthy discourse;
And do not let the parables of understanding escape
you.
36 And if you see a man of understanding,
Get yourself to him early,
And let your feet wear out his doorstep.
37 Let your mind be upon the Laws of HWHY,
And consider His Commands continually;
He shall establish your heart, and give you the
wisdom you desire.
33

7 Do no evil, so no harm shall come to you.
Depart from the unrighteous, and evil shall turn
away from you.
3 My son, do not sow upon the furrows of
unrighteousness,
And you shall not reap them sevenfold.
4 Do not seek superiority from HWHY, Neither of the
royal seat of esteem.
5 Do not declare yourself right before HWHY;
And do not boast of your wisdom before the
sovereign.
6 Do not seek to be judge, being unable to remove
evil;
Lest at any time you be partial to the mighty,
A stumbling block in the way of your uprightness.
7 Do not cause the crowd of a city to stumble,
And then you shall not be brought low among the
people.
8 Do not bind one sin upon another;
For not one shall go unpunished.
2

1120

SIRACH

Do not say, “Elohim shall look upon the multitude
of my offerings,
And when I offer to the Most High Elohim,
He shall accept it.”
10 Do not be faint-hearted when you make your
prayer,
And do not neglect to give in kindness.
11 Mock no man in the bitterness of his being;
For there is One who humbles and exalts.
12 Do not plan a lie against your brother;
Neither do likewise to your friend.
13 Refuse to make any manner of lie;
For the way of this is not good.
14 Do not use many words among a multitude of
elders,
And do not make much babbling when you pray.
15 Do not hate laborious work, neither work of the
land,
Which the Most High has ordained.
16 Do not number yourself among the crowd of
sinners,
But remember that wrath shall not delay.
17 Humble yourself greatly;
For the punishment of the wicked is fire and worms.
18 Do not exchange a friend for goods by any
means;
Neither a trustworthy brother for the gold of Ophir.
19 Do not forsake a wise and good woman;
For her favour is above gold.
20 When your servant works trustworthily, do not
mistreat him.
Nor the hired man that gives himself completely for
you.
21 Let your being love a good servant, and do not
withhold his freedom.
22 Do you have cattle? Keep an eye on them;
And if they are for your profit, keep them with you.
9

1121

ECCLESIASTICUS

Do you have children? Instruct them,
And bow their neck from their youth.
24 Do you have daughters?
Look after their body,
And do not be too generous toward them.
25 Give your daughter in marriage, and you shall
have performed a weighty matter;
But give her to a man of understanding.
26 Do you have a wife in mind?
Do not forsake her;
And do not give yourself over to an easy woman.
27 Esteem your father with your whole heart,
And do not forget the sorrows of your mother.
28 Remember that you were brought forth by them;
And how would you repay them what they have done
for you?
29 Revere HWHY with all your being, and revere His
kohenim.
30 Love He who made you with all your strength,
And do not forsake his servants.
31 Revere HWHY, and honour the kohĕn;
And give him his portion, as it is Commanded you;
The first-fruits, and the guilt offering, and the wave
offering,
And the qodesh offering, and the first-fruits of
qodeshah.
32 And stretch out your hand to the poor,
That your beraḵah may be perfected.
33 A gift has favour in the sight of every living man;
And do not hold back for the dead.
34 Do not fail to accompany those who weep,
And mourn with those who mourn.
35 Do not be slow to visit the sick;
For that shall cause you to be loved.
36 Whatever you take in hand, remember the end,
And you shall never do wrong.
23

1122

SIRACH

8 Do not strive with a mighty man lest you fall into
his hands.
2 Do not quarrel with a wealthy man, lest he
outweigh you;
For gold has destroyed many, and twisted the hearts
of sovereigns.
3 Do not strive with a man that is a babbler,
And do not heap wood upon his fire.
4 Do not jest with a rude man,
Lest your ancestors be shamed.
5 Do not reproach a man that turns from sin,
But remember that we are all worthy of punishment.
6 Do not shame a man in his old age;
For even some of us grow old.
7 Do not rejoice over the death of your greatest
enemy,
But remember that we all die.
8 Do not despise the discourse of the wise,
But acquaint yourself with their proverbs;
For from them you shall learn instruction,
And how to serve great men with ease.
9 Do not avoid the discourse of the elders;
For they also learned from their fathers,
And from them you shall learn understanding,
And to give answer as needed.
10 Do not kindle the coals of a sinner,
Lest you be burned with the flame of his fire.
11 Do not rise up at the presence of an insuiter,
Lest he lie in wait to entrap you in your words.
12 Do not lend to he who is mightier than
yourself;
For if you lend to him, count it but lost.
13 Do not be guarantor above your ability;
For if you be guarantor, take care to pay it.
1123

ECCLESIASTICUS

Do not go to law against a judge;
For they shall judge for him according to his
esteem.
15 Do not travel on the way with one who is
headstrong,
Lest he become burdensome to you;
For he shall do according to his own desire,
And you shall perish with him through his folly.
16 Do not strive with a man of wrath,
And do not go with him to a lonely place;
For bloodshed is naught in his sight,
And where there is no help, he shall overthrow you.
17 Do not counsel a fool;
For he does not heed advice.
18 Do not speak secrets before a stranger;
For you do not know what he shall reveal.
19 Do not open your heart to every man,
Lest he repay you craftily.
14

9 Do not be jealous over the wife of your bosom,
And do not teach her an evil lesson against yourself.
2 Do not give yourself to a woman to trample your
strength.
3 Do not go into a whore, lest you fall into her
snares.
4 Do not keep company with a flirtatious woman,
Lest you be taken by her attempts.
5 Do not stare upon a maiden,
So you do not fall by that which is precious in her.
6 Do not give yourself to whores,
So that you do not lose your inheritance.
7 Do not look about in the streets of the city,
Neither wander in its lonely places.
8 Turn your eye away from a good- looking woman,
And do not look upon another’s loveliness;
For many have been deceived by the loveliness of a
1124

SIRACH

woman;
For desire is kindled by it like a fire.
9 Do not sit at all with another man’s wife,
Nor sit down with her in your arms,
And do not spend your silver with her on wine;
Lest your heart incline toward her,
And so, through your desire fall into destruction.
10 Do not forsake an old friend;
For the new is not comparable to him.
A new friend is like new wine;
When it is old, you shall drink it with pleasure.
11 Do not envy the esteem of a sinner;
For you do not know what his end shall be.
12 Do not delight in that which the wicked have
pleasure in;
But remember they shall not go unpunished to their
grave.
13 Keep far from the man who has power to kill;
So the fear of death shall not concern you.
And if you encounter him, make no mistake,
Lest he take away your life immediately. Remember
that you walk in the midst of snares,
And that you walk upon the walls of the city.
14 When you draw near, reason with your neighbour,
And consult with the wise.
15 Let your words be with the wise,
And all your talk in the Law of the Most High.
16 And let righteous men eat and drink with you;
And let your esteem be in the reverence of HWHY.
17 For the hand of the craftsman the work shall be
praised,
And the wise ruler of the people for his words.
18 A man of an evil tongue is dangerous in his city;
And he who is hasty with his words shall be hated.

10 A wise judge shall instruct his people;
And the reign of a clever man is well ordered.
1125

ECCLESIASTICUS

As the judge of the people is himself, so are his
officers;
And what manner of man the ruler of the city is,
Such are all those who dwell in it.
3 An unwise sovereign destroys his people;
But through the insight of those who are in authority
the city shall be inhabited.
4 The power of the earth is in the hand HWHY,
And in due time He shall appoint it to One who is
worthy.
5 The prosperity of man is in the hand of Elohim;
And He shall lay His esteem upon the face of the
scribe.
6 Do not bear hatred against your neighbour for
every wrong;
And do not act as an insulter at all.
7 Pride is hateful before Elohim and man;
And against both, one commits wickedness.
8 Because of unrighteous dealings, maltreatment,
and wealth gained by deceit,
The rule is transferred from one people to another.
9 How could earth and ashes be proud?
There is none more wicked than a covetous man;
For such a one puts his own being up for sale;
For while he lives he destroys his inner being.
10 The physician ends a long disease;
And he who is a sovereign today shall die tomorrow.
11 For when a man is dead,
He shall inherit insects, creatures and worms.
12 The beginning of pride is when one departs from
Elohim,
And his heart is turned away from his Maker.
13 For pride is the beginning of sin,
And he who has it shall pour out abominations:
And therefore HWHY brings upon them unknown
calamity,
And overthrows them completely.
2

1126

SIRACH

HWHY has thrown down the thrones of proud
princes,
And appointed the meek in their place.
15 HWHY has plucked up the roots of the proud
nations,
And planted the lowly in their place.
16 HWHY overthrew the lands of the gentiles,
And destroyed them to the foundations of the earth.
17 He took some of them away, and destroyed them,
And has caused their remembrance to cease from
the earth.
18 Pride was not made for man,
Nor violent wrath for those who are born of a woman.
19 Those who revere HWHY are a continual seed,
And those who love Him an esteemed plant.
Those who disregard the Law are a shameful seed;
Those who transgress the Commands are a
deceptive seed.
20 Among brothers he who is chief is esteemed;
So are those who revere HWHY in His eyes.
21 The reverence of HWHY goes before the obtaining
of authority;
But stubbornness and pride is the loss of it.
22 Whether he is wealthy, noble or poor,
Their esteem is the reverence of HWHY.
23 It is not right to despise the poor who has
understanding;
Neither is it proper to exalt a sinner.
24 Great men and judges and rulers shall be
esteemed;
Yet there is none greater than he who reveres HWHY.
25 Those who are free shall do service to the servant
that is wise;
And he who has knowledge shall not grumble when
he is instructed.
26 Do not be overwise in doing your business;
And do not boast in the time of your distress.
14

1127

ECCLESIASTICUS

Better is he who labours and overflows in all,
Than he who boasts and lacks bread.
28 My son, esteem your being in meekness,
And give it respect according to its quality.
29 Who shall declare right he who sins against his
own being?
And who shall esteem he who shames his own life?
30 The poor man is esteemed for his skill,
And the wealthy man is esteemed for his wealth.
31 He who is esteemed in poverty, how much more
in wealth?
And he who is ashamed in wealth, how much more in
poverty?
27

11 Wisdom lifts up the head of he who is of low
degree,
And makes him to sit among great men.
2 Do not commend a man for his good looks;
Neither despise a man for his outward appearance.
3 The bee is little among those that fly;
But her fruit is the first of that which is sweet.
4 Do not boast of your garments and clothes,
And do not exalt yourself in the day of esteem;
For the works of HWHY are wondrous,
And His works among men are hidden.
5 Many sovereigns have sat down on the
ground;
And one that was never considered has worn the
crown.
6 Many mighty men have been greatly shamed;
And those esteemed delivered into other men’s
hands.
7 Do not accuse before you have examined the
truth;
Understand first, and then reprove.
8 Do not answer before you have heard the case;
Neither interrupt men in the middle of speaking.
1128

SIRACH

Do not strive in a matter that does not
concern you;
And do not sit in judgment with sinners.
10 My son, do not engage in many matters;
For if you strive greatly, you shall not be innocent;
And if you pursue, you shall not obtain,
Neither shall you escape by fleeing.
11 There is one who labours, and struggles, and
hurries,
And is so much more behind.
12 Again, there is another that is slow, and needs
help,
Lacking skill, and full of poverty;
Yet the eye of HWHY looks upon him for good,
And raises him up from his humiliation,
13 And lifts his head from misery;
So that many see His peace over all this.
14 Prosperity and adversity, life and death,
Poverty and wealth, come from HWHY.
15 Wisdom, knowledge and understanding of the
Law, are of HWHY;
Love, and the way of good works, are from Him.
16 Sin and darkness had their beginning together
with sinners;
And evil shall grow old with those who boast in them.
17 The gift of HWHY remains with the righteous,
And His favour brings peace forever.
18 There is he who grows wealthy by his cunning and
frugality,
And this is the portion of his reward:
19 For he says, “I have found rest, and now shall eat
continually of my goods.”
And yet he does not know what event shall come
upon him,
And that he must leave those to others, and die.
9

1129

ECCLESIASTICUS

Be steadfast in your agreement, and be
acquainted with it,
And grow old in your work.
21 Do not marvel at the works of sinners;
But trust in HWHY, and continue in your labour;
For it is light in the eyes of HWHY to suddenly make a
poor man wealthy.
22 The beraḵah of HWHY is in the reward of the
reverent,
And suddenly He makes his beraḵah flourish.
23 Do not say, “What profit is there of my service?
And what good shall I have afterward?”
24 Again, do not say, “I have enough, and possess
much,
And what evil shall come to me afterward?”
25 In the day of good there is a forgetfulness of
affliction;
And in the day of affliction there is no
remembrance of good.
26 For it is light for HWHY to reward a man according
to his ways on the day of death.
27 The affliction of an hour makes a man forget
pleasure;
And in the end his deeds shall be exposed.
28 Judge none baruḵ before his death;
For a man shall be known in his children.
29 Do not bring every man into your house;
For the deceitful man has many schemes.
30 As a partridge taken in a cage,
So is the heart of the proud;
And as a spy, he watches for your fall;
31 For he lies in wait, and turns good into evil,
And in that which is worthy of praise shall accuse
you.
32 From a spark of fire a heap of coals is kindled:
And a sinful man lays in wait for blood.
20

1130

SIRACH

Take heed of an evil-doer, for he works
wickedness;
Lest he bring upon you an everlasting stain.
34 Receive a stranger into your house, and he shall
disturb you,
And turn you out of your own.
33

12 When you do good, know to whom you do it;
So you shall be thanked for your good works.
2 Do good to the upright, and you shall find a
recompense;
And if not from him, even from the Most High.
3 No good shall come to he who is always occupied
with evil,
Nor to he who does no kind deed.
4 Give to the upright man, and do not help a sinner.
5 Do good to he who is lowly, but do not give to the
wicked;
Withhold your bread, and do not give it to him,
Lest he overthrow you by it;
For you shall receive twice as much evil for all the
good you have done to him.
6 For the Most High hates sinners, and shall repay
the wicked with retribution,
And keeps them for the great day of their
punishment.
7 Give to the good, and do not help the sinner.
8 A friend cannot be known in good times;
And an enemy cannot be hidden in adversity.
9 In the prosperity of a man enemies shall be
grieved:
But in his adversity even a friend shall turn away.
10 Never trust your enemy;
For as iron rusts, so is his wickedness.
11 Though he humbles himself, and comes bowed
down,
Yet be on your guard and beware of him,
1131

ECCLESIASTICUS

And be to him as if you had wiped a mirror,
And you shall know that its tarnish has not been
wiped away altogether.
12 Do not put him near you,
Lest when he has overthrown you, he stands in your
place;
Neither let him sit at your right hand,
Lest he seek to take your seat, and you remember
my words in the end,
And be pierced by them.
13 Who shall pity a charmer that is bitten by a
serpent,
Or any who come near wild beasts?
14 So one that goes to a sinner, and is defiled by him
in his sins,
Who shall pity?
15 For a while he shall remain with you,
But if you begin to fall, he shall not wait.
16 An enemy speaks sweetly with his lips,
But in his heart he imagines how to throw you into a
pit;
He weeps with his eyes, but if he finds opportunity,
He shall not be satisfied with blood.
17 If adversity comes upon you, you shall find him
there first;
And though he pretends to help you, even so he shall
wrong you.
18 He shall shake his head, and clap his hands,
And whisper much, and change his face.

13 He who handles tar is made unclean by it;
And he who has fellowship with a proud man shall be
like him.
2 Do not burden yourself above your strength while
you live;
And have no fellowship with one who is mightier and
wealthier than yourself;
1132

SIRACH

For how is the kettle and the earthen pot in
agreement?
For if the one be struck against the other, it shall be
broken.
3 The wealthy man has done wrong, and yet he
threatens all;
The poor is wronged, and he must also plead.
4 If you profit him, he shall use you;
But if you have naught, he shall forsake you.
5 If you possess whatever, he shall live with you;
He shall also leave you naked, and shall not be sorry
for it.
6 If he has need of you, he shall deceive you,
And smile at you, and have you in expectancy;
He shall speak smooth words to you, and say,
“What do you need?”
7 And he shall shame you with his delicacies,
Until he has drained you dry two or three times,
And in the end he shall mock you afterward.
When he sees you, he shall forsake you, and shake
his head at you.
8 Beware that you are not deceived and brought
down in your rejoicing.
9 If you are invited by a mighty man, withdraw
yourself,
And he shall invite you so much more.
10 Do not push yourself on him, lest you be turned
away;
Do not stand far off, lest you be forgotten.
11 Do not be eager to be equal to him in speech,
And do not believe his many words;
For with much talk he shall persuade you,
And smiling at you shall draw out your secrets;
12 But cruelly he shall lay up your words, and not
spare to do you harm,
And deliver you up.
1133

ECCLESIASTICUS

Observe, and be on your guard,
For you walk in danger of being overthrown;
When you hear these, awake from your sleep.
14 Love HWHY all your life,
And call upon Him for your deliverance.
15 Every beast loves its kind,
And every man loves his neighbour.
16 All flesh associates according to kind,
And a man shall cling to those like himself.
17 What fellowship has the wolf with the lamb?
So the sinner with the righteous.
18 What agreement is there between the hyena and
a dog?
And what peace between the wealthy and the poor?
19 As the wild donkey is the lion’s prey in the
wilderness;
So the wealthy eat up the poor.
20 As the proud hate humility;
So does the wealthy abhor the poor.
21 A wealthy man beginning to fall is supported by
his friends;
But a poor man fallen is pushed away by his friends.
22 When a wealthy man is fallen, he has many
helpers;
He speaks words not to be spoken, and yet men
declare him right:
The poor man slips, and yet they also rebuke him;
He speaks wisely, but is not heeded.
23 When a wealthy man speaks, every man holds his
tongue,
And look, what he says, they exalt it to the clouds;
But if the poor man speaks, they say, “What fellow is
this?”
And if he stumbles, they shall help to overthrow him.
24 Wealth is good to he who has no sin,
And poverty is evil in the mouth of the wicked.
13

1134

SIRACH

The heart of a man changes his face, whether it
be for good or evil;
And a glad heart makes a good face.
26 A good face is a sign of a heart that is good;
And the searching out of parables is a wearisome
labour of the mind.
25

14 Baruḵ is the man that has not slipped with his
mouth,
And is not pierced with the great number of sins.
2 Baruḵ is he whose conscience has not
condemned him,
And who has not fallen from his expectancy in HWHY.
3 Wealth is not fitting for a miser;
And what should an envious man do with silver?
4 He who gathers by depriving his own being,
Gathers for others that shall spend his goods loosely.
5 He who is evil to himself, to whom shall he be
good?
He shall not take pleasure in his goods.
6 There is none worse than he who envies himself;
And this is to repay for his wickedness.
7 And if he does good, he does it unwillingly;
And in the end he shall declare his wickedness.
8 The greedy man has an evil eye;
He turns away his face, and despises men.
9 A covetous man’s eye is not satisfied with his
portion;
And the wickedness of the wicked dries up his being.
10 A wicked eye is greedy for bread,
And he is a miser at his table.
11 My son, according to your ability do good to
yourself,
And give HWHY His due offering.
12 Remember that death shall not be long in coming,
And that the promise of the grave is not revealed to
you.
1135

ECCLESIASTICUS

Do good to your friend before you die,
And according to your ability stretch out your hand
and give to him.
14 Do not deprive yourself of a good day,
And do not let the share of a good desire overlook
you.
15 Shall you not leave your hardships to another?
And your labours to be divided by lot?
16 Give and take, and qadosh your being;
For there is no seeking delicacies in the grave.
17 All flesh grows old as a garment;
For the promise from the beginning is: You shall die
in death.
18 As the green leaves on a thick tree, some fall, and
some grow;
So is the generation of flesh and blood:
One comes to an end, and another is born.
19 Every work rots and eats away,
And the worker of it shall go likewise.
20 Baruḵ is the man who meditates on goodness in
wisdom,
And thinks upon qodesh matters with his
understanding.
21 He who considers her ways in his heart,
Shall also have understanding of her secrets.
22 Go after her as one that follows, and lie in wait on
her ways.
23 He who peers in her windows shall also listen at
her doors.
24 He who lodges near her house shall also fasten a
peg on her walls.
25 He shall pitch his tent near to her,
And shall lodge in a lodging where goodness is.
26 He shall put his children under her shelter,
And shall lodge under her branches.
27 By her he shall be covered from heat,
And in her esteem he shall dwell.
13

1136

SIRACH

15 He who reveres HWHY shall do good,
And he who has the knowledge of the Law shall
obtain her.
2 And as a mother she shall meet him,
And receive him as a wife married in maidenhood.
3 With the bread of understanding she shall feed
him,
And give him the water of wisdom to drink.
4 He shall be visited by her, and shall not be moved;
And shall rely on her, and shall not be ashamed.
5 She shall exalt him above his neighbours,
And she shall open his mouth in the midst of the
assembly.
6 He shall find joy and a crown of gladness,
And she shall cause him to inherit an everlasting
name.
7 But foolish men shall not obtain her,
And sinners shall not see her.
8 For she is far from pride,
And men that are liars cannot remember her.
9 Praise is not fitting for the mouth of a sinner,
For it was not sent to him by HWHY.
10 For praise shall be uttered in wisdom,
And HWHY shall make it prosper.
11 Do not say, “It is because of HWHY that I fell away.”
For you ought not to do that which He hates.
12 Do not say, “He has caused me to stray.”
For He has no need of the sinful man.
13 HWHY hates all abomination;
And those who revere Elohim do not love it.
14 He Himself made man from the beginning,
And left him in the hand of his own counsel;
15 So you shall guard the Commands,
And act trustworthily.
16 He has put fire and water before you;
Stretch out your hand to which you choose.
1137

ECCLESIASTICUS

Ḥai and death is before man;
And what he chooses shall be given him.
18 For the wisdom of HWHY is great,
And He is mighty in power, and sees all.
19 And His eyes are upon those who revere Him,
And He knows every work of man.
20 He has commanded no man to do wickedly,
Neither has He given any man permission to sin.
17

16 Do not desire a great number of worthless
children,
Neither delight in wicked sons.
2 Though they increase, do not rejoice in them,
Unless the reverence of HWHY is with them.
3 Do not trust in them living, neither regard their
great number;
For one that is righteous is better than a thousand;
And it is better to die without children, than to have
those who are wicked.
4 For by one that has understanding the city shall
be filled;
But the offspring of the wicked shall be quickly laid
waste.
5 Many such matters I have seen with my eyes,
And my ear has heard greater than these.
6 In the assembly of the wicked a fire shall be
kindled;
And in a rebellious nation wrath is lit on fire.
7 He was not appeased toward the giants of old,
Who fell in the strength of their foolishness.
8 Neither did He spare the place where Lot
sojourned,
But loathed them for their pride.
9 He had no compassion for the people of
destruction,
Who were taken away in their sins;
1138

SIRACH

Nor the six hundred thousand foot soldiers,
Who were gathered together in the hardness of their
hearts.
11 And if there is one stiff-necked among the people,
It is marvel if he escapes unpunished; For kindness
and wrath are with Him.
He is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure.
12 As His kindness is great, so is His discipline also.
He judges a man according to his works.
13 The sinner shall not escape with his plunder;
And the patience of the righteous shall not be
defeated.
14 Make room for every act of kindness;
For everyone shall receive according to his works.
15 HWHY hardened Pharaoh, that he should not know
Him,
That His mighty works might be known to the world.
16 His kindness is revealed to every creature;
And He has separated His light from the darkness
and is unbreakable.
17 Do not say, “I shall hide myself from HWHY.
“Shall any remember me from above?
“I shall not be remembered among so many people;
“For what is my being among such a limitless
number of creatures?”
18 See, the shamayim, and the shamayim of
shamayim,
The deep, and the earth, and all that is in it,
Shall be moved at His visitation.
19 The mountains and foundations of the earth shall
also be shaken with trembling,
When HWHY looks upon them.
20 No heart may think upon these worthily;
And who is able to perceive His ways?
21 It is a whirlwind that no man sees;
For most of his works are hidden.
10

1139

ECCLESIASTICUS

Who shall declare the works of His
righteousness?
Or who shall endure them?
For His decree is far off,
And the trial of all is at the end.
23 He who lacks understanding shall think upon
emptiness;
And a foolish man straying plots foolishness.
24 My son, listen to me and learn knowledge,
And know my words in your heart.
25 I shall present instruction by measure,
And declare His knowledge exactly.
26 The works of HWHY are done in right-ruling from
the beginning;
And from the time He made them He laid out their
parts.
27 He decorated His works forever,
And in His hand are the beginning of them to all
generations;
They neither labour, nor are weary, nor cease from
their works.
28 None of them withholds another,
And they never disobey His word.
29 After this HWHY looked upon the earth,
And filled it with His bireḵoth.
30 Has He covered the face of it with all manner of
living creatures;
And they shall return to it again.
22

17 HWHY created man from the earth,
And returns him to it again.
2 He gave them few days, and a short time,
And also authority over that within it.
3 He gave them strength within themselves,
And made them according to His image,
4 And put the fear of man upon all flesh,
And gave him rule over beasts and birds.
1140

SIRACH

They received the use of the five senses of HWHY,
And in the sixth place He gave them understanding,
And in the seventh speech, an interpreter of the
thoughts.
6 Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a
heart,
He gave them to understand.
7 He filled them with the knowledge of
understanding,
And showed them good and evil.
8 He put His eye on their hearts,
That He might show them the greatness of His works.
9 He appointed them to boast in His marvellous
deeds forever,
That they might declare His works with
understanding.
10 And the elect shall praise His qodesh Name.
11 Besides this He gave them knowledge,
And the Law of Ḥai for an inheritance.
12 He made an everlasting Covenant with
them,
And gave them His Right-Rulings.
13 Their eyes saw the excellence of His esteem,
And their ears heard His esteemed voice.
14 And He said to them, “Beware of all
unrighteousness.”
And He gave every man Command concerning his
neighbour.
15 Their ways are ever before Him,
And shall not be hid from His eyes.
16 Every man from his youth is given to evil;
Neither could they make hearts of flesh for
themselves from stony.
17 For in the division of the nations of the whole earth
He appointed a ruler over every people;
But Yisra’ĕl is the portion of HWHY;
5

1141

ECCLESIASTICUS

Whom being His first-born, He nourishes with
discipline,
And giving him the light of His love, does not forsake
him.
19 Therefore all their works are as the sun before
Him,
And His eyes are continually upon their ways.
20 None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from Him,
But all their sins are before HWHY.
21 But HWHY showing favour and knowing His
workmanship,
Neither left nor forsook them, but spared them.
22 The kind deeds of a man are as a signet with Him,
And He shall guard the good deeds of man as the
apple of His eye,
And give repentance to His sons and daughters.
23 Afterwards He shall rise up and reward them,
And render their recompense upon their heads.
24 And to those who repent, He provides a return,
And comforts those whose expectancy is failing.
25 Return to HWHY, and leave your sins.
Make your prayer before His face, and be guiltless.
26 Turn again to the Most High, and turn away from
wickedness;
For He shall lead you out of darkness into the light of
peace,
And intensely hate your abominations.
27 Who shall praise the Most High in the grave,
Except for those who live and give thanks?
28 Thanksgiving perishes from the dead, as from one
who is not;
The living and perfect in heart shall praise HWHY.
29 How great is the kindness of HWHY our Elohim,
And His compassion to those who turn to Him in
qodeshah!
30 For not all is within man,
For the son of man is not incorruptible.
18

1142

SIRACH

What is brighter than the sun, yet its light fails?
So flesh and blood shall imagine evil.
32 He views the power of the height of the
shamayim;
And all men are but dust and ashes.
31

18 He who lives forever has created all in its
entirety.
2
HWHY alone is righteous,
And there is no other but He,
3 Who guides the world with the palm of His hand,
And all obey His desire;
For He is the Sovereign of all by His power,
Dividing the qodesh from among the profane.
4 To whom has He given power to declare His
works?
And who shall find out His noble acts?
5 Who shall measure the strength of His
excellence?
And who also shall tell of His kindnesses?
6 As for the wondrous works of HWHY, there is
naught taken from them,
Nor any that are compared to them,
Nor may the expanse of them be found out.
7 When a man is finished, then one begins;
And when he leaves, then he shall be uncertain.
8 What is man, and what use is he?
What is his good, and what is his evil?
9 The number of a man’s days at the greatest are a
hundred years.
10 As a drop of water into the sea, and a grain
compared to the sand;
So are a thousand years to everlasting days.
11 Therefore Elohim is patient with them,
And pours out His kindness upon them.
12 He looked and saw their end to be evil;
Therefore He multiplied His compassion.
1143

ECCLESIASTICUS

The kindness of man is toward his neighbour;
But the kindness of HWHY is upon all flesh.
He reproves, and disciplines, and teaches and turns
them back again, as a shepherd his flock.
14 He has kindness on those who receive discipline,
And who diligently seek after His Right-Rulings.
15 My son, do not blemish your good deeds,
Nor use harsh words when you give.
16 Does the dew not relieve the heat?
So a word is better than a gift.
17 Look, is a word not better than a gift?
But both are with one showing kindness.
18 A fool shall reproach harshly,
And a gift of the selfish consumes the eyes.
19 Learn before you speak,
And use healing if you are ever sick.
20 Before judgment examine yourself,
And in the day of visitation you shall find kindness.
21 Humble yourself before you become sick,
And in the time of sins show repentance.
22 Let naught hinder you to pay your vow in due
time,
And do not delay till death to be declared right.
23 Before you pray, prepare yourself;
And do not be as one that tries HWHY.
24 Think upon the wrath that shall be in the end,
And the time of vengeance, when He turns
away His face.
25 When you have enough, remember the time of
hunger:
And when you are wealthy, think upon poverty
and need.
26 From the morning until the evening the times
change,
And all are soon done before HWHY.
13

1144

SIRACH

A wise man shall revere in every matter,
And in the day of sinning he shall beware of trespass.
But a fool does not observe time.
28 Every man of understanding knows wisdom,
And shall baraḵ he who finds her.
29 Those who have understanding in words also
become wise themselves,
And pour forth splendid parables.
30 Do not pursue your lusts,
But restrain yourself from your appetites.
31 If you give your being the desires that it pleases,
It shall make you a mockery to your enemies
that slander you.
32 Do not revel in excessive pleasure,
Nor be bound by its expense.
33 Do not become a beggar by feasting through
borrowing,
When you have naught in your purse;
For you shall be lying in wait for your own life, and be
plotted upon.
27

19 A labourer that is given to drunkenness shall not
be wealthy;
And he who despises small matters shall fall little by
little.
2 Wine and women shall cause men of
understanding to fall away:
And he who clings to whores shall become hardened.
3 Moths and worms shall have him to inherit,
And a bold man shall be taken away.
4 He who is hasty to give credit is light- minded;
And he who sins corrupts his own being.
5 Whoever takes pleasure in wickedness shall be
condemned:
But he who resists pleasures crowns his ḥai.
6 He who rules his tongue shall live without strife;
And he who hates gossip shall have less evil.
1145

ECCLESIASTICUS

Do not repeat to another that which is told to you,
And you shall not suffer harm.
8 Whether to friend or enemy, do not speak of
another’s life;
And if you may without offense, do not reveal them.
9 For if he hears and sees you,
So in time to come he shall hate you.
10 If you have heard a word, let it die with you;
And be brave, it shall not burst you!
11 A fool struggles with a word,
As a woman in labour with a child.
12 As an arrow that sticks in a man’s thigh,
So is a word inside a fool.
13 Admonish a friend, it may be he has not done it;
And if he has done it, that he does it no more.
14 Admonish your friend, it may be he has not said it;
And if he has, that he does not speak it again.
15 Admonish a friend, for many times it is slander,
And do not believe every whisper.
16 There is one that slips in his speech, but not from
his heart;
And who is he who has not offended with his tongue?
17 Admonish your neighbour before you threaten
him;
And not being wroth, give place to the Law of the
Most High.
18 The reverence of HWHY is the beginning of
acceptance,
And wisdom obtains His love.
19 The knowledge of the Commands of HWHY is the
instruction of Ḥai:
And those who do that which pleases Him,
Shall receive the fruit of the tree of immortality.
20 The reverence of HWHY is complete wisdom;
And in all wisdom is the doing of the Law,
And the knowledge of His mightiness.
7

1146

SIRACH

If a servant says to his master, “I shall not do as it
pleases you.”
Though afterward he does it, he angers him who
feeds him.
22 The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom,
Nor at any time is insight the counsel of sinners.
23 There is a wickedness, and such is an
abomination;
And there is a fool lacking in wisdom.
24 He who has little understanding, and reveres
Elohim,
Is better than one that has much wisdom,
And transgresses the Law of the Most High.
25 There is a delicate craftiness, and the same is
unrighteous;
And there is one that turns aside to make judgment
appear;
And there is a wise man that speaks rightly in
judgment.
26 There is a wicked man that bows his head sadly;
But inwardly he is full of deceit,
27 Casting down his face, and making as if he did not
hear.
Where he is unknown, he shall do you evil before you
are aware.
28 And if for need of power he may cease
from sinning,
Yet when he finds opportunity he shall do evil.
29 A man may be known by his appearance,
And one that has understanding, by his face when
you meet him.
30 A man’s dress, and excessive laughter, and walk,
reveal what is.
21

20 There is a reproof that is not proper;
Again, some man holds his tongue, and he is wise.
1147

ECCLESIASTICUS

It is much better to reprove, than to be wroth
secretly;
And he who confesses his wrong shall be preserved
from harm.
3 How good is it, when you are reproved, to show
repentance!
For so you shall escape deliberate sin.
4 As is the lust of a eunuch to defile a maiden;
So is he who executes judgment with violence.
5 There is one that keeps silent, and is found wise;
And another by much babbling becomes hated.
6 Some man holds his tongue, because he has no
answer:
And some keep silent, knowing his time.
7 A wise man shall hold his tongue till he sees
opportunity;
But a babbler and a fool shall regard no time.
8 He who uses many words shall be loathed;
And he who takes authority for himself in this shall be
hated.
9 There is a sinner that has good success in evil;
And there is a gain that turns to loss.
10 There is a gift that shall not profit you;
And there is a gift whose recompense is double.
11 There is he who is shamed because of esteem;
And there he who lifts up his head from a low estate.
12 There is he who buys much for a little,
But repays it sevenfold.
13 A wise man by his words makes him beloved;
But the favours of fools shall be poured out.
14 The gift of a fool shall do you no good when you
have it;
Nor that of the greedy by necessity;
For he looks to receive much for one.
15 He gives little, and insults greatly;
He opens his mouth as an accuser.
2

1148

SIRACH

Today he lends, and tomorrow he shall ask it again;
Such a one is to be hated of Elohim and man.
16 The fool says, “I have no friends,
I have no thanks for all my good deeds,
And those who eat my bread speak evil of me.”
17 How often, and by how many shall he be mocked!
For he does not know what it is to have;
And it is all the same to him as if he did not have.
18 To slip upon a pavement is better than to slip with
the tongue;
So shall the fall of the wicked come speedily.
19 An untimely word shall always be in the mouth of
the unwise.
20 A wise word shall be rejected when it comes from
the mouth of a fool;
For he shall not speak it in its season.
21 There is he who is hindered from sinning through
poverty;
And when he takes rest, he is not troubled.
22 There is he who destroys his own being through
shame,
And overthrows himself by showing partiality.
23 There is he who promises to his friend from
shame,
And makes him his enemy for naught.
24 A lie is an unclean stain within a man,
Yet it is continually in the mouth of the unlearned.
25 A thief is better than a man who is known to lie:
But they shall both inherit destruction.
26 The way of a liar is humiliation,
And his shame is ever with him.
27 With his words a wise man shall promote himself
to esteem:
And he who has understanding shall please great
men.
1149

ECCLESIASTICUS

He who tills his land shall increase his heap:
And he who pleases great men shall receive pardon
for wrong.
29 Presents and bribes blind the eyes of the wise,
And stop up his mouth so he cannot reprove.
30 Wisdom that is hidden, and treasure that is
hoarded up,
What profit is there in either?
31 Better is he who hides his folly
Than a man who hides his wisdom.
32 Enduring patience in seeking HWHY,
Is better than he who leads his life without a guide.
28

21 My son, have you sinned?
Do so no more,
But ask forgiveness for your former sins.
2 Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent;
For if you come too close to it, it shall bite you.
The teeth of it are as the teeth of a lion,
Slaying the beings of men.
3 All wickedness is as a two-edged sword,
The wounds of which cannot be healed.
4 Fear and wickedness shall waste wealth;
Therefore the house of the proud shall be made
desolate.
5 A prayer out of a poor man’s mouth reaches the
ears of Elohim,
And his right-ruling comes speedily.
6 He who hates to be reproved is in the path of
sinners;
But he who reveres HWHY shall repent from his heart.
7 A learned man is known far and near;
And a man of understanding knows when he slips.
8 He who builds his house with another man’s
silver,
Is like one that gathers stones for the tomb of his
burial.
1150

SIRACH

The assembly of the wicked is like tow wrapped
together;
And their end is a flame of fire to destroy them.
10 The way of sinners is paved with stones,
But at the end of it is the pit of She’ol.
11 He who guards the Law of HWHY gains
understanding from it;
And the perfect reverence of HWHY is wisdom.
12 He who is not wise cannot be taught;
But there is a knowledge which multiplies bitterness.
13 The knowledge of a wise man shall increase as a
flood:
And his counsel is like a pure fountain of life.
14 The inward parts of a fool are like a broken vessel,
And he shall hold no knowledge as long as he lives.
15 If a skilled man hears a wise word,
He commends it, and adds to it;
But when one of no understanding hears it,
It displeases him, and he throws it behind his back.
16 The talking of a fool is like a burden on the way;
But favour shall be found in the lips of the wise.
17 They inquire at the mouth of the wise in the
assembly,
And they shall consider his words in their heart.
18 As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a
fool;
And the knowledge of the unwise are words without
sense.
19 Instruction to fools is as chains on the feet,
And like shackles on the right hand.
20 A fool lifts up his voice with laughter;
But a wise man hardly smiles a little.
21 Learning is to a wise man as an ornament of gold,
And like a bracelet upon his right arm.
22 The foot of a fool hurries into his house;
But a diligent man is ashamed of him.
9

1151

ECCLESIASTICUS

A fool shall peep at the door into the house;
But he who is disciplined shall stand outside.
24 It is the disrespect of a man to listen at the door:
But a wise man shall be grieved with the shame.
25 The lips of gossipers speak that which does not
pertain to them;
But the words of those who have understanding are
weighed in the balance.
26 The heart of fools is in their mouth;
But the mouth of the wise is in their heart.
27 When the wicked curses an adversary,
He curses his own being.
28 A whisperer defiles his own being, and is hated
wherever he dwells.
23

22 A lazy man is compared to a filthy stone,
And all shall hiss him to shame.
2 An idle man is compared to the filth of a dunghill:
Every man that picks it up shall shake off his hand.
3 An undisciplined man is the shame of his father
that brought him forth;
And a daughter is brought forth to his loss.
4 A wise daughter brings an inheritance to her
husband;
But she who lives dishonestly is her father’s
heaviness.
5 She who is bold shames both her father and her
husband,
And they shall both despise her.
6 An untimely word is music in mourning;
But blows and discipline by wisdom are never
untimely.
7 Whoever teaches a fool is as one who glues a
potsherd together,
And as he who wakes one from a sound sleep.
8 He who speaks a word to a fool speaks to one in a
slumber;
1152

SIRACH

When he has spoken a word, he shall say,
“What is this word?”
9 If children live decently, and have means,
They shall cover the lowliness of their parents.
10 But children, being haughty, through pride and
lacking discipline,
Stain the nobility of their relatives.
11 Weep for the dead, for he has lost the light;
And weep for the fool, for he lacks understanding.
Make little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest:
But the life of the fool is worse than death.
12 Seven days men shall mourn for the dead;
But all the days of his life for a fool and a wicked
man.
13 Do not speak much with a fool,
And do not go to he who has no understanding.
Beware of him, lest you have trouble,
And you shall never be defiled with his foolishness.
Depart from him, and you shall find rest,
And never be worried with madness.
14 What is heavier than lead?
And what is its name, but a fool?
15 Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier to
bear,
Than a man without understanding.
16 As timber girded and bound together in a building
cannot be loosed with shaking;
So the heart that is established by wise counsel shall
fear at no time.
17 A heart rested upon a thought of understanding,
Is as a lovely plastering on the wall of a gallery.
18 Fences put on a high place shall never stand
against the wind;
So a fearful heart in the mind of a fool cannot stand
against any fear.
1153

ECCLESIASTICUS

He who pricks the eye makes tears fall;
And he who pricks the heart makes it show her
knowledge.
19

Whoever throws a stone at the birds frightens
them away;
And he who reproaches his friend breaks a
friendship.
20

Though you draw a sword against your friend, yet
do not despair;
For there may be a returning.
21

If you have opened your mouth against your
friend,
Do not fear;
For there may be an atonement,
Except for reproach, or pride, or disclosing secrets, or
a deadly wound;
For these matters every friend shall depart.
22

Be trustworthy to your neighbour in his poverty,
That you may rejoice in his prosperity.
Remain steadfast with him in the time of his distress,
That you may be heir with him in his inheritance;
For a poor position is not always to be despised;
Nor the wealthy, who are foolish to be held in
admiration.
23

As the clouds and smoke of a furnace goes before
the fire;
So reviling before blood.
24

I shall not be ashamed to defend a friend;
Nor shall I hide myself from him.
25

But if any evil comes upon me because of him,
Every one that hears it shall beware of him.
26

Who shall appoint a guard before my mouth,
And a seal of wisdom upon my lips,
So I do not suddenly fall by them,
And that my tongue does not destroy me?
27

1154

SIRACH

23 O HWHY, Father and Aḏon of all my ḥai,
Do not leave me to their counsels,
And do not let me fall by them.
2 Who shall appoint whips over my thoughts,
And the discipline of wisdom over my heart?
That they do not spare me for my ignorances,
And it does not pass by my sins;
3 Lest my ignorances increase, and my sins multiply
to my destruction,
And I fall before my adversaries, and my enemy
rejoice over me,
Whose expectancy is far from Your kindness.
4 O HWHY, Father and Elohim of my ḥai,
Do not give me a proud look,
But always turn your servants away from a haughty
mind.
5 Turn me away from worthless expectation and
lust,
And You hold up he who desires to always serve
You.
6 Do not let the gluttony of the stomach nor lust of
the flesh take hold of me;
And do not give me, your servant, over to a hardened
heart.
7 Hear O you children, the instruction of the mouth;
He who guards it shall never be overtaken with his
lips.
8 The sinner shall be left in his foolishness;
Both the speaker of evil and the proud shall fall by it.
9 Do not accustom your mouth to swearing;
Nor use the Name of the Qadosh One.
10 For as a servant that is continually beaten shall
not be without a bruise;
So he who swears Naming Elohim continually shall
not be guiltless.
1155

ECCLESIASTICUS

A man that swears much is filled with wickedness,
And the plague shall never depart from his house.
If he transgresses, his sin shall be upon him;
And if he does not acknowledge his sin, he
commits a double offense:
And if he swears in vain, he shall not be innocent,
But his house shall be filled with calamities.
12 There is a word that is clothed with death;
Elohim grant that it not be found in the inheritance of
Ya’aqoḇ;
For all such matters shall be far from the reverent,
And they shall not wallow In their sins.
13 Do not use your mouth to swear rashly,
For in these words there is sin.
14 Remember your father and your mother when you
sit among great men.
Do not be forgetful before them, and so, by your
habit,
Become a fool, and wish that you had not been born,
And curse the day of your birth.
15 The man who is accustomed to insulting words
Shall never be instructed all the days of his life.
16 Two kinds of men multiply sin, and the third shall
bring wrath:
A heated spirit as a burning fire shall never be
quenched till it is consumed:
One who whores in the body of his flesh shall never
cease till he has kindled a fire.
17 All bread is sweet to those who whore,
He does not cease till he dies.
18 An adulterer, says thus in his heart:
“Who sees me? I am surrounded with darkness.
“The walls cover me, and no one sees me; what do I
need to fear?
“The Most High shall not remember my sins.”
19 Such a man only fears the eyes of men,
And does not know that the eyes of HWHY are ten
11

1156

SIRACH

thousand times brighter than the sun,
Watching all the ways of men, and observing the
most secret places.
20 He knew all when they were created;
So after they were accomplished he looked upon
them all.
21 This man shall be punished in the streets of the
city,
And he shall be taken where he does not suspect.
22 So it shall also be for the wife that leaves her
husband,
And brings forth an heir by another.
23 For firstly, she has disobeyed the Law of the Most
High;
And secondly, she has trespassed against her own
husband;
And thirdly, she has committed whoring by adultery,
And brought forth children by another man.
24 She shall be brought out into the assembly,
And inquiry shall be made of her children.
25 Her children shall not take root,
And her branches shall not bring forth fruit.
26 She shall leave a cursed remembrance,
And her reproach shall not be blotted out.
27 And those who remain shall know that there is
none better than the reverence of HWHY,
And that there is naught sweeter than to guard the
Commands of HWHY.
28 It is great esteem to follow HWHY,
And to be accepted by Him is long life.

24 Wisdom shall praise herself,
And be esteemed in the midst of her people.
2 In the assembly of the Most High she opens her
mouth,
And overcomes before His power.
1157

ECCLESIASTICUS

I came out of the mouth of the Most High,
And covered the earth as a cloud.
4 I dwelt in high places,
And my throne is in a cloudy pillar.
5 I alone surrounded the circuit of the shamayim,
And walked in the bottom of the deep.
6 In the waves of the sea and in all the earth,
And in every people and nation,
I obtained a possession.
7 With all these I sought rest;
And in whose inheritance shall I remain?
8 So the Creator of all gave me a command,
And He who made me gave rest for my tent, and
said,
“Let your dwelling be in Ya’aqoḇ, and your
inheritance in Yisra’ĕl.”
9 He created me from the beginning before the
world,
And I shall never fail.
10 In the qodesh Mishkan I served before Him;
And so I was established in Tsiyon.
11 Likewise in the beloved city He gave me rest,
And in Yerushalayim was my strength.
12 And I took root in an esteemed people,
Even in the portion of the inheritance of HWHY.
13 I was exalted like a cedar in Leḇanon,
And as a cypress upon the mountains of Ḥermon.
14 I was exalted like a palm tree in Ĕyn Geḏi,
And as a rosebush in Yeriḥo,
As a fair olive tree in a pleasant field,
And grew as a fig tree by the water.
15 I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and rosewood,
And I yielded a pleasant fragrance like the best
myrrh,
As galbanam, and shoham, and fragrant gum,
And as the fragrance of frankincense in the Mishkan.
3

1158

SIRACH

As the cypress I stretched out my branches,
And my branches are the branches of esteem and
favour.
17 As the vine I brought forth a pleasant fragrance,
And my flowers are the fruit of esteem and wealth.
18 I am the mother of pleasant love, and reverence,
and knowledge, and qodesh expectancy:
I therefore, being of old,
Am given to all my children who are named by Him.
19 Come to me, all you who desire me,
And fill yourselves with my fruit.
20 For my remembrance is sweeter than honey,
And my inheritance than the honeycomb.
21 Those who eat of me shall hunger for more,
And those who drink me shall thirst for more.
22 He who obeys me shall never be ashamed,
And those who work beside me shall not do wrong.
23 All these are the Book of the Covenant of the Most
High Elohim,
Even the Law which Mosheh Commanded for an
inheritance to the congregations of Ya’aqoḇ.
24 Do not lose heart, but be strong in HWHY, that He
may confirm you;
Cling to Him, for HWHY Almighty is Elohim alone,
And beside Him there is no other Saviour.
25 He fills all with His wisdom,
As Pishon and as Ḥiddeqel in the time of first- fruits.
26 He makes understanding to abound like Perath,
And as the Yardĕn in the time of the harvest.
27 He makes the instruction of knowledge appear as
the light,
And as Giḥon in the time of grape harvest.
28 The first man did not know her fully;
Nor shall the last find her out.
29 For her thoughts are more than the sea,
And her counsels deeper than the great deep.
16

1159

ECCLESIASTICUS

I also came out as a wadi from a river,
And as a channel into a garden.
31 I said, “I shall water my best garden,
And shall water my garden bed very much.”
And see, my wadi became a river, and my river
became a sea.
32 I shall yet make instruction to shine as the
morning,
And shall send forth her light far away.
33 I shall yet pour out instruction as neḇuah,
And leave it to all ages forever.
34 See that I have not laboured for myself only,
But for all those who seek wisdom.
30

25 In three matters I was adorned,
And stood in loveliness both before Elohim and man:
The oneness of brothers, the love of neighbours,
A man and wife that agree together.
2 Three sorts of men my being hates,
And I greatly loathe of their life:
A poor man who is proud, a wealthy man who is a
liar,
And an old adulterer who is foolish.
3 If you have gathered naught in your youth,
How shall you find any matter in your old age?
4 O how lovely is judgment for grey hairs,
And for the aged to know counsel!
5 O how lovely is the wisdom of old men,
And understanding and counsel in men of esteem.
6 Much experience is the crown of old men,
And the reverence of Elohim is their esteem.
7 There are nine which I have judged in my heart to
be baruḵ,
And the tenth I shall relate with my tongue:
A man that has joy from his children;
And he who lives to see the fall of his enemy.
1160

SIRACH

Good is he who dwells with a wife of
understanding,
And that has not slipped with his tongue,
And that has not served a man more unworthy than
himself.
9 Good is he who has found insight,
And he who speaks in the ears of those who listen.
10 O how great is he who finds wisdom!
Yet there is none above he who reveres HWHY.
11 But the love of HWHY passes all in understanding;
He who possesses it, to what shall he be likened?
12 The reverence of HWHY is the beginning of His
love;
And belief is the beginning of clinging to Him.
13 Any wound, but a wound of the heart;
And any wickedness, but the wickedness of a
woman.
14 And any affliction, but the affliction from those who
hate me;
And any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.
15 There is no venom above the venom of a serpent;
And there is no wrath above the wrath of an
enemy.
16 I would rather dwell with a lion and a dragon,
Than to dwell in a house with a wicked woman.
17 The wickedness of a woman changes her
appearance,
And darkens her face like sackcloth.
18 Her husband shall sit among his neighbours;
And listening he shall sigh bitterly.
19 All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a
woman;
Let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.
20 As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the
aged,
So is a wife full of words to a quiet man.
8

1161

ECCLESIASTICUS

Do not stumble at the loveliness of a woman,
And do not desire her for pleasure.
21

A woman supporting her husband,
Is full of wrath, hardness, and much reproach.
22

A wicked woman causes courage to cease,
Causes a heavy face and a wounded heart;
A woman that does not comfort her husband in
distress
Causes weak hands and feeble knees.
23

From the woman came the beginning of sin,
And because of her we all die.
24

Give water no outlet;
Nor a wicked woman freedom to roam.
25

If she does not do as you would have her,
Cut her off from yourself,
And give her a certificate of divorce, and let her go.
26

26 Baruḵ is the man that has a capable wife,
For the number of his days shall be double.
A capable woman gladdens her husband,
And he shall fill the years of his life in peace.
2

A good wife is a good portion,
Which shall be given in the portion of those who
revere HWHY.
3

Whether a man is wealthy or poor,
If he has a good heart toward HWHY,
He shall rejoice at all times with a cheerful face.
4

There are three matters that my heart fears;
And of the fourth I was very afraid:
The slander of a city, the gathering together of an
unruly crowd, and a false accusation;
All these are worse than death.
5

But a woman that is jealous over another woman
is grieving to the heart and sorrow;
And a lashing tongue which makes known to all.
6

1162

SIRACH

An evil wife is a yoke shaken to and fro;
He who has hold of her is as though he held a
scorpion.
8 A drunken and wandering woman causes great
wrath,
And she does not cover her own shame.
9 The whoring of a woman is known by her haughty
looks and eyelids.
10 If your daughter is wayward, keep her straight,
Lest she abuse herself through too much freedom.
11 Watch over one with a hard eye;
And do not marvel if she trespasses against you.
12 She shall open her mouth, as a thirsty traveller
who has found a fountain,
And drink of every water near her.
By every hedge she shall sit down,
And open her quiver for every arrow.
13 The favour of a wife delights her husband,
And her discretion shall fatten his bones.
14 A silent and loving woman is a gift of HWHY;
And there is naught worth as much as a mind well
instructed.
15 A humble and trustworthy woman is a double
favour,
And her sober mind cannot be valued.
16 As the sun when it rises high in the shamayim;
So is the loveliness of a good wife in the ordering of
her house.
17 As the shining light upon the qodesh candlestick;
So is the loveliness of the face in ripe age.
18 As the golden stands upon the sockets of silver;
So are the lovely feet with a constant heart.
19 My son, guard the flower of your youth well;
And do not give your strength to foreigners.
20 When you have acquired a fruitful possession
through all the field,
7

1163

ECCLESIASTICUS

Sow it with your own seed, trusting in the goodness
of your stock.
So your relatives which you leave are made great,
Having the confidence of their good genealogy.
21

A whore shall be counted as spittle;
But a married woman is a tower against death to her
husband.
22

A wicked woman is given as a portion to a wicked
man;
But a reverent woman is given to he who reveres
HWHY.
23

A dishonest woman is despised and shamed;
But an honest woman shall revere her husband.
24

A headstrong woman shall be counted as a dog;
But she that is humble reveres HWHY.
25

A woman that esteems her husband shall be
judged wise among all;
But she that shames him in her pride shall be
counted wicked among all.
26

27

A loud-mouthed woman and a nagger shall be
sought out to drive away the enemies.

There are two matters that grieve my heart;
And the third makes me wroth:
A man of battle that suffers poverty;
And men of understanding that are not respected;
And one that turns from righteousness to sin;
HWHY prepares such a one for the sword.
28

A merchant hardly guards himself from doing
wrong;
And a trader is not free from sin.
29

27 Many have sinned for a small matter;
And he who seeks abundance turns his eyes away.
As a nail holds fast between the join of stones;
So sin holds close between buying and selling.
2

1164

SIRACH

Unless a man behaves diligently in the reverence
of HWHY,
His house shall soon be overthrown.
4 As when one sifts with a sieve, the refuse
remains;
So the filth of man is in his words.
5 The furnace tries the potter’s vessels;
So the trial of man is in his reasoning.
6 The fruit declares if the tree has been cultivated;
So is the speaking of pride in the heart of man.
7 Praise no man before you hear him speak;
For this is the trial of men.
8 If you follow righteousness, you shall obtain it,
And put it on, as a long robe of esteem.
9 The birds shall gather with their kind;
So shall truth return to those who practise it.
10 As the lion lies in wait for prey;
So does sin for those who work wickedness.
11 The words of a reverent man are always with
wisdom;
But a fool changes as the moon.
12 Watch the time if you are among the foolish;
But be continually among men of understanding.
13 The words of fools are troublesome,
And their entertainment is the indecency of sin.
14 The words of he who swears much makes the hair
stand upright;
And their uproar makes one stop his ears.
15 The strife of the proud is bloodshed,
And their revilings are grievous to the ear.
16 Whoever uncovers secrets loses his trust;
And shall never find a friend of his being.
17 Love your friend, and be trustworthy to him;
But if you betray his secrets, never again follow after
him.
18 For as a man has destroyed his enemy;
So you have lost the love of your neighbour.
3

1165

ECCLESIASTICUS

As one that releases a bird out of his hand,
So you have let your neighbour go,
And shall not have him again.
20 Do not follow after him, for he is too far off;
He is like a gazelle escaped out of the snare.
21 As for a wound, it may be bound up,
And after reviling there may be peace;
But he who betrays secrets is without expectancy.
22 He who winks with the eyes works evil;
And he who knows him departs from him.
23 When you are present, he shall speak sweetly,
and shall admire your words;
But in the end he shall twist his mouth, and slander
your sayings.
24 I have hated many matters, but naught like him;
For HWHY shall hate him.
25 Whoever throws a stone high, throws it on his own
head;
And a blow in deceit makes wounds.
26 Whoever digs a pit shall fall in to it;
And he who lays a trap shall be caught in it.
27 He who does evil, it shall fall upon him,
And he shall not know from where it comes.
28 Mockery and reproach are from the proud;
But vengeance as a lion, lies in wait for them.
29 Those who rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall
be taken in the snare;
And anguish shall consume them before they die.
30 Evil and wrath, even these are abominations;
And the sinful man has them both.
19

28 He who is vengeful shall find vengeance from
HWHY,
And He shall surely keep account of his sins.
2 Forgive your neighbour the harm that he has done
to you,
So your sins shall also be forgiven when you pray.
1166

SIRACH

One man bears hatred against another,
And should he seek forgiveness from HWHY?
4 He shows no kindness to a man, who is like
himself;
And does he ask forgiveness of his own sins?
5 If he who is but flesh maintains hatred,
Who shall pray forgiveness for his sins?
6 Remember your end, and let enmity cease;
Corruption and death, and remain in the Commands.
7 Remember the Commands, and bear no evil
against your neighbour;
The Covenant of the Most High, and overlook faults.
8 Abstain from strife, and you shall diminish your
sins;
For a man of rage kindles strife,
9 A sinful man disrupts friendships,
And creates quarrels among those who are at peace.
10 As the structure of the fire, so it burns:
And as a man’s strength is, so is his wrath;
And according to his wealth his wrath rises;
And the stronger they are who contend,
The more they shall be inflamed.
11 A hasty quarrel kindles a fire;
And hasty fighting sheds blood.
12 If you blow the spark, it shall burn;
If you spit upon it, it shall be quenched;
And both of these come out of your mouth.
13 Curse the gossiper and double tongued;
For such have destroyed many who were at peace.
14 A backbiting tongue has troubled many, and
driven them from nation to nation:
It has pulled down strong cities, and overthrown the
houses of great men.
15 A backbiting tongue has thrown out virtuous
women,
And deprived them of their labours.
3

1167

ECCLESIASTICUS

Whoever listens to it shall never find rest, and
never dwell quietly.
17 The stroke of the whip makes marks in the flesh;
But the stroke of the tongue breaks the bones.
18 Many have fallen by the edge of the sword;
But not as many who have fallen by the tongue.
19 It is good for he who is protected from its venom;
Who has not drawn its yoke, nor been bound in its
bands.
20 For its yoke is a yoke of iron,
And its bands are bands of bronze.
21 The death from it is an evil death;
The grave is better than it.
22 It shall not rule over those who revere Elohim,
Nor shall they be burned with its flame.
23 Those who forsake HWHY shall fall into it;
And it shall burn in them, and not be quenched.
It shall be sent upon them as a lion,
And devour them as a leopard.
24 As you hedge your possessions with thorns
around,
And bind up your silver and gold,
25 Weigh your words in a balance,
And make a door and bar for your mouth.
26 Beware you do not slip by it,
Lest you fall before he who lies in wait.
16

29 He who is kind shall lend to his neighbour;
And he who strengthens his hand guards the
Commands.
2 Lend to your neighbour in his time of need,
And repay your neighbour again in due season.
3 Guard your word, and deal trustworthily with him,
And you shall always find that which is necessary for
you.
1168

SIRACH

Many reckon what was loaned to them to be
found,
And put to trouble those who helped them.
5 Till he has received, he shall kiss a man’s hand;
And for his neighbour’s silver he shall speak softly;
But when he should repay, he shall prolong the time,
And return words of grief, and complain of the time.
6 If he overcomes, he shall hardly give the half,
And he shall count it as though he had found it.
If not, he has deprived him of his silver, and he has
gained an enemy without cause.
He pays him with cursings and slander;
And instead of esteem he shall pay him shame.
7 Many have therefore refused to lend for other
men’s evil deeds,
Fearing to be cheated.
8 Yet have patience with a man in poverty,
And do not delay to show him kindness.
9 Help the poor for the sake of the Command,
And do not turn him away because of his poverty.
10 Lose your silver for your brother and your friend,
And do not let it rust under a stone to be lost.
11 Lay up your treasure according to the Commands
of the Most High,
And it shall bring you more profit than gold.
12 Store up kind deeds in your storehouses,
And it shall deliver you from all affliction.
13 It shall fight for you against your enemies better
than a mighty shield and strong spear.
14 An honest man stands guarantor for his
neighbour;
But he who is impudent shall forsake him.
15 Do not forgot the friendship of your guarantor,
For he has given his life for you.
16 A sinner shall overthrow the good manner of his
guarantor;
4

1169

ECCLESIASTICUS

And he who is thankless shall forsake he who
delivered him.
18 Guarantee has undone many of good estate,
And shaken them as a wave of the sea.
It has driven mighty men from their houses,
So that they wandered among foreign nations.
19 A wicked man transgressing the Commands of
HWHY shall fall in guarantee;
And he who undertakes and follows other men’s
business for gain shall fall into lawsuits.
20 Assist your neighbour according to your ability,
And beware that you do not fall into the same.
21 The necessities for life are water, and bread, and
garments,
And a house for privacy.
22 Better is the life of a poor man in a lowly cottage,
Than food of delicacies in another man’s house.
23 Whether little or much, be content,
That you do not hear the reproach of your house.
24 For it is a miserable life to go from house to
house;
For where you are a stranger, you dare not open your
mouth.
25 You shall entertain, and feast, and have no
thanks;
And you shall hear bitter words:
26 “Come, you stranger, and furnish a table,
And feed me of what you have ready.
27 “Give place, you stranger, to an esteemed man;
My brother seeks lodging, and I have need of my
house.”
28 These matters are grievous to a man of
understanding;
The contempt of a household, and a reproach of the
lender.
17

1170

SIRACH

30 He who loves his son causes him to often feel
the rod,
That he may have joy from him in the end.
2 He who punishes his son shall have joy in him,
And shall rejoice in him among his
acquaintances.
3 He who teaches his son grieves the enemy;
And before his friends he shall rejoice in him.
4 Though his father dies, it is as though he were not
dead;
For he has left one behind who is like himself.
5 While he lived, he saw and rejoiced in him:
And when he died, he was not grieved.
6 He left behind an avenger against his enemies,
And one that shall repay kindness to his friends.
7 He who makes too much of his son binds up his
wounds;
And his body shall be troubled at every cry.
8 A horse unbroken becomes headstrong:
And a child left to himself shall be unruly.
9 Spoil your child, and he shall cause you dread;
Play with him, and he shall bring you to grief.
10 Do not laugh with him, lest you have sorrow from
him,
And lest you gnash your teeth in the end.
11 Give him no freedom in his youth,
And do not wink at his foolishness.
12 Bow down his neck while he is young,
And beat his side while he is a child,
Lest he become stubborn, and be disobedient to you,
And so bring sorrow to your heart.
13 Discipline your son, and put him to work,
Lest his wicked behaviour be a stumbling to you.
14 Better is the poor, being healthy and strong in
body,
Than a wealthy man who is afflicted in his body.
1171

ECCLESIASTICUS

Health and good state of body are better than any
gold,
And a strong body above infinite wealth.
16 There is no wealth above a healthy body,
And no joy above the joy of the heart.
17 Death is better than a bitter life or continual
sickness.
18 Delicacies poured upon a closed mouth,
Are as servings of meat placed upon a grave.
19 What good is the offering to an idol?
For it neither eats nor smells;
So is he who is persecuted by HWHY.
20 He sees with his eyes and groans,
As a eunuch that embraces a maiden and sighs.
21 Do not give your mind over to sorrow,
And do not afflict yourself on purpose.
22 The gladness of the heart is the life of man,
And the joy of a man prolongs his days.
23 Love your own being, and comfort your heart.
Remove sorrow far from you;
For sorrow has killed many, and there is no profit in it.
24 Envy and wrath shorten the life,
And worry brings age before time.
25 A cheerful and good heart pays attention to his
meat and diet.
15

31 Watching for wealth consumes the flesh,
And the worry of it drives away sleep.
2 Watchful worry does not let a man slumber,
As a painful disease breaks sleep.
3 The wealthy labours greatly in gathering wealth
together;
And when he rests, he is filled with his delicacies.
4 The poor labours in his poverty;
And when he finishes, he is still needy.
5 He who loves gold shall not be declared right,
And he who pursues corruption shall have enough.
1172

SIRACH

Gold has been the ruin of many,
And their destruction stands.
7 It is a stumbling block to those who offer to it,
And every fool shall be taken in it.
8 Baruḵ is the wealthy who is found without blemish,
And has not gone after gold.
9 Who is he, that we may call him baruḵ?
For he has done wonders among his people.
10 Who has been tried by it, and found perfect?
Then let him boast.
Who might offend, and has not offended?
Or may do evil, and has not done it?
11 His goods shall be established,
And the assembly shall declare his kind deeds.
12 If you sit at a plentiful table, do not be greedy on it,
And do not say, “There is much food on it.”
13 Remember that an evil eye is wickedness;
And what is created more evil than an eye?
Therefore it weeps at every occasion.
14 Do not stretch your hand wherever you look,
And do not thrust with it into the dish.
15 Do not judge your neighbour by yourself;
But be discerning in every matter.
16 Eat as is allowed, that which is put before you;
But do not devour, lest you be hated.
17 For the sake of manners, be first to cease;
And do not be gluttonous, lest you cause stumbling.
18 When you sit among many,
Do not be the first to reach out your hand.
19 A very little is sufficient for a man of discipline,
And he is not short of breath on his bed.
20 Sound sleep comes from moderate eating;
He rises early, and is attentive;
But the pain of worry, and bitterness, and stomach
pangs,
Are with a gluttonous man.
6

1173

ECCLESIASTICUS

And if you have been forced to eat,
Rise up, go vomit, and you shall have rest.
22 My son, listen to me, and do not despise me,
And in the end you shall find as I told you.
In all your work be efficient, so that no sickness
comes to you.
23 Whoever is generous with his food, men shall
speak well of him;
And the report of his good hospitality shall be
believed.
24 But against he who is greedy with his food, the
whole city shall murmur;
And the report of his selfishness shall not be doubted.
25 Do not show your boldness with wine;
For wine has destroyed many.
26 The furnace proves the sword edge by dipping;
So wine tries the hearts of the proud in drunkenness.
27 Wine is as good as life to a man, if it is drunk
moderately.
What then is life to a man that is without wine?
For it was made to make men glad.
28 Wine drunk moderately and in season brings
gladness of the heart,
And cheerfulness of the mind;
29 But wine drunken in excess makes bitterness of
the mind,
With brawling and quarreling.
30 Drunkenness increases the rage of a fool till he
stumbles:
It diminishes strength, and causes wounds.
31 Do not rebuke your neighbour while at wine,
And do not despise him in his rejoicing;
Give him no words of grief, and do not urge him on.
21

32 If you are appointed master do not lift yourself
up,
1174

SIRACH

But be among them as one of the rest.
Diligently look after them, and then sit down.
2 And when you have fulfilled your office, take your
place,
That you may rejoice with them,
And receive a crown for your well ordering of the
feast.
3 Speak, you who are the elder, for it is fitting for
you,
But with right-ruling; and do not withhold music.
4 Do not pour out words when there is a musician,
And do not put forth wisdom out of time.
5 A concert of music at a banquet of wine is as a
signet of ruby mounted in gold.
6 As a signet of an emerald mounted in a work of
gold,
So is the melody of music with pleasant wine.
7 Speak, young man, if there is need of you;
And yet only twice when you are asked.
8 Let your words be few, saying much with few
words;
Be as one who knows and yet holds his tongue.
9 If you are among great men, do not make yourself
equal with them;
And when aged men are in place, do not use many
words.
10 Before the thunder goes lightning;
And before a humble man goes favour.
11 Rise up early, and do not be the last;
And get home without delay.
12 There fulfill your office, and do what you shall:
But do not sin with proud speech.
13 And for these baraḵ He who made you,
And has filled you with His goodness.
14 Whoever reveres HWHY shall receive His
discipline;
And those who seek Him early shall find favour.
1175

ECCLESIASTICUS

He who seeks the Law shall be filled with it;
But the hypocrite shall stumble over it.
16 Those who revere HWHY shall find Right-Ruling,
And shall kindle righteousness as a light.
17 A sinful man shall not be reproved,
But finds an excuse according to his liking.
18 A man of counsel is considerate;
But a strange and proud man is not troubled by fear,
Even when he himself has done without counsel.
19 Do no deed without advice;
And when you are done, do not regret it.
20 Do not go in a way in which you may fall,
And do not stumble among the stones.
21 Do not be reckless on an easy road.
22 And beware of your own children.
23 In every good work guard your own being;
For this is the keeping of the Commands.
24 He who believes in HWHY guards the Commands;
And he who trusts in Him does not come to harm.
15

33 No evil shall come upon he who reveres HWHY;
And in trials He also shall deliver him.
2 A wise man does not hate the Law;
But he who is a hypocrite in it, is like a ship in a
storm.
3 A man of understanding trusts in the Law;
And the Law is trustworthy to him, as a Word.
4 Prepare what to say, and so you shall be heard;
And draw upon instruction, and then give answer.
5 The heart of the foolish is like a cartwheel;
And his thoughts are like a rolling axle.
6 A mocking friend is like a stallion,
He neighs under everyone that rides him.
7 Why is one day better than another,
When all the light of every day of the year is from the
sun?
1176

SIRACH

By the knowledge of HWHY they were appointed;
And He turns seasons and Feasts.
9 Some of them He has made High Days, and
qadosh them,
And some of them He has made regular days.
10 And all men are from the ground,
And Aḏam was created from the earth.
11 In much knowledge HWHY has spread them,
And made their ways different.
12 Some of them He has baraḵ and exalted,
And some of them He qadosh, and placed near
Himself;
But some of them He has cursed and brought low,
And removed from their places.
13 As the clay is in the potter’s hand, to fashion it at
his desire;
So is man in the hand of He who made him,
To give unto them as He thinks best.
14 Good opposes evil, and life against death;
So is the righteous against the sinner, and the wicked
against the reverent.
15 So look upon all the works of the Most High;
And there are pairs of two, one against another.
16 I woke up last of all, as one that gathers after the
grape gatherers;
By the beraḵah of HWHY I profited, and trod my
winepress like a gatherer of grapes.
17 Consider that I did not labour for myself only,
But for all those who seek learning.
18 Hear me, O you great men of the people,
And listen with your ears, you rulers of the assembly.
19 Do not give your son and wife, your brother and
friend, power over you while you live,
And do not give your goods to another;
Lest you reconsider, and you ask for its return.
20 As long as you live and have breath in you,
Do not give yourself over to any.
8

1177

ECCLESIASTICUS

For it is better that your children should seek from
you,
Than that you should stand to their sympathy.
22 Be the best in all your works;
Do not leave a blot on your esteem.
23 At the time when you shall end your days, and
finish your life,
Distribute your inheritance.
24 Fodder, a rod, and burdens, are for the donkey;
And bread, discipline, and work, for a servant.
25 If you put your servant to labour, you shall find
rest:
But if you let him go idle, he shall seek freedom.
26 A yoke and a collar bow the neck;
So are tortures and punishment for an evil servant.
27 Send him to work, so he is not idle;
For idleness teaches much evil.
28 Put him to work, as is fit for him;
If he is not obedient, put on heavier shackles.
29 But do not be excessive toward any;
And do naught without discretion.
30 If you have a servant, let him be to you as
yourself,
Because you have bought him for a price.
31 If you have a servant, treat him as a brother;
For you have need of him, as of your own being.
If you treat him evilly, and he runs from you,
Which way shall you go to seek him?
21

34 The expectancies of a man of no understanding
are empty and false;
And dreams raise up fools.
2 Whoever regards dreams is like he who catches
at a shadow,
And follows after the wind.
1178

SIRACH

The vision of dreams is the reflection of one to
another,
Even as the likeness of a face to a face.
4 From an unclean matter, what may be cleansed?
And from that which is false, what truth shall come?
5 Divination, and predictions, and dreams, are
empty;
And imaginations of the heart,
As the heart of a woman in childbirth.
6 If they are not sent from the Most High in your
visitation,
Do not lay your heart upon them.
7 For dreams have deceived many,
And they have failed those who put their trust in
them.
8 The Law shall be found perfect without falsehood;
And wisdom is perfection to a trustworthy mouth.
9 A man that has travelled knows much;
And he who has much experience shall declare
wisdom.
10 He who has no experience knows little;
But he who has travelled is full of insight.
11 When I travelled, I saw much;
And I understand more than I could express.
12 I was often in danger of death;
Yet I was delivered because of these:
13 The spirit of those who revere HWHY shall live;
For their expectancy is in He who saves them.
14 Whoever reveres HWHY shall not fear nor be
afraid;
For He is his expectancy.
15 Baruḵ is the being of he who reveres HWHY:
To whom does he look, and who is his strength?
16 For the eyes of HWHY are upon those who love
Him,
He is their mighty shield and strong support,
A protection from heat, and a cover from the sun at
3

1179

ECCLESIASTICUS

noon,
A preservation from stumbling, and a help from
falling.
17 He raises up the being, and lightens the eyes:
He gives health, ḥai, and beraḵah.
18 He who offers of what is wrongfully gotten, his
offering is a mockery;
And the gifts of unrighteous men are not accepted.
19 The Most High is not pleased with the offerings of
the wicked;
Nor is He appeased by the multitude of offerings for
sin.
20 Whoever brings an offering from the goods of the
poor,
Does as one that kills the son before his father’s
eyes.
21 The bread of the needy is their life;
He who deprives him of it is a man of blood.
22 He who takes away the livelihood of his neighbour
slays him;
And he who deprives the labourer of his wage is a
shedder of blood.
23 When one builds, and another pulls down,
What profit do they have but labour?
24 When one prays, and another curses,
Whose voice shall HWHY hear?
25 He who washes himself after touching a dead
body,
If he touches it again, what use is his washing?
26 So it is with a man that fasts for his sins, and goes
again, and does the same;
Who shall hear his prayer, or what does his humbling
profit him?

35 He who guards the Law brings offerings enough;
He who guards the Command offers a peace offering.
1180

SIRACH

He who repays a good deed offers fine flour;
And he who gives in kindness offers praise.
3 To depart from wickedness is pleasing to HWHY;
And to forsake unrighteousness is an atonement.
4 You shall not appear empty-handed before HWHY.
5 For all these are because of the Command.
6 The offering of the righteous makes the altar fat,
And its sweet savour is before the Most High.
7 The offering of a righteous man is acceptable.
And the remembrance of it shall never be forgotten.
8 Give HWHY His esteem with a good eye,
And do not diminish the first-fruits of your hands.
9 In all your gifts show a cheerful face,
And dedicate your tithes with gladness.
10 Give to the Most High according to His enrichment
unto you;
And as you have received, give with a cheerful eye.
11 For HWHY repays,
And shall give you seven times as much.
12 Do not think to corrupt with gifts; for He does not
accept these:
And do not trust in unrighteous offerings;
For HWHY is Judge, and with Him is no partiality.
13 He shows no partiality against the poor,
But shall hear the prayer of the oppressed.
14 He shall not despise the prayer of the fatherless;
Nor the widow, when she pours out her complaint.
15 Do not the tears run down the widow’s cheeks?
And is not her cry against he who causes them to
fall?
16 He who HWHY serves shall be accepted with
favour,
And his prayer reaches to the clouds.
17 The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds;
And he shall not be comforted till it comes near;
And shall not depart, till the Most High executes rightruling and judgment.
2

1181

ECCLESIASTICUS

For HWHY does not delay, nor is the Almighty
patient toward them,
Till He has crushed the loins of the ruthless,
And repaid vengeance upon the gentiles;
Till He has taken away the crowd of the proud,
And broken the sceptre of the unrighteous;
18

Till He has given to everyone according to their
deeds,
And to the works of men according to their schemes;
Till He has judged the cause of His people,
And caused them to rejoice in His kindness.
19

Favour is welcomed in the time of affliction,
As clouds of rain in the time of drought.
20

36 Show favour upon us, O HWHY Elohim of all, and
look on us;
2

And send Your fear upon all the nations that do
not seek You.

Lift up Your hand against the foreign nations,
And let them see Your strength.
3

As You were qadosh in us before them:
So You be exalted among them before us.
4

And let them know You, as we have known You,
That there is no Elohim but You alone, O Elohim.
5

Show new signs, and make other awesome
wonders;
Esteem Your hand and Your right arm,
That they may put forth Your wondrous works.
6

Raise up displeasure, and pour out wrath;
Remove the adversary, and destroy the enemy.
7

Shorten the time, remember the Covenant,
And let them declare Your wonders.
8

Let he who escapes be consumed by the rage of
the fire;
And let those who oppress the people perish.
9

1182

SIRACH

Crush the heads of the rulers of the gentiles that
say,
“There is no one else but us!”
11 Gather all the tribes of Ya’aqoḇ together;
Your inheritance, as from the beginning.
12 O HWHY, show favour upon the people that are
called by Your Name,
And upon Yisra’ĕl, whom You have named Your firstborn.
13 O be kind to Yerushalayim, Your qodesh city,
The place of Your rest.
14 Fill Tsiyon with Your unspeakable words,
And Your people with Your esteem.
15 Give witness to those who You have possessed
from the beginning,
And raise up neḇi’im that are for Your Name.
16 Reward those who wait for You,
And let Your neḇi’im be found trustworthy.
17 O HWHY, hear the prayer of Your servants,
According to the beraḵah of Aharon over Your
people,
That all those who dwell on the earth may know that
You are HWHY,
The Elohim of old.
18 The stomach consumes all foods,
Yet one meat is better than another.
19 As the mouth tastes different kinds of game;
So does a heart of understanding false speeches.
20 A crooked heart causes grief;
But a man of experience shall repay him.
21 A woman shall accept any man,
Yet one daughter is better than another.
22 The loveliness of a woman cheers the face,
And there is naught a man loves better.
23 If there is kindness, meekness, and comfort, in her
tongue,
Then her husband is not like other men.
10

1183

ECCLESIASTICUS

He who acquires a wife begins a possession,
A help like himself, and a pillar of rest.
25 Where no wall is, there possessions are
plundered;
And he who has no wife shall wander about sighing.
26 Who shall trust a crafty thief that skips from city to
city?
Even so a man that has no house, and lodges
wherever the night takes him?
24

37 Every friend says, “I am his friend also.”
But there is a friend, which is only a friend in name.
2 Is it not a grief unto death,
When a companion and friend is turned to an enemy?
3 O wicked thoughts, where have you come from,
To cover the earth with deceit?
4 There is a companion, who rejoices in the
prosperity of a friend,
But in the time of trouble shall be against him.
5 There is a companion, who helps his friend for his
stomach,
And takes up a shield against the enemy.
6 Do not forget your friend in your heart,
And do not forget him in your wealth.
7 Every counsellor extolls counsel;
But some who counsel for themselves.
8 Beware of a counsellor, and know before what
need he has;
For he shall counsel for himself;
And cast the lot against you,
9 And say to you, “Your way is good.”
And afterward stand on the other side, to see what
shall befall you.
10 Do not consult with one that suspects you;
And hide your counsel from those who envy you.
11 Nor consult with a woman regarding she of whom
she is jealous;
1184

SIRACH

Nor with a coward in matters of battle;
Nor with a merchant concerning exchange;
Nor with a buyer about selling;
Nor with an envious man about thankfulness;
Nor with a ruthless man regarding kindness;
Nor with the lazy for any work;
Nor with a yearly hired man about finishing work;
Nor with an idle servant of much business.
Do not listen to these in any matter of counsel,
12 But be continually with a reverent man,
Whom you know to guard the Commands of HWHY,
Whose, mind is according to your mind,
And shall grieve with you, if you fail.
13 And let the counsel of your own heart stand;
For there is no man more trustworthy to you
than it.
14 For the mind of a man sometimes tells him more
than seven watchmen,
That sit above in a high tower.
15 And above all this, pray to the Most High,
That He directs your way in truth.
16 Let reason go before every work,
And counsel before every action.
17 The face is a sign of changing of the heart.
18 Four ways of all are apparent:
Good and evil, life and death;
But the tongue rules over them continually.
19 There is one who is wise and teaches many,
And yet does not profit himself.
20 There is one who shows wisdom in words, and is
hated;
He shall be destitute of all food.
21 For favour is not given to him from HWHY,
Because he has neglected all wisdom.
22 Another is wise to himself;
And the fruits of understanding are as praise in his
mouth.
1185

ECCLESIASTICUS

A wise man instructs his people;
And the fruits of his understanding do not fail.
24 A wise man shall be filled with bireḵoth;
And all those who see him shall regard him as baruḵ.
25 The days of the life of man may be numbered;
But the days of Yisra’ĕl are without number.
26 A wise man shall inherit esteem among his
people,
And his name shall be forever.
27 My son, prove your being in your life,
And see what is evil for it, and do not give in to it.
28 For not all is profitable for all men,
Nor has every being pleasure in every matter.
29 Do not be gluttonous in any delicacy,
Nor too greedy with food;
30 For excess of food brings sickness,
And gluttony shall turn to disgust.
31 Many have perished by gluttony;
But he who guards himself prolongs his life.
23

38 Esteem a physician with the esteem due to him
for the uses which you may have for him:
For HWHY has created him.
2 For healing comes from the Most High,
And He shall receive esteem from the sovereign.
3 The skill of the physician shall raise his head;
And in the sight of great men he shall be admired.
4 HWHY has created medicines out of the earth;
And he who is wise does not reject them.
5 Was not the water made sweet with wood,
That its power might be known?
6 And He has given men skill,
That He might be esteemed by His marvellous works.
7 With such He heals and takes away their pains.
8 Of such the perfumer makes a perfume;
And of His works there is no end;
And from Him there is peace over all the earth.
1186

SIRACH

My son, in your sickness do not be slack;
But pray to HWHY, and He shall heal you.
10 Cease from sin, and order your hands well,
And cleanse your heart from all wickedness.
11 Offer a sweet fragrance, and a remembrance of
fine flour;
And make an offering of fat of your being.
12 So give place to the physician, for HWHY has
created him;
Do not let him leave you, for you have need of him.
13 There is a time when there is good success in
their hands.
14 For they shall also pray to HWHY,
That He would prosper that which they give,
For ease and health to prolong life.
15 He who sins before his Maker,
Let him fall in the hand of the physician.
16 My son, let tears fall down over the dead,
And begin to lament, as if you had suffered great
harm yourself;
And then cover his body according to the custom,
And do not neglect his burial.
17 Weep bitterly, and make a great mourning with
lamentation, as he is worthy,
And that a day or two, lest you are spoken evil of;
And then comfort yourself for your grief.
18 For from grief comes death, and heaviness of the
heart destroys strength.
19 In affliction sorrow also remains;
And the life of the poor is the curse of the heart.
20 Take no grief to heart;
Drive it away, and remember the latter end.
21 Do not forget it, for there is no returning again;
You shall do him no good, but harm yourself.
22 “Remember my judgment; for so shall
yours
be also...
Yesterday for me, and today for you.”
9

1187

ECCLESIASTICUS

When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance
rest;
And be comforted for him, when his spirit has
departed from him.
24 The wisdom of a learned man comes by
opportunity of leisure;
And he who has little business may become wise.
25 How shall he who holds the plough attain wisdom,
And who sharpens the goad, who drives oxen, and is
occupied in their labour, and whose talk is of
bulls?
26 He gives his mind to making furrows;
And is diligent to give the cattle fodder.
27 So every carpenter and worker, that labours night
and day;
And those who cut and engrave seals,
And are diligent to make great variety, and give
themselves to copy imagery, and watch to finish a
work;
28 Also the smith sitting by the anvil, and considering
the iron work,
The smoke of the fire weakens his flesh, and he
fights the heat of the furnace;
The noise of the hammer and the anvil is constantly
in his ears, and his eyes are fixed on the pattern of
that which he makes;
He applies his mind to finish his work,
And watches to polish it perfectly.
29 So the potter sits at his work,
And turns the wheel around with his feet,
Who is always focused at his work, and makes all his
work by number;
30 He moulds the clay with his arm, and bows down
his strength before his feet;
He applies himself to the glazing;
And he is diligent to clean the furnace.
23

1188

SIRACH

All these rely on their hands,
And everyone is skilled in his work.
32 Without these a city cannot be inhabited;
And they could not dwell where they do, nor go up
and down.
33 They shall not be sought in public counsel, nor sit
high in the assembly;
They shall not sit on the seat of judges, nor
understand the ruling of judgment;
They cannot declare righteousness and right- ruling;
And they shall not be found where parables are
spoken.
34 But they maintain the face of the world,
And their desire is in the work of their craft.
31

39 But he who gives his mind to the Law of the
Most High,
And is occupied in the study of it,
Seeks out of all the ancient wisdom, and is occupied
in neḇuoth.
2 He guards the sayings of the men of name;
And where wise parables are, he shall be there also.
3 He shall seek out the secrets of proverbs,
And speak of hidden parables.
4 He shall serve among great men, and appear
before princes;
He shall travel through foreign countries;
For he has examined the good and the evil
among men.
5 He applies his heart early to look to HWHY who
made him,
And shall pray before the Most High,
And opens his mouth in prayer,
And makes supplication for his sins.
6 When HWHY the Almighty acts, he shall be filled
with the spirit of understanding;
1189

ECCLESIASTICUS

He shall pour out wise sayings, and give thanks to
HWHY his prayer.
7 He shall guide his counsel and knowledge,
And on His secrets he meditates.
8 He reveals that which he has learned,
And shall boast in the Law of the Covenant of HWHY.
9 Many shall commend his understanding;
And as long as the world endures, it shall not be
blotted out;
His remembrance shall not depart, and his name
shall live from generation to generation.
10 Nations shall speak of his wisdom,
And the assembly shall declare him baruḵ.
11 If he dies, he shall leave a greater name than a
thousand:
And if he lives, he shall increase it.
12 Yet I have more to say, which I have thought
upon;
For I am filled as at the full moon.
13 Listen to me, you qodesh children,
And bud as a rose of the field growing by the wadi;
14 And give a sweet fragrance as frankincense, and
flourish as a lily.
Send out a fragrance, and sing a song of praise,
Baraḵ HWHY in all His works.
15 Exalt His Name, and extol His praise with the
songs of your lips, and with harps,
And in praising Him you shall say after this manner:
16 All the works of HWHY are exceedingly good,
And whatever He commands shall be accomplished
in due season.
17 And none shall say, “What is this?
Why is that?”
For at an appropriate time they shall all be sought
out:
At His command the waters stood as a heap,
1190

SIRACH

And the reservoir of waters at the words of His
mouth.
18 Whatever pleases Him is done at His command;
And none reverses His deliverance.
19 The works of all flesh are before Him,
And there is none hidden from His eyes.
20 He sees from everlasting to everlasting;
And there is no matter too marvellous for Him.
21 A man need not say, “What is this? Why is that?”
For He has made all for their uses.
22 His beraḵah covered the dry land as a river,
And watered it as a flood.
23 As He has turned the waters salty;
So shall the gentiles inherit His wrath.
24 As His ways are clear to the qodesh;
So they are stumbling blocks to the wicked.
25 The good matters are created for the good from
the beginning;
So evil matters for sinners.
26 The basic necessities for the whole use of man’s
life are:
Water, fire, iron, and salt, flour of wheat, honey,
milk, and the juice of grapes, and oil, and
garments.
27 All these are for good to the righteous;
So to the sinners they are turned to evil.
28 There are spirits that are created for punishment,
Who in their wrath lay on many strokes;
In the time of destruction they pour out their strength,
And appease the wrath of He who made them.
29 Fire, and hail, and scarcity of food, and death,
All these were created for punishment;
30 Teeth of wild beasts, and scorpions,
serpents,
And the sword punishing the wicked to destruction.
31 They shall rejoice in His Command, and they shall
be ready upon earth when needed;
1191

ECCLESIASTICUS

And when their time comes, they do not transgress
His Word.
32 Therefore from the beginning I knew,
And thought upon these, and have left them in
writing.
33 All the works of HWHY are good;
And He shall give all that is needed in due season;
34 So that a man cannot say, “This is worse than
that.”
For in time they all shall be prove good;
35 And therefore praise HWHY with all your heart and
voice,
And baraḵ the Name of HWHY.

40 Great hardship is created for every man,
And a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Aḏam;
From the day that they go out of their mother’s womb,
Till the day that they return to the mother of all.
2 Their imagination of what is to come, and the day
of death,
Are their thoughts, and fear of heart;
3 From he who sits on a throne of esteem,
To he who is humbled in dirt and ashes;
4 From he who wears purple and a crown,
To he who is clothed with a linen robe.
5 Wrath, and envy, trouble, and unrest, fear of
death, and displeasure, and strife,
And in the time of rest on his bed his sleep at night
changes his knowledge.
6 He gets little or no rest, and after his sleep, is as
in a day of watching,
Troubled in the vision of his mind, as if he had
escaped out of a battle.
7 When all is safe, he wakes,
And marvels that the fear was naught.
8 These come to all flesh, both man and beast,
And seven times more upon sinners.
1192

SIRACH

Death, and bloodshed, strife, and sword,
Calamities, scarcity of food, distress, and the
scourge;
10 These are created for the wicked,
And the flood came for their sakes.
11 All that are of the earth shall return to the earth
again;
And that which is of the waters returns to the sea.
12 All bribery and unrighteousness shall be blotted
out;
But right-dealing endures forever.
13 The goods of the unrighteous shall be dried up
like a wadi,
And shall vanish with noise, like great thunder in rain.
14 While the generous shall rejoice;
So transgressors shall come to naught.
15 The children of the wicked shall not bring forth
many branches;
But are as unclean roots on a hard rock.
16 The weed growing on all water and riverbank,
Shall be pulled up before any grass.
17 Kindness is like a most fruitful garden,
And favour endures forever.
18 To labour, and to be content with what a man has,
is a sweet life;
But he who finds a treasure is above them both.
19 Children and the building of a city continue a
man’s name;
But a blameless wife is counted above them both.
20 Wine and music rejoice the heart;
But the love of wisdom is above them both.
21 The flute and the harp make a sweet melody;
But a pleasant tongue is above them both.
22 Your eye desires favour and loveliness;
But more than both is grain while green.
23 A friend and companion never meet wrongfully;
But above both is a wife with her husband.
9

1193

ECCLESIASTICUS

Brothers are a help for time of trouble;
But kind deeds shall deliver more than them both.
25 Gold and silver make a solid footing;
But counsel is esteemed above them both.
26 Wealth and power lift the heart;
But the reverence of HWHY is above them both.
There is no lack with the reverence of HWHY,
And with it you need not seek help.
27 The reverence of HWHY is a fruitful garden,
And covers him above all esteem.
28 My son, do not lead a beggar’s life;
For better it is to die than to beg.
29 The life of he who depends on another man’s
table,
Cannot be considered a life;
For he pollutes himself with the food of other men;
But a wise, disciplined man guards himself from it.
30 Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless;
But in his inward parts a fire burns.
24

41 O death, how bitter is the remembrance of you to
a man that lives at rest in his possessions,
To the man who has no pain unto him, and that has
prosperity in all;
Even to he who is yet able to gain food!
2 O death, your lot is acceptable to the needy,
And to him whose strength fails, that is now in the last
age, and pained with all,
And to he who despairs, and has lost patience!
3 Do not fear the lot of death;
Remember those who have been before you, and who
come after;
For this is the lot from HWHY over all flesh.
4 And why are you against the decision of the Most
High?
There is no searching in the grave,
1194

SIRACH

Whether you have lived ten, or a hundred, or a
thousand years.
5 The children of sinners are abominable children,
And those who keep company in the dwelling of the
wicked.
6 The inheritance of the children of sinners shall
perish,
And their descendants shall be an everlasting reproach.
7 The children complain of a wicked father,
Because they shall be reproached for his sake.
8 Woe unto you, wicked men, who have forsaken the
Law of the Most High Elohim!
For if you increase, it shall be to your destruction:
9 And if you are born, you shall be born into a curse:
And if you die, a curse shall be your lot.
10 All that are of the earth shall turn to earth again;
So the wicked shall go from a curse to destruction.
11 The mourning of men is over their bodies;
But the evil name of sinners shall be blotted out.
12 Have regard for your name;
For that shall continue with you above a thousand great
treasures of gold.
13 A good life has few days;
But a good name endures forever.
14 My children, guard discipline in peace;
For wisdom that is hidden, and a treasure that is not
seen;
What profit is there in either?
15 A man that hides his foolishness is better than a
man that hides his wisdom.
16 Therefore be ashamed according to my word;
For it is not good to retain all shame;
Nor is it altogether approved in every matter:
17 Be ashamed of whoring before your father and
mother;
And of a lie before a prince and a mighty man;
1195

ECCLESIASTICUS

Of an offense before a judge and ruler;
Of wickedness before the assembly and people;
Of unrighteous dealing before your partner and friend;
19 And of theft in regard to the place where you
sojourn,
And in regard to the truth of Elohim and His Covenant;
And to lean with your elbow upon the food;
And despising to give and take;
20 And of silence before those who greet you;
And to look upon a whore;
21 And to turn away your face from your relative;
Or to take away a portion or a gift;
Or to gaze upon another man’s wife.
22 Or to be meddling with his female servant,
And do not come near her bed;
Or words of reproach before friends;
And after you have given, do not reproach;
23 Or of repeating and speaking again that which you
have heard;
And of revealing of secrets.
24 So you shall be truly ashamed and find favour
before all men.
18

42 Of these matters do not be ashamed, and allow
no one to sin by them:
2 Of the Law of the Most High, and His Covenant;
And of judgment to declare the wicked right;
3 Of reckoning with your partners and travellers;
Or of the gift of the inheritance of friends;
4 Of exactness of balance and weights;
Or of acquiring much or little;
5 And of the haughty selling by merchants;
Of much correction of children;
And to draw blood from the back of a wicked servant.
6 Where a wicked wife is, safe- keeping is good;
And shut up, where many hands are.
7 Deliver all by number and weight;
And put in writing all that you give out, or receive in.
1196

SIRACH

Do not be ashamed to inform the unwise and
foolish,
And the very old who contends with those who are
young;
Thus you shall be truly learned, and approved of all
men living.
9 The father wakes for the daughter, when no man
knows;
And the concern for her takes away sleep When she is young, lest she pass the flower of youth;
And being married, lest she should be hated;
10 In her maidenhood, lest she should be defiled and
become pregnant in her father’s house;
And having a husband, lest she should misbehave
herself;
And when she is married, lest she should be barren.
11 Keep a close watch over a shameless daughter,
Lest she make you a laughing-stock to your enemies,
And a byword in the city, and a reproach among the
people,
And make you ashamed before the assembly.
12 Do not look upon the loveliness of every woman,
And do not sit in the midst of women.
13 For a moth comes from garments, and
wickedness from women.
14 Better is the hardness of a man than a courteous
woman,
A woman who brings shame and reproach.
15 I shall now remember the works of HWHY, and
declare that which I have seen:
In the Words of HWHY are His works,
And all His creation does His desire.
16 The sun that gives light looks upon all,
And its doing is full of the esteem of HWHY.
17 HWHY has not given power to the qodeshim to
declare all of His marvellous works,
Which HWHY the Almighty firmly settled,
8

1197

ECCLESIASTICUS

That whatever exists might be established for His
esteem.
18 He seeks out the deep, and the heart, and
considers their crafty schemes;
For HWHY knows all that may be known,
And He looks upon the signs of the world.
19 He declares matters that are past, and those to
come,
And reveals the path of that which is hidden.
20 No thought escapes Him,
Nor is any word hidden from Him.
21 He has adorned the excellent works of His
wisdom,
And He is from everlasting to everlasting:
Unto Him none is added, nor shall He be diminished,
And He has no need of any counsellor.
22 Oh how desirable are all His works!
And that a man may see even a spark.
23 All these live and remain forever for all uses,
And they are all obedient.
24 All matters are equal, one against another;
And He has made none imperfect.
25 One establishes the good of another;
And who is ever filled with looking upon His esteem?

43 The pride of the heights, the clear expanse,
The loveliness of the shamayim, with His esteemed
display;
2 The sun when it appears, showing a marvellous
instrument at its rising;
The work of the Most High.
3 At noon it scorches the land,
And who shall stand its burning heat?
4 A man blowing a furnace works with heat,
But the sun burns the mountains three times more;
Breathing out fiery vapours, and sending out bright
rays, it blinds the eyes.
1198

SIRACH

Great is HWHY who made it;
And at His command it runs speedily.
6 He made the moon also to serve in its season for
appointed times,
And a sign for the world.
7 From the moon is the sign of Feasts,
A light that decreases in its completion.
8 The new moon is called after its name,
Increasing wondrously in its changing, being an
instrument for the hosts above,
Shining in the expanse of the shamayim;
9 The loveliness of the shamayim, the esteem of the
stars,
An ornament giving light in the highest places of
HWHY.
10 At the command of the Qadosh One they stand in
their order,
And never weary in their watches.
11 Look upon the rainbow, and praise He who made
it;
It is very lovely in its brightness.
12 It surrounds the shamayim with a splendid arc,
And the hands of the Most High have bent it.
13 By His command He makes the snow to fall in
place,
And sends the lightnings of His judgment swiftly.
14 Through this the storehouses are opened;
And clouds fly onward as birds.
15 By His great power He makes the clouds pour out,
And the hailstones are broken small.
16 At His sight the mountains are shaken,
And at His desire the south wind blows.
17 The noise of thunder causes the earth to tremble;
So does the northern storm and the whirlwind.
As birds flying He scatters the snow,
And its falling is as the settling of grasshoppers.
5

1199

ECCLESIASTICUS

The eye marvels at the loveliness of its whiteness,
And the heart is astonished at its falling.
19 He also pours the frost as salt upon the earth,
And being hardened, it lays on the top as sharp
icicles.
20 When the cold north wind blows, and the water is
hardened into ice,
It remains upon every collection of water,
And clothes the water like a breastplate.
21 It devours the mountains, and burns the
wilderness,
And consumes the grass like fire.
22 A mist coming speedily stands as a healer of all,
A refreshing dew coming after heat.
23 By His counsel He calms the deep,
And plants islands within it.
24 Those who sail on the sea tell of its dangers;
And when we hear it with our ears, we marvel at it.
25 For in it are strange and wondrous works,
Differing kinds of all creatures and whales created.
26 By Him the end of them has a benefit of good,
And by His word all exists.
27 We may speak much, and yet come short;
Therefore in summary, He is all.
28 How are we able to exalt Him?
For He is great above all His works.
29 HWHY is awesome and exceedingly great,
And His power is marvellous.
30 When you esteem HWHY, exalt Him as much as
you may;
For He shall even yet far exceed.
And when you exalt Him, deliver all your strength,
And do not be weary; for you shall never declare
enough.
31 Who has seen Him, that he might tell us?
And who could exalt Him as He is?
18

1200

SIRACH

There are still greater than these which are
hidden,
For we have seen but a few of His works.
33 For HWHY has made all;
And to the reverent has he given wisdom.
32

44 Let us now baraḵ men of name,
And our fathers who brought us forth.
2 HWHY has worked great esteem by them,
Through His great power from the beginning.
3 Those who ruled in their reigns, men named for
their strength,
Giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring
neḇuoth.
4 Leaders of the people by their counsels;
And by their knowledge of learning, fitting for the
people,
Wise and learned are their instructions.
5 Such who compose musical songs, and speak
verses in writing;
6 Wealthy men equipped with resource, living
peaceably in their dwellings;
7 All these were esteemed in their generations,
And were the esteem of their times.
8 There are some of them who have left behind a
name,
That their bireḵoth might be declared.
9 And there are some who have no remembrance;
Who have perished as though they had never been;
And have become as though they had never been
born;
And their children after them.
10 But these were kind men,
Whose righteousness has not been forgotten.
11 With their seed a good inheritance shall
continually remain,
And their children are within the Covenant.
1201

ECCLESIASTICUS

Their seed stands fast,
And their children for their sakes.
13 Their seed shall remain forever,
And their esteem shall not be blotted out.
14 Their bodies are buried in peace;
But their name lives forever.
15 The people shall tell of their wisdom,
And the assembly shall declare their praise.
16 Ḥanoḵ pleased HWHY and was translated,
Being an example of repentance to all generations.
17 Noaḥ was found perfect and righteous;
In the time of wrath he was taken in exchange;
Therefore he was left as a remnant upon the earth
when the flood came.
18 An everlasting Covenant was made with him,
That no longer would all flesh perish by the flood.
19 Aḇraham was a great father of many people;
There was none like him in esteem;
20 Who kept the Law of the Most High, and was in
Covenant with Him.
He established the Covenant in his flesh;
And when he was tried, he was found trustworthy.
21 Therefore He assured him with an oath,
That He would baraḵ the nations in his seed,
And that He would multiply him as the dust of the
earth,
And exalt his seed as the stars, and cause them to
inherit from sea to sea,
And from the River unto the utmost part of the land.
22 With Yitsḥaq He likewise established the beraḵah
of all men, and the Covenant,
And caused it to rest upon the head of Ya’aqoḇ.
He acknowledged him with His beraḵah,
And gave him an inheritance, and divided his
portions;
Among the twelve tribes He divided them.
12

1202

SIRACH

45 And He brought out from him a kind man, who
found favour in the sight of all flesh,
Even Mosheh, beloved of Elohim and men, whose
remembrance is baruḵ.
2 He made him like the esteemed qodeshim,
And exalted him, so that his enemies stood in fear of
him.
3 By his words He caused the wonders to cease,
And He made him esteemed in the sight of
sovereigns,
And gave him a Command for His people,
And showed him part of His esteem.
4 He qadosh him in his trustworthiness and humility,
And chose him out of all men.
5 He caused him to hear His voice, and brought him
into the thick cloud,
And gave him Commands before His face,
Even the Law of Ḥai and knowledge,
That he might teach Ya’aqoḇ His Covenant,
And Yisra’ĕl his Right-Rulings.
6 He exalted Aharon, a qodesh man like him,
Even his brother, of the tribe of Lĕwi.
7 He made an everlasting Covenant with him,
And gave him the kehunnah among the people;
He adorned him with comely ornaments,
And clothed him with a robe of esteem.
8 He put upon him perfect esteem;
And strengthened him with splendid garments,
With linen trousers, with a long robe, and the
shoulder garment.
9 And He surrounded it with pomegranates,
And with many golden bells all around,
So that as he walked there would be a sound,
And a noise made that would be heard in the Hĕyḵal,
For a remembrance to the children of His people;
1203

ECCLESIASTICUS

With a qodesh garment of gold and blue silk and
purple,
The work of embroidery with a breastplate of RightRuling,
And with Urim and Tummim;
11 With woven scarlet, the work of the skilled
workman,
With precious stones engraved like seals, and
mounted in gold,
The work of the engraver with writing engraved for a
remembrance,
After the number of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
12 He placed a crown of gold upon the turban, in
which was engraved QODESHAH,
An ornament of esteem, a precious work,
The desire of the eyes, elegant and lovely.
13 Before him there were none like them,
Nor did any stranger ever put them on,
But only his children and his children’s children for all
time.
14 Their offerings shall be completely consumed
twice every day continually.
15 Mosheh ordained him, and anointed him with
qodesh oil:
This was appointed to him with an everlasting
Covenant,
And to his seed, so long as the shamayim should
remain,
That they should serve Him, and execute the office of
the kehunnah,
And baraḵ the people in His Name.
16 He chose him out of all men living to offer
slaughterings to HWHY,
Incense, and a sweet savour, for a remembrance,
To make atonement for His people.
17 He gave him His Commands, and authority in the
Laws of Right-Rulings,
10

1204

SIRACH

That he should teach Ya’aqoḇ the Witnesses,
And instruct Yisra’ĕl in His Torot.
18 Foreigners conspired together against him,
And scorned him in the wilderness,
Even the men that were on the side of Dathan and
Aḇiram,
And the assembly of Qoraḥ, with rage and wrath.
19 This HWHY saw, and it displeased Him,
And in His wrathful displeasure they were consumed;
He did wonders upon them, to consume them with
the fiery flame.
20 But he made Aharon more esteemed,
And gave him an inheritance, and divided to him the
first-fruits of the increase;
Most of all He prepared bread in abundance;
21 For they eat of the offerings of HWHY,
Which He gave to him and his seed.
22 However in the land of the people he had no
inheritance,
Nor had he any portion among the people;
For HWHY Himself is his portion and inheritance.
23 The third in esteem is Pineḥas the son of Eli’ezer,
Because he had ardour in the reverence of HWHY,
And stood up with good courage of heart when the
people were turned back,
And made atonement for Yisra’ĕl.
24 Therefore there was a Covenant of peace made
with him,
That he should be the chief of the Miqdash and of His
people,
And that he and his descendants should have the
height of the kehunnah forever;
25 According to the Covenant made with Dawiḏ son
of Yishai, of the tribe of Yahuḏah,
That the inheritance of the sovereign should be to his
descendants alone;
1205

ECCLESIASTICUS

So the inheritance of Aharon should also be to his
seed.
26 Elohim give you wisdom in your heart to rightlyrule His people in righteousness,
That their good is not abolished, and that their
esteem may endure forever.

46 Yahoshua the son a Nun was a brave warrior,
And was the successor of Mosheh in neḇuoth,
Who according to his name was made great for the
saving of the elect of Elohim,
And taking vengeance on the enemies that rose up
against them,
That he might place Yisra’ĕl in their inheritance.
2 What great esteem he attained, when he lifted up
his hands,
And stretched out his sword against the cities!
3 Who before him ever stood up to it? For HWHY
Himself brought his enemies to him.
4 Did the sun not go back by His doing?
And was not one day as long as two?
5 He called upon the Most High Ĕl, when the
enemies pressed upon him on every side;
And HWHY the Almighty heard him.
6 And with hailstones of great strength He made the
battle fall violently against the nations,
And at the descent he destroyed those who resisted,
That the nations might know all their strength,
Because he fought in the sight of HWHY,
And he followed the Almighty.
7 In the time of Mosheh he also did a work of
kindness,
He and Kalĕḇ the son of Yephunneh,
In that they withstood the assembly,
And withheld the people from sin, and appeased the
wicked murmuring.
1206

SIRACH

And of six hundred thousand people on foot,
These two were preserved to bring them into the
inheritance,
Even to the land that flows with milk and honey.
9 HWHY also gave strength to Kalĕḇ,
Who remained with him to his old age;
So that he entered into the high places of the land,
And his seed obtained it for an inheritance;
10 That all the children of Yisra’ĕl might see that it is
good to follow HWHY.
11 And concerning the judges, every one by name,
Whose heart did not go whoring, nor departed from
HWHY,
Let their memory be baruḵ.
12 Let their bones flourish from their place,
And let the name of those who were esteemed be
continued upon their children.
13 Shemu’ĕl, the naḇi of HWHY, beloved of his Aḏon,
Established a reign, and anointed princes over His
people.
14 By the Law of HWHY he rightly-ruled the assembly,
And HWHY showed respect toward Ya’aqoḇ.
15 By his trustworthiness he was found a true naḇi,
And by his word he was known to be trustworthy in
vision.
16 He called upon HWHY the Almighty,
When his enemies pressed upon him on every side,
When he offered the suckling lamb.
17 And HWHY thundered from the shamayim,
And with a great noise made His voice heard.
18 And He destroyed the rulers of the Tsorites,
And all the princes of the Pelishtites.
19 And before his long sleep he bore witness in the
sight of HWHY and His anointed,
“I have not taken any man’s goods, so much as a
shoe.”
And no man accused him.
8

1207

ECCLESIASTICUS

And after his death he naḇa, and showed the
sovereign his end,
And lifted up his voice from the earth in neḇuah,
To blot out the wickedness of the people.
20

47 And after him rose up Nathan to naḇa in the time
of Dawiḏ.
2 As the fat is taken away from the peace offering,
So Dawiḏ was chosen out of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
3 He played with lions as with young goats,
And bears as with lambs.
4 Did he not slay a giant, when he was still young?
And did he not take away the reproach of the people,
When he lifted up his hand with the stone in the sling,
And beat down the boasting of Golyath?
5 For he called upon the Most High Ĕl;
And He gave him strength in his right hand to slay
that mighty warrior,
And raise up the horn of His people.
6 So the people esteemed him with ten thousands,
And praised him with the bireḵoth of HWHY,
In that He gave him a crown of esteem.
7 For he destroyed their enemies on every side,
And brought to naught his adversaries, the
Pelishtites,
And broke their horn in pieces to this day.
8 In all his works he praised the Qadosh One Most
High with words of esteem;
With his whole heart he sang songs,
And loved He who made him.
9 He also appointed singers before the altar,
That with their voices they made sweet melody,
And sang praises daily with their songs.
10 He adorned their Feasts, and put in order the
Appointed Times until the end,
That they should praise His qodesh Name,
And that the Hĕyḵal might resound from the morning.
1208

SIRACH

HWHY took away his sins, and exalted his horn
forever:
He gave him a Covenant of sovereigns,
And a throne of esteem in Yisra’ĕl.
12 After him rose up a wise son, and for his sake his
dwelling was broad.
13 Shelomoh reigned in a peaceable time, and was
esteemed;
For Elohim made quiet all around him,
That he might build a House for His Name,
And prepare His Miqdash forever.
14 How wise you were in your youth,
And filled with understanding as a flood!
15 Your being covered the whole earth, and you filled
it with deep parables.
16 Your name went to the far islands;
And for your peace you were loved.
17 The lands marvelled at you for your songs, and
proverbs, and parables, and interpretations.
18 By the Name of HWHY Elohim, which is called
HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
You gathered gold as tin and multiplied silver as lead.
19 You bowed your loins to women,
And by your body you were brought into subjection.
20 You stained your esteem, and polluted your seed;
So that you brought wrath upon your children,
And were grieved for your folly.
21 So the reign was divided, and out of Ephrayim
ruled a rebellious reign.
22 But the kindness of HWHY shall never cease,
Nor shall any of His works perish,
Neither shall He cut off the descendants of His elect,
And the seed of he who loves Him He shall not take
away;
Therefore He gave a remnant to Ya’aqoḇ,
And out of him, a root of Dawiḏ.
11

1209

ECCLESIASTICUS

Thus Shelomoh rested with his fathers,
And of his seed he left behind him Reḥaḇ’am,
Even the foolishness of the people, and one who had
no understanding,
Who turned the people away through his counsel.
There was also Yaroḇ’am the son of Neḇat,
Who caused Yisra’ĕl to sin, and showed Ephrayim
the way of sin;
24 And their sins were multiplied exceedingly,
So they were driven out of the land.
25 For they sought out all wickedness,
Till the punishment came upon them.
23

48 Then Ĕliyahu the naḇi stood up as fire,
And his word burned like a lamp.
2 He brought a severe scarcity of food upon them,
And by his ardour he diminished their number.
3 By the word of HWHY he shut up the shamayim,
And also brought down fire three times.
4 O Ĕliyahu, how you were esteemed in your
wondrous deeds!
And whose esteem is like yours?
5 Who raised up a dead man from death,
And his being from the place of the dead,
By the word of the Most High;
6 Who brought sovereigns to destruction,
And honourable men from their bed;
7 Who heard the rebuke of HWHY at Sinai,
And the judgment of punishment in Ḥorĕḇ;
8 Who anointed sovereigns to take vengeance,
And neḇi’im to succeed after him;
9 Who was taken up in a whirlwind of fire,
And in a chariot of fiery horses;
10 Who were ordained for reproofs in their times,
To appease the wrath of judgment of HWHY,
Before it broke forth into wrath,
1210

SIRACH

And to turn the heart of the father to the son,
And to restore the tribes of Ya’aqoḇ.
11 Baruḵ are those who saw You, and slept in love;
For we shall surely live.
12 It was Ĕliyahu who was covered with a whirlwind;
And Ĕlisha was filled with His Ruaḥ.
While he lived, he was not moved by the presence of
any prince,
Nor could any bring him into subjection.
13 No word could overcome him;
And after his death his being naḇa.
14 He did wonders in his life,
And at his death his works were marvellous.
15 For all this the people did not repent,
Nor did they depart from their sins,
Till they were plundered and carried out of their land,
And were scattered through all the earth;
Yet there remained a remnant of the people,
And a ruler from the house of Dawiḏ;
16 Of whom some did that which was pleasing to
Elohim,
And some multiplied sins.
17 Ḥizqiyahu fortified his city, and brought in water
into the midst of it;
He dug the solid rock with tools of iron,
And made wells for water.
18 In his time Sanḥĕriḇ came up, and sent the
Raḇshaqĕh,
And lifted up his hand against Tsiyon,
And boasted proudly.
19 Then their hearts and hands trembled,
And they were in pain, as women in childbirth.
20 But they called upon HWHY who is kind,
And stretched out their hands toward Him.
And immediately the Qadosh One heard them out of
the shamayim,
And delivered them by the service of Yeshayahu.
1211

ECCLESIASTICUS

He smote the army of Ashshur,
And His messenger destroyed them.
22 For Ḥizqiyahu had done that which pleased HWHY,
And was strong in the Ways of Dawiḏ his father,
As Yeshayahu the naḇi, who was great and
trustworthy in his vision, had commanded him.
23 In his time the sun went backward,
And he lengthened the sovereign’s life.
24 He saw by an excellent spirit what would come to
pass,
And he comforted those who mourned in Tsiyon.
25 He showed what should come to be at the end of
time,
And secrets before they came to be.
21

49 The remembrance of Yoshiyahu is like the
composition of a perfume that is made with the skill of
the perfumer;
It is sweet as honey in all mouths,
And as music at a feast of wine.
2 He acted uprightly by instructing the people,
And took away the wicked abominations.
3 He directed his heart toward HWHY,
And in the time of the wicked he established the
worship of Elohim.
4 All except Dawiḏ and Ḥizqiyahu and Yoshiyahu,
were wicked;
For they forsook the Law of the Most High,
Even the sovereigns of Yahuḏah failed.
5 Therefore He gave their strength to others,
And their esteem to a foreign nation.
6 They burned the chosen city of the Miqdash,
And made the streets desolate,
According to the neḇuah of Yirmeyahu.
7 For they treated him evilly, who was yet a naḇi,
qadosh in his mother’s womb,
1212

SIRACH

That he might root out, and afflict, and destroy;
And that he might also build up, and plant.
8 It was Yeḥezqĕl who saw the esteemed vision,
Which was shown to him upon the chariot of the
keruḇim.
9 For he remembered the enemies under the sign of
rain,
And directed those who went rightly.
10 And of the twelve neḇi’im let their remembrance
be baruḵ,
And let their bones flourish again out of their place;
For they comforted Ya’aqoḇ, and delivered them with
true expectancy.
11 How shall we exalt Zerubbaḇel?
Even he was as a signet on the right hand;
12 So was Yĕshua son of Yotsaḏaq;
Who in their time built the House,
And raised a qodesh Hĕyḵal to HWHY,
Which was prepared for everlasting esteem.
13 And among the elect was Neḥemyah,
Whose name is great, who raised up for us the walls
that had fallen,
And put up the gates and the bars, and raised up our
ruins again.
14 But no man on the earth was created like Ḥanoḵ;
For he was taken from the earth.
15 Neither was there a young man born like Yosĕph,
A governor over his brothers, a support to the people,
Whose bones were regarded by HWHY.
16 Shĕm and Shĕth were in great esteem among
men,
And so was Aḏam above every living creature in
creation.

50 Shim’on the kohĕn ha’gadol, the son of Onyah,
Who in his life repaired the House again,
And in his days fortified the Hĕyḵal;
1213

ECCLESIASTICUS

And by him the double height from the foundation
was built,
The high fortress of the wall around the Hĕyḵal;
3 In his days the cistern to receive water, being
surrounded as the sea,
Was covered with plates of bronze;
4 He looked after of the Hĕyḵal that it should not fall,
And fortified the city against a siege.
5 How esteemed he was in the midst of the people,
When coming out of the Miqdash!
6 He was as the morning star in the midst of a
cloud,
And as the moon in its fullness;
7 As the sun shining upon the Hĕyḵal of the Most
High,
And as the rainbow giving light in the bright clouds,
8 And as the flower of roses in the spring of the
year;
As lilies by the rivers of water,
And as the branches of frankincense in the time of
summer;
9 As fire and incense in the fire holder,
And as a vessel of beaten gold mounted with all kinds
of precious stones;
10 And as a fair olive tree budding forth fruit,
And as a cypress which grows up to the clouds.
11 When he put on the robe of esteem,
And was clothed with the perfection of esteem,
When he went up to the qodesh altar,
He made the garment of qodeshah esteemed.
12 When he took the portion out of the hands of the
kohenim,
He himself stood by the hearth of the altar,
Surrounded as a young cedar in Leḇanon;
And as palm trees they surrounded him.
2

1214

SIRACH

So were all the sons of Aharon in their esteem,
And the offerings of HWHY in their hands,
Before all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl.
14 And finishing the service at the altar,
That he might adorn the offering of the Most High
Almighty,
15 He stretched out his hand to the cup,
And pouring the blood of the grape,
He poured out at the foot of the altar,
A sweet fragrance to the Most High Sovereign of all.
16 Then the sons of Aharon shouted,
And sounded the silver trumpets,
And made a great noise to be heard,
For a remembrance before the Most High.
17 Then all the people hurried together,
And fell down on their faces on the earth to worship
HWHY Ĕl Shaddai, the Most High.
18 The singers also sang praises with their voices,
With all kinds of sounds sweet melody was made.
19 And the people sought HWHY the Most High,
By prayer before He who is kind,
Till the qodeshah of HWHY had ended,
And they had finished His service.
20 Then he went down, and raised his hands over
the whole assembly of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
To give the beraḵah of HWHY with his lips, and to
rejoice in His Name.
21 And they bowed themselves down to worship a
second time,
That they might receive a beraḵah from the Most
High.
22 Now therefore baraḵ the Elohim of all,
Who does only wondrously everywhere,
Who exalts our days from the womb,
And deals with us according to His kindness.
23 He gives joy to the heart,
And that peace may be in our days in Yisra’ĕl forever;
13

1215

ECCLESIASTICUS

That He would confirm His kindness with us,
And deliver us in His time!
25 There are two manner of nations which my heart
abhors,
And the third is no nation:
26 Those who sit on the mountain of Shomeron,
And those who dwell among the Pelishtites,
And those foolish people who dwell in Sheḵem.
27 Yahoshua the son of Sira of Yerushalayim,
Has written in this book the instruction of
understanding and knowledge,
From whose heart poured out wisdom.
28 Baruḵ is he who shall be exercised in these;
And he who treasures them up in his heart shall
become wise.
29 For if he does them, he shall be strong in all;
For the light of HWHY leads he who gives wisdom to
the reverent.
Baruḵ be the Name of HWHY forever.
Amĕn, Amĕn.
24

51 A Prayer of Yahoshua the son of Sira.
I thank you, O Aḏon and Sovereign,
And praise You, O Elohim my Saviour;
I give praise to Your Name;
2 For You are my Defender and Helper,
And have preserved my body from destruction,
And from the snare of the slanderous tongue,
And from the lips that forge lies,
And have been my Helper against my adversaries;
3 And have delivered me, according to the multitude
of Your kindnesses and greatness of Your Name,
From the teeth of those who were ready to devour
me,
And out of the hands of those who sought after my
life,
And from the great afflictions which I had;
1

1216

SIRACH

From the choking fire on every side,
And from the midst of the fire which I did not kindle;
5 From the depth of the inward parts of She’ol,
From an unclean tongue, and from lying words.
6 By an accusation to the sovereign from an
unrighteous tongue,
My being drew near unto death,
My life was near to She’ol beneath.
7 They surrounded me on every side,
And there was no one to help me.
I looked for the support of men, but there was none.
8 Then I thought upon Your favour, O HWHY,
And upon Your acts of old, How You save those who
wait on You,
And save them out of the hands of their enemies.
9 Then I lifted up my supplications from the earth,
And prayed for deliverance from death,
10 I called upon Aḏonai HWHY, the Father,
That He would not leave me in the days of my
trouble,
And in the time of the proud, when there was no help.
11 I praise Your Name continually,
And sing praises with thanksgiving;
And so my prayer is heard.
12 For You saved me from destruction,
And delivered me from the evil time;
Therefore I thank and praise You,
And baraḵ Your Name, O HWHY!
13 When I was still young, or if I ever went travelling,
I desired wisdom openly in my prayer.
14 I prayed for her before the Hĕyḵal,
And shall seek her to the end.
15 Even from the flower till the grape was ripe,
My heart has delighted in her;
My foot went the right way,
From my youth upward I sought after her.
4

1217

ECCLESIASTICUS

I bowed down my ear a little, and received her,
And acquired much learning.
17 I profited in this, therefore I shall ascribe esteem
to He who gives me wisdom.
18 For I purposed to go after her,
And earnestly I followed that which is good;
So I shall not be ashamed.
19 My being has wrestled with her,
And in my doings I was exact.
I stretched forth my hands to the shamayim above,
And bewailed my ignorances of her.
20 I directed my being unto her,
And I found her in pureness.
I have had my heart joined with her from the
beginning,
Therefore I shall not be forsaken.
21 My heart was troubled in seeking her;
Therefore I have received a good possession.
22 HWHY has given me a tongue for my reward,
And I shall praise Him with it!
23 Draw near unto me, you unlearned,
And dwell in the house of learning.
24 Why are you slow, and what do you say to these?
Seeing your beings are very thirsty.
25 I opened my mouth, and said,
“Acquire her for yourselves without silver.”
26 Put your neck under the yoke, and let your being
receive instruction;
She is found to be close at hand.
27 See with your eyes, how I have only little labour,
And have received much rest.
28 Acquire learning with a great sum of silver,
And get much gold by her.
29 Let your being rejoice in His kindness,
And do not be ashamed of His praise.
30 Work your work early,
And in His time He shall give you your reward.
16

1218

JUDITH

YAHUḎITH
‫ יהודית‬tYdWhY

1 In the twelfth year of the reign of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar,
who reigned in Ninewĕh, the great city; in the days of
Arpaḵshaḏ, who reigned over the Maḏites in Aḥmetha,
2 and in Aḥmetha built walls round about of stones
hewn three ammah wide and six ammah long, and
made the height of the wall seventy ammah, and the
breadth of it fifty ammah,
3 and put its towers upon its gates a hundred ammah
high, and its breadth in the foundation sixty ammah.
4 And he made its gates, even gates that were raised
to the height of seventy ammah, and the breadth of
them was forty ammah, for the going forth of his mighty
armies, and for the formation of his footmen.
5 Also in those days, sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
fought against overeign Arpaḵshaḏ in the great plain,
which is the plain in the borders of Rhaḡes.
6 And all those who dwelt in the hill country, and all
who dwelt by Perath came to him, and Ḥiddeqel and
Hudaspĕs, and the plain of Aryoḵ the sovereign of the
Ĕylamites, and very many nations of the sons of
Kasdim, assembled themselves to the battle.
7 Then Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Ashshur sent
to all who dwelt in Paras, and to all who dwelt
westward, and to those who dwelt in Kilikia, and
Dammeseq, and Leḇanon, and opposite Leḇanon, and
to all who dwelt on the seacoast,
8 and to those among the nations that were of
Karmel, and Gil’aḏ, and the higher Galil, and the great
Valley of Yizre’ĕl,
9 and to all that were in Shomeron and its cities, and
beyond the Yardĕn to Yerushalayim, and Bĕyth Anun,
and Ḥĕlets, and Qaḏĕsh, and the River of Mitsrayim,
1219

YAHUḎITH

and Taḥpenĕs, and Ra’amses, and all the land of
Goshen,
10 until you come beyond Tso’an and Noph, and to all
the inhabitants of Mitsrayim, until you come to the
borders of Kush.
11 But all the inhabitants of the land disregarded the
command of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Ashshur,
neither went with him to battle, for they were not afraid
of him. Indeed, he was before them as one man, and
they sent away his ambassadors from them without
effect, and with shame.
12 Therefore Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar was very wroth with all
this land, and swore by his throne and reign, that he
would surely be avenged upon all those coasts of
Kilikia, and Dammeseq, and Aram, and that he would
slay all the inhabitants of the land of Mo’aḇ with the
sword, and the children of Ammon, and all Yahuḏah,
and all who were in Mitsrayim, till you come to the
borders of the two seas.
13 Then he marched in battle array with his strength
against sovereign Arpaḵshaḏ in the seventeenth year,
and he prevailed in his battle; for he overthrew all the
strength of Arpaḵshaḏ, and all his horsemen, and all
his chariots.
14 And became master of his cities, and came to
Aḥmetha, and took the towers, and plundered its
streets, and turned its pleasantness into shame.
15 He also took Arpaḵshaḏ in the mountains of
Rhaḡes, and smote him through with his arrows, and
utterly destroyed him that day.
16 So afterward he returned to Ninewĕh, both he and
all his army of assorted nations - being a very great
number of men of battle - and there he took his ease,
and feasted, both he and his army, a hundred and
twenty days.

1220

JUDITH

2 And in the eighteenth year, the twenty-second day
of the first month, it was spoken in the house of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Ashshur that he should,
as he said, avenge himself on all the earth.
2 So he called all his officers to him, and all his
nobles, and spoke with them his secret counsel, and
decided upon afflicting the whole earth out of his own
mouth.
3 Then they decreed to destroy all flesh, that did not
obey the command from his mouth.
4 And
when he had ended his counsel,
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Ashshur called
Holophernĕs the chief captain of his army, who was
next to him, and said to him.
5 “Thus said the great sovereign, the master of the
whole earth, ‘See, you shall go out from my presence,
and take men with you that trust in their own strength:
one hundred and twenty thousand footmen; and the
number of twelve thousand horses with their riders.
6 ‘And you shall go against all the western land,
because they disobeyed my command.
7 ‘And you shall declare to them that they prepare for
me earth and water; for I shall go forth in my wrath
against them and shall cover the whole face of the
earth with the feet of my army, and I shall give them for
a plunder,
8 so that their slain shall fill their valleys and wadis
and the river shall be filled with their dead, till it
overflows.
9 ‘And I shall lead them captive to the farthest parts
of all the earth.
10 ‘You therefore shall go out beforehand and take for
me all their coasts; and if they surrender themselves to
you, you shall reserve them for me till the day of their
punishment.
1221

YAHUḎITH

‘But concerning those who rebel, do not let your eye
spare them; but put them to the slaughter, and plunder
them wherever you go.
12 ‘For as I live, and by the power of my reign,
whatever I have spoken, that I shall do by my hand.
13 ‘And take heed that you transgress none of the
commands of your master, but accomplish them fully,
as I have commanded you, and do not delay to do
them.’ ”
14 Then Holophernĕs went out from the presence of
his master, and called all the governors and captains
and the officers of the army of Ashshur;
15 and he mustered the chosen men for the battle, as
his master had commanded him, to one hundred and
twenty thousand, and twelve thousand mounted
archers;
16 and he arranged them, as a great army is ordered
for battle.
17 And he took camels and donkeys for their supplies,
a very great number; and sheep and oxen and goats
without number for their provisions,
18 and plenty of food for every man of the army, and
very much gold and silver out of the sovereign’s
palace.
19 Then he went forth and all his strength to go before
sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar in the journey, and to
cover all the face of the earth westward with their
chariots and horsemen and their chosen footmen.
20 A great number of various countries also came with
them like locusts, and like the dust of the earth; for the
crowd was without number.
21 And they went forth from Ninewĕh three days’
journey toward the plain of Bĕktilĕth, and pitched from
Bĕktilĕth near the mountain which is to the left hand of
upper Kilikia.
11

1222

JUDITH

Then he took all his army; his footmen and
horsemen and chariots, and went from there into the
hill country;
23 and destroyed Put and Luḏ, and plundered all the
children of Rassis, and the Yishma’ĕlites, who were
toward the wilderness to the south of the land of the
Ḵelleans.
24 Then he passed over Perath, and went through
Aram Naharayim, and destroyed all the high cities that
were on the River Aḇrona, till you come to the sea.
25 And he took the borders of Kilikia, and killed all who
resisted him, and came to the borders of Yepheth,
which were toward the south, opposite Araḇia.
26 He also surrounded all the children of Miḏian, and
burned up their tents, and plundered their sheepfolds.
27 Then he went down into the plain of Dammeseq in
the time of wheat harvest, and burned up all their
fields, and destroyed their flocks and herds, he also
plundered their cities and utterly laid waste their lands
and smote all their young men with the edge of the
sword.
28 Therefore the fear and dread of him fell upon all the
inhabitants of the seacoasts who were in Tsor and
Tsiḏon and those who dwelt in Sur and Okeyna, and
all who dwelt in Yemna’an; and those who dwelt in
Ashdoḏ and Ashqelon feared him greatly.
22

3 So they sent ambassadors to him to entreat for
peace, saying,
2 “See, we the servants of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the great
sovereign lie before you; use us as is good in your
eyes.
3 “Look, our houses and all our places and all our
fields of wheat and flocks and herds, and all the camps
of our tents lie before you; use them as it pleases you.

1223

YAHUḎITH

“See, even our cities and their inhabitants are your
servants; come and deal with them as seems good to
you.”
5 So the men came to Holophernĕs, and spoke to
him after this manner.
6 Then he came down toward the seacoast, both he
and his army, and appointed garrisons in the high
cities, and took chosen men out of them for help.
7 So they and all the country round about received
them with flowers, with dances, and with timbrels.
8 But he broke down their pillars and cut down their
Ashĕrim; for he had decreed to destroy all the mighty
ones of the land, that all nations should worship
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar only, and that all tongues and tribes
should call upon him as a mighty one.
9 He also came opposite Yizre’ĕl near Yahuḏah,
opposite the great ridge of Yahuḏah.
10 And he camped between Geḇa and Bĕyth She’an,
and there he waited a whole month, that he might
gather together all the supplies for his army.
4

4 Now the children of Yisra’ĕl who dwelt in Yahuḏah,
heard all that Holophernĕs the chief captain of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Ashshur had done to
the nations, and how he had plundered all their
temples, and brought them to nought.
2 Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of him, and
were troubled for Yerushalayim, and for the Hĕyḵal of
HWHY their Elohim;
3 for they had recently returned from the captivity,
and all the people of Yahuḏah were recently gathered
together; and the utensils and the altar and the House
were qadosh after they were defiled.
4 So they sent to all the coast of Shomeron, and
Qonah and to Bĕyth Ḥoron, and Ba’al Mayim, and
Yeriḥo, and to Ḥoḇah, and Ḥatsor, and to the valley of
Shalĕm;
1224

JUDITH

and took possession beforehand of all the tops of
the high mountains, and strengthened the cities that
were in them, and laid up food for the supply of battle;
for their fields were recently reaped.
6 Also Yoyaqim the kohĕn ha’gadol, who was in
Yerushalayim in those days, wrote to those who dwelt
in Bĕyth Yulia, and Bĕyth Hornasthayim, which is
opposite Yizre’ĕl toward the open country, near to
Dothan,
7 commanding them to guard the passages of the hill
country; for through them there was an entrance into
Yahuḏah, and it was easy to stop those who would
come up, because the passage was narrow - for two
men at the most.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did as Yoyaqim the
kohĕn ha’gadol had commanded them, with the elders
of all the people of Yisra’ĕl who dwelt at Yerushalayim.
9 Then every man of Yisra’ĕl cried to Elohim with
great ardour, and they humbled their beings with great
fervency;
10 both they and their wives and their children and
their cattle and every stranger and hired man and their
servants bought with money, and put sackcloth upon
their loins.
11 So every man and woman and the little children and
the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, fell before the Hĕyḵal,
and threw ashes upon their heads, and spread out
their sackcloth before the face of HWHY; they also put
sackcloth around the altar,
12 and cried to the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl all with one
accord earnestly, that He would not give their children
as prey and their wives as spoil and the cities of their
inheritance to destruction and the Qodesh Place to
defilement and reproach, and for the nations to rejoice
at.
13 So Elohim heard their prayers and looked upon
their afflictions; for the people fasted many days in all
5

1225

YAHUḎITH

Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim before the Qodesh Place
of HWHY Elohim.
14 And Yoyaqim the kohĕn ha’gadol, and all the
kohenim that stood before HWHY, and those who
served before HWHY, had their loins girded with
sackcloth and offered the daily burnt offerings with the
vowed and voluntary offerings of the people,
15 and had ashes on their turbans, and cried unto
HWHY with all their strength, that He would look upon
all the house of Yisra’ĕl with favour.

5 Then it was declared to Holophernĕs, the chief
captain of the army of Ashshur, that the children of
Yisra’ĕl had prepared for battle and had shut up the
passages of the hill country and had fortified all the
tops of the high hills and had laid obstructions in the
plains,
2 with which he was very wroth, and called all the
princes of Mo’aḇ and the captains of Ammon, and all
the governors of the seacoast;
3 and he said to them, “Tell me now you sons of
Kena’an, who these people are that dwell in the hill
country; and what are the cities that they inhabit and
what is the number of their army and in what is their
power and strength and what sovereign is appointed
over them or captain of their army,
4 and why have they determined not to come and
meet me, more than all the inhabitants of the west?”
5 Then Aḵior, the captain of all the sons of Ammon
said, “Let my master now hear a word from the mouth
of your servant, and I shall declare to you the truth
concerning these people who dwell near you and
inhabit the hill countries; and no lie shall come out of
the mouth of your servant.
6 “These people are descended from the Kasdim,

1226

JUDITH

and they sojourned before in Aram Naharayim,
because they would not follow the mighty ones of their
fathers, who were in the land of Kasdim.
8 “For they left the way of their ancestors and
worshipped the Elohim of the shamayim, the Elohim
whom they knew. So they cast them out from the face
of their mighty ones, and they fled into Aram
Naharayim, and sojourned there many days.
9 “Then their Elohim Commanded them to depart
from the place where they sojourned, and to go into
the land of Kena’an; where they dwelt, and increased
in gold and silver and with very much cattle.
10 “But when a famine covered all the land of Kena’an,
they went down into Mitsrayim, and sojourned there,
while they were provided for, and became a great
multitude there, so that none could number their
nation.
11 “Therefore the sovereign of Mitsrayim rose up
against them, and dealt cunningly with them, and
brought them low in making bricks, and made them
slaves.
12 “Then they cried out to their Elohim, and He smote
all the land of Mitsrayim with incurable plagues; so the
Mitsrites cast them out of their sight.
13 “And Elohim dried the Sea of Reeds before them,
14 and brought them to Mount Sinai, and Qaḏĕsh
Barnĕa, and cast out all who dwelt in the wilderness.
15 “So they dwelt in the land of the Amorites, and they
destroyed all those of Ḥeshbon by their strength, and
passing over the Yardĕn they took possession of all
the hill country.
16 “And they cast out before them the Kena’anites, the
Perizzites, the Yeḇusites, and the Sheḵemites, and all
the Girgashites, and they dwelt in that land many days.
17 “And while they did not sin before their Elohim, they
prospered, because the Elohim who hates wickedness
was with them.
7

1227

YAHUḎITH

“But when they departed from the Way which He
appointed them, they were destroyed in many heavy
battles, and were led captives into a land that was not
theirs, and the Hĕyḵal of their Elohim was cast down
to the ground, and their cities were taken by their
enemies.
19 “But now they have returned to their Elohim and
have come up from the places where they were
scattered and have possessed Yerushalayim where
their Qodesh Place is; and have settled in the hill
country, for it was isolated.
20 “Now therefore my master and governor, if there is
any mistake against this people, and they sin against
their Elohim, let us consider that this shall be their ruin,
and let us go up, and we shall overcome them.
21 “But if there is no wickedness in their nation, let my
master now pass by, lest their Aḏon defend them, and
their Elohim be for them, and we become a reproach
before all the world.”
22 And when Aḵior had finished these words, all the
people standing around the tent murmured, and the
heads of Holophernĕs and all who dwelt by the
seacoast and in Mo’aḇ, said that he should kill him.
23 For they said, “We are not afraid of the face of the
children of Yisra’ĕl! For see, they are a people who
have no strength nor power for a mighty battle.
24 “Now therefore master Holophernĕs, we shall go up
and they shall be a prey to be devoured by your entire
army!”
18

6 And when the uproar from the men that were around
the council had ceased, Holophernĕs the chief captain
of the army of Ashshur said to Aḵior and all the
Mo’aḇites before all the company of other nations,
2 “And who are you Aḵior, and the hired men of
Ephrayim, that you have prophesied this against us
today, and have said that we should not go to battle
1228

JUDITH

with the people of Yisra’ĕl because their Elohim shall
defend them; and who is a mighty one but
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar?
3 “He shall send his power, and destroy them from
the face of the earth, and their Elohim shall not deliver
them! But we his servants shall destroy them as one
man; for they are not able to sustain the might of our
horses.
4 “For with them we shall trample them, and their
mountains shall be drunk with their blood and their
fields shall be filled with their dead bodies and their
footprints shall not be able to stand before us, for they
shall utterly perish, said sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar,
master of all the earth! For he said, ‘None of my words
shall come to naught.’
5 “And you, Aḵior, a hired man of Ammon, who has
spoken these words on the day of your punishment,
shall see my face no more from this day until I take
vengeance on this nation that came out of Mitsrayim.
6 “And then the sword of my army and the number of
those who serve me shall pierce your sides, and you
shall fall among their slain when I return.
7 “Now therefore my servants shall take you back
into the hill country, and shall place you in one of the
cities of the passages;
8 and you shall not perish, till you are destroyed with
them.
9 “And if you persuade yourself in your mind that they
shall be taken, do not let your face fall. I have spoken
it, and none of my words shall come to naught.”
10 Then Holophernĕs commanded his servants who
waited on his tent, to take Aḵior and bring him to Bĕyth
Yulia, and deliver him into the hands of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
11 So his servants took him, and brought him out of
the camp into the plain, and they went from the midst
1229

YAHUḎITH

of the plain into the hill country, and came to the
springs below Bĕyth Yulia.
12 And when the men of the city saw them, they took
up their weapons and went out of the city to the top of
the hill; and every man that used a sling kept them from
coming up by slinging stones against them.
13 However, having approached hidden below the hill,
they bound Aḵior and threw him down and left him at
the foot of the hill, and returned to their master.
14 But the Yisra’ĕlites descended from their city, and
came to him, and released him, and brought him to
Bĕyth Yulia, and presented him to the governors of the
city,
15 who in those days were: Uzziyah the son of Miḵah,
of the tribe of Shim’on, and Ḥaḇriyah the son of
Othni’ĕl, and Ḥeremyah the son of Malki’ĕl.
16 And they called together all the elders of the city,
and all their youth ran together and their women to the
assembly, and they put Aḵior in the midst of all their
people. Then Uzziyah asked him about what was
done.
17 And he answered and related to them the words of
the council of Holophernĕs, and all the words that he
had spoken in the midst of the princes of Ashshur, and
all that Holophernĕs had spoken proudly against the
house of Yisra’ĕl.
18 Then the people fell down and worshipped Elohim,
and cried out to Elohim saying,
19 “O HWHY Elohim of the shamayim! See their pride
and show favour on our humble nation, and look upon
the face of those that are qadosh to You this day.”
20 Then they comforted Aḵior, and praised him
greatly.
21 And Uzziyah took him out of the assembly to his
house, and made a feast for the elders; and they called
on the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl all that night for help.
1230

JUDITH

7 The next day Holophernĕs commanded all his army
and all his people who had come to take part, that they
should remove their encampment against Bĕyth Yulia,
to take the ascents of the hill country beforehand, and
to fight against the children of Yisra’ĕl.
2 Then their mighty men removed their camps that
day, and the army of the men of battle was one
hundred and seventy thousand footmen and twelve
thousand horsemen, besides the baggage and other
footmen that were among them - a very great crowd.
3 And they camped in the valley near Bĕyth Yulia by
the spring, and they spread themselves wide over
Dothan even to Ba’al Mayim, and in length from Bĕyth
Yulia to Yoqne’am, which is opposite Yizre’ĕl.
4 Now when the children of Yisra’ĕl saw the number
of them, they were greatly troubled, and each one said
to his neighbour, “Now these men shall lick up the face
of the earth; for neither the high mountains nor the
valleys nor the hills are able to bear their weight.”
5 Then every man took up his weapons of battle and
when they had kindled fires on their towers, they
remained and watched all that night.
6 But on the second day, Holophernĕs led out all his
horsemen in the sight of the children of Yisra’ĕl who
were in Bĕyth Yulia,
7 and scouted the ascents to the city and came to the
springs of their waters and took them and placed
garrisons of men of battle over them, and he himself
returned to his army.
8 Then all the chiefs of the children of Ĕsaw came to
him and all the governors of the people of Mo’aḇ and
the captains of the seacoast and said,
9 “Let our master now hear a word, that there shall
not be an overthrow of your army.
10 “For this people of the children of Yisra’ĕl do not
trust in their spears, but in the height of the mountains
1231

YAHUḎITH

in which they dwell, because it is not easy to ascend
to the tops of their mountains.
11 “Now therefore, my master, do not fight against
them in battle array, and not so much as one man of
your army shall perish.
12 “Remain in your camp and keep all the men of your
army, and let your servants take possession of the
spring of water which issues from the foot of the
mountain,
13 for all the inhabitants of Bĕyth Yulia get their water
there; so thirst shall kill them and they shall give up
their city. And we and our people shall go up to the
tops of the mountains that are near and shall lay siege
to them to watch that none go out of the city.
14 “So they and their wives and their children shall be
consumed with fire and before the sword comes
against them, they shall be overthrown in the streets
where they dwell.
15 “Thus you shall render them an evil reward;
because they rebelled, and did not meet you
peaceably.”
16 And these words pleased Holophernĕs and all his
servants, and he gave orders to do as they had
spoken.
17 So the camp of the children of Ammon departed
and with them five thousand of Ashshur, and they
encamped in the valley and seized the waters and the
springs of water of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
18 Then the children of Ĕsaw went up with the children
of Ammon and encamped in the hill country opposite
Dothan. And they sent some of them toward the south
and toward the east opposite Aqrabbah, which is near
Ḵusi which is on the wadi Moḵmur; and the rest of the
army of Ashshur encamped in the plain, and covered
the face of the whole land. And their tents and supply
wagons were camped forming a very great crowd.
1232

JUDITH

Then the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to HWHY their
Elohim, because their hearts failed, for all their
enemies had surrounded them, and there was no way
to escape from among them.
20 So all the army of Ashshur surrounded them thirtyfour days, both their footmen, chariots and horsemen,
so that all the containers of water of the inhabitants of
Bĕyth Yulia were empty.
21 And the cisterns were emptied and they had no
water to drink their fill for one day; for they gave them
drink by measure.
22 Therefore their young children were disheartened,
and their women and young men fainted for thirst and
fell down in the streets of the city and by the passages
of the gates, and there was no longer any strength in
them.
23 Then all the people assembled to Uzziyah and to
the chief of the city, both young men and women and
children, and cried with a loud voice, and said before
all the elders,
24 “Elohim be judge between us and you; for you have
done us great injury, in that you have not required
peace from the children of Ashshur.
25 “For now we have no helper; and Elohim has sold
us into their hands, that we should be cast down before
them with thirst and great destruction.
26 “Now therefore summon them to you, and deliver
the whole city for plunder to the men of Holophernĕs,
and to all his army.
27 “For it is better for us to be plundered by them, than
to die for thirst; for we shall be his servants, that our
beings may live and not see the death of our infants
before our eyes, nor our wives nor our children die.
28 “We take the shamayim and the earth to witness
against you, and our Elohim and Aḏon of our fathers,
who punishes us according to our sins and the sins of
19

1233

YAHUḎITH

our fathers, that He does not do as we have said this
day.”
29 Then there was great weeping with one accord in
the midst of the assembly; and they cried out to HWHY
Elohim with a loud voice.
30 Then Uzziyah said to them, “Brothers, be of good
courage, let us yet endure five days, in which time
HWHY our Elohim may turn His favour toward us; for He
shall not utterly forsake us.
31 “And if these days pass, and no help comes for us,
I shall do according to your word.”
32 And he dispersed the people, each one to their own
watch; and they went to the walls and towers of their
city and sent the women and children into their houses;
and in the city they were brought very low.

8 Now at that time Yahuḏith heard of this, who was
the daughter of Merari, the son of Utz, the son of
Yosĕph, the son of Uzzi’ĕl, the son of Elkayah, the son
of Ḥananyah, the son of Giḏ’on, the son of Repha’im,
the son of Aḥituḇ, the son of Elihu, the son of Eliyaḇ,
the son of Nethan’ĕl, the son of Shelumi’ĕl, the son of
Tsurishaddai, the son of Yisra’ĕl.
2 And Menashsheh was her husband, of her tribe
and relatives, who died in the barley harvest.
3 For as he stood overseeing those who bound
sheaves in the field, the heat overcame his head, and
he fell on his bed and died in the city of Bĕyth Yulia,
and they buried him with his fathers in the field
between Dothan and Ba’al Me’on.
4 So Yahuḏith was a widow in her house three years
and four months.
5 And she made herself a tent on the top of her
house, and put sackcloth on her loins and wore her
widow’s garments.
6 And she fasted all the days of her widowhood,
except the Shabbath, and evenings of the Shabbath,
1234

JUDITH

and the new moons, and the evenings of the new
moons and the Festivals and Appointed Times of the
house of Yisra’ĕl.
7 She also had a lovely face, and very good-looking;
and her husband Menashsheh had left her gold and
silver, and male and female servants, and cattle and
lands; and she maintained them.
8 And no one spoke evil of her; for she greatly
revered Elohim.
9 Now when she heard the evil words of the people
against the governor, when they fainted for lack of
water; for Yahuḏith had heard all the words that
Uzziyah had spoken to them, and that he had sworn to
deliver the city to Ashshur after five days;
10 then she sent her female servant who governed all
that she had, to call Uzziyah and Ḥaḇriyah and
Ḥeremyah, the elders of the city.
11 And they came to her, and she said to them, “Hear
me now, you governors of the inhabitants of Bĕyth
Yulia; for your words that you have spoken before the
people this day are not right, regarding this oath which
you made and pronounced between Elohim and you,
and have promised to deliver the city to our enemies,
unless HWHY turns to help you within these days.
12 “And now who are you to try Elohim this day, and
stand in place of Elohim among the children of men?
13 “And now, try HWHY Elohim, but you shall never
know any matter.
14 “For you cannot find the depth of the heart of man,
neither can you perceive that which he thinks. How
then can you search out Elohim, who has made all
these, and know His mind, or understand His purpose?
No my brothers! Do not provoke HWHY our Elohim to
anger.
15 “For if He does not help us within these five days,
He has power to defend us when He desires, even
every day, or to destroy us before our enemies.
1235

YAHUḎITH

“Do not bind the counsel of HWHY our Elohim; for
Elohim is not like mankind, that He could be
threatened; neither is He like the son of man, that He
should hesitate.
17 “Therefore let us wait for deliverance from Him, and
call upon Him to help us, and He shall hear our voice
if it pleases Him.
18 “For none has arisen in our age, neither is there any
in these days neither tribe, nor family, nor people, nor
city among us, who worship mighty ones made with
hands, as it was before this;
19 for which cause our fathers were given to the
sword, and for a spoil, and fell greatly before our
enemies.
20 “But we know no other mighty ones, therefore we
trust that He shall not despise us, nor any of our nation.
21 “For if we are captured, all Yahuḏah shall lie waste,
and our Qodesh Place shall be plundered; and He
shall require its defilement by our mouth.
22 “And the slaughter of our brothers and the captivity
of the country and the desolation of our inheritance, He
shall turn upon our heads among the gentiles,
wherever we are in bondage; and we shall be an insult
and a reproach to all those who possess us.
23 “For our slavery shall not be directed to favour; but
HWHY our Elohim shall turn it to dishonour.
24 “Now therefore brothers, let us show an example to
our brothers, because their hearts depend on us, and
the Qodesh Place and the House and the altar rest
upon us.
25 “Moreover let us give thanks to HWHY our Elohim,
who tries us, even as He did our fathers.
26 “Remember what He did to Aḇraham, and how He
tried Yitsḥaq, and what happened to Ya’aqoḇ in Aram
Naharayim of Suria, when he kept the sheep of Laḇan
his mother’s brother.
16

1236

JUDITH

“For He has not tried us in the fire as He did them
to search their hearts, neither has He taken vengeance
upon us; but HWHY scourges those who come near to
Him, to admonish them.”
28 Then Uzziyah said to her, “All that you have spoken
you have spoken with a good heart, and there is none
that would refute your words.
29 “For this is not the first day in which your wisdom
has been shown; but from the beginning of your days
all the people have known your understanding,
because the inclination of your heart is good.
30 “But the people were very thirsty, and compelled us
to do for them as we have spoken, and to bring an oath
upon ourselves, which we are unable to break.
31 “Therefore now pray for us, because you are a
righteous woman, and HWHY shall send us rain to fill
our cisterns, and we shall no longer be weary.”
32 Then Yahuḏith said to them, “Hear me, and I shall
do that which shall go throughout all generations to the
children of our nation.
33 “Tonight you shall stand in the gate, and I shall go
out with my female servant; and within the days that
you have promised to deliver the city to our enemies
HWHY shall visit Yisra’ĕl by my hand.
34 “But do not ask about my actions, for I shall not
declare it to you, till that which I do is completed.”
35 Then Uzziyah and the rulers said to her, “Go in
peace, and HWHY Elohim go before you, to take
vengeance on our enemies.”
36 So they returned from the tent, and went to their
watches.
27

9 Then Yahuḏith fell on her face, and put ashes on
her head, and uncovered the sackcloth with which she
was clothed; and about the time that the incense of that
evening was offered in Yerushalayim in the House of
HWHY, Yahuḏith cried with a loud voice and said,
1237

YAHUḎITH

“O HWHY Elohim of my father Shim’on, to whom you
gave a sword to take vengeance on the foreigners who
loosened the girdle of a maiden to defile her and
uncovered the thigh to her reproach and polluted her
maidenhood to put her to shame; for You said, ‘It shall
not be so.’ And yet they did so.
3 “Therefore You gave their rulers to be slain, so that
they stained their bed with blood, being deceived and
smote the servants with their masters, and the masters
on their thrones;
4 and have given their wives for a prey and their
daughters to be captives and all their plunder to be
divided among Your dear children; who were moved
with Your ardour, and abhorred the defilement of their
blood, and called upon You for help. O Elohim, O my
Elohim, hear me also a widow!
5 “For You have not only done these, but also that
which came to be before, and which came to be after;
You have thought upon the matters that are now, and
those that are to come.
6 “Even those that You determined to be ready at
hand and said, ‘See, we are here.’ For all Your ways
are prepared and Your judgments are in Your
foreknowledge.
7 “For look, Ashshur have multiplied in their power;
they are exalted with horse and man; they boast in the
strength of their footmen; they trust in shield and spear
and bow and sling, and do not know that You are HWHY
who breaks the battles. HWHY is Your Name!
8 “Cast down their strength in Your power, and bring
down their might in Your wrath; for they have planned
to defile Your Qodesh Place and to pollute the
Dwelling Place where Your great Name rests, and to
cast down the horn of Your altar with the sword.
9 “See their pride, and send Your wrath upon their
heads! Give into my hand, who is a widow, the strength
to do what I have planned.
2

1238

JUDITH

“By the deceit of my lips smite the servant with the
prince, and the prince with the servant. Break down
their pride by the hand of a woman,
11 for Your power does not stand in numbers nor Your
strength in mighty men; for You are an Elohim of the
afflicted, a Helper of the helpless, an Upholder of the
weak, a Protector of the oppressed, a Saviour of those
who are without expectancy.
12 “Please, please, O Elohim of my father and Elohim
of the inheritance of Yisra’ĕl, Aḏon of the shamayim
and earth, Creator of the waters, Sovereign of all
creation, hear my prayer,
13 and make my words and deception to be their
wound and smiting, who have planned violence
against Your Covenant, and Your qodesh House, and
against Mount Tsiyon, and against the house of the
possession of Your children.
14 “And make every nation and tribe to acknowledge
that You are the Elohim of all power and might, and
that there is none other who protects the people of
Yisra’ĕl but You!”
10

10 Now after she had ceased crying out to the Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl, and had made an end of all these words,
2 she rose from where she had fallen and called her
female servant, and went down to the house in which
she stayed on the Shabbath days, and on her Feast
days,
3 and pulled off the sackcloth which she wore and
took off the garments of her widowhood and washed
her body all over with water and anointed herself with
precious oil and braided the hair of her head and put
on a head-dress and put on her festival garments with
which she was dressed during the life of Menashsheh
her husband.
4 And she put sandals on her feet, and put on her
bracelets, and her chains, and her rings, and her
1239

YAHUḎITH

earrings, and all her ornaments, and adorned herself
splendidly, to allure the eyes of all men that should see
her.
5 Then she gave her female servant a bottle of wine
and a flask of oil and a bag filled with roasted grain and
cakes of figs and with fine bread; so she wrapped all
these together, and laid them upon her.
6 So they went out to the gate of the city of Bĕyth
Yulia, and found Uzziyah and the elders of the city,
Ḥaḇriyah and Ḥeremyah standing there.
7 And when they saw her, that her face was changed,
and her garments were changed, they marvelled
greatly at her loveliness, and said to her,
8 “HWHY, the Elohim of our fathers give you favour
and accomplish Your purposes to the esteem of the
children of Yisra’ĕl and to the exaltation of
Yerushalayim.” Then they worshipped Elohim.
9 And she said to them, “Command the gates of the
city to be opened for me, that I may go out to
accomplish that which you have spoken with me.” So
they commanded the young men to open for her as
she had spoken.
10 And when they had done so, Yahuḏith went out,
she and her female servant with her; and the men of
the city watched after her until she had gone down the
mountain and till she had passed the valley and could
see her no more.
11 So they went straight ahead in the valley; and the
first watch of Ashshur met her,
12 and took her and asked her, “Of what people are
you, and where do you come from, and where are you
going?” And she said, “I am a woman of the Iḇrim, and
have fled from them, for they shall be given to you to
be consumed.
13 “And I am coming before Holophernĕs the chief
captain of your army to declare words of truth; and I
shall show him a way by which he shall go and win all
1240

JUDITH

the hill country without losing the body or life of any
one of his men.”
14 Now when the men heard her words and saw her
face, they marvelled greatly at her loveliness and said
to her,
15 “You have saved your life, in that you have hurried
to come down to the presence of our master; now
therefore come to his tent, and some of us shall
accompany you until they have delivered you to his
hands.
16 “And when you stand before him, do not be afraid
in your heart, but show him according to your word;
and he shall treat you well.”
17 Then they chose from among them one hundred
men to accompany her and her female servant; and
they brought her to the tent of Holophernĕs.
18 Then there was a thronging throughout the entire
camp; for her coming was reported among the tents,
and they gathered around her as she stood outside the
tent of Holophernĕs, till they told him of her.
19 And they marvelled at her loveliness and admired
the children of Yisra’ĕl because of her, and each one
said to his neighbour, “Who would despise these
people who have such women among them? Surely it
is not good that one man of them be left, whom being
released might deceive the whole earth.”
20 And those who stood near Holophernĕs and all his
servants went out, and they brought her into the tent.
21 Now Holophernĕs was resting on his bed under a
canopy which was woven with purple and gold and
emeralds and precious stones.
22 So they informed him about her, and he came to
the front of his tent with silver lamps going before him.
23 And when Yahuḏith had come before him and his
servants they all marvelled at the loveliness of her
face. And she fell down upon her face, and did
obeisance to him; and his servants raised her up.
1241

YAHUḎITH

11 Then Holophernĕs said to her, “Take courage
woman, do not fear in your heart. For I never hurt any
that desire to serve Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, the sovereign of
all the earth.
2 “Now therefore, if your people who dwell in the
mountains had not despised me, I would not have lifted
up my spear against them; but they have brought these
matters upon themselves.
3 “But now tell me why you have fled from them and
have come to us; for you have come for safeguard;
take courage, you shall live this night and hereafter.
4 “For none shall hurt you, but treat you well, as they
do the servants of sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar my
master.”
5 Then Yahuḏith said to him, “Receive the words of
your servant, and allow your female servant to speak
in your presence, and I shall declare no lie to my
master this night.
6 “And if you follow the words of your female servant,
Elohim shall accomplish this matter through you; and
my master shall not fail from his purposes.
7 “As Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of all the earth
lives, and as his power exists, who has sent you for the
sustaining of all that live; for not only men shall serve
him by you, but also the beasts of the field and the
cattle and the birds of the air shall live by your power
under Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar and all his house.
8 “For we have heard of your wisdom and your
understanding, and it is reported in all the earth that
you alone are excellent in all the reign, and mighty in
knowledge and marvellous in feats of battle.
9 “Now concerning the matter which Aḵior spoke in
your council, we have heard his words; for the men of
Bĕyth Yulia saved him, and he reported to them all that
he had spoken to you.
1242

JUDITH

“Therefore, O master and governor, do not
disregard his word; but lay it up in your heart for it is
true. For our nation shall not be punished, neither can
the sword prevail against them unless they sin against
their Elohim.
11 “And now, so that my master is not defeated or
frustrated from his purpose, even now death has fallen
upon them, and their sin has overtaken them with
which they have provoked their Elohim to anger
whenever they do that which is not to be done.
12 “For their food is exhausted and their water is
scarce, and they have determined to seize their cattle,
and planned to consume all that which Elohim has
forbidden them to eat by His Torot,
13 and have resolved to consume the first-fruits of the
tenth of wine and oil which they had qadosh and
reserved for the kohenim that serve in Yerushalayim
before the face of our Elohim; that which is not right for
any of the people so much as to touch with their hands.
14 “For they have sent some to Yerushalayim,
because those who dwell there have also done the
same, to bring them permission from the council.
15 “Now when they bring them word, they shall do it
straight away, and they shall be given to you to be
destroyed the same day.
16 “Therefore I your female servant, knowing all this,
have fled from their presence; and Elohim has sent me
to accomplish matters with you at which all the earth
and whoever hears it shall be astonished.
17 “For your servant is dedicated, and serves the
Elohim of the shamayim day and night. Now therefore
my master, I shall remain with you, and your servant
shall go out by night into the valley, and I shall pray to
Elohim and He shall tell me when they have committed
their sins.
10

1243

YAHUḎITH

“And I shall come and reveal it to you; then you
shall go out with all your army, and there shall be none
of them that shall resist you.
19 “And I shall lead you through the midst of Yahuḏah
until you come to Yerushalayim; and I shall place your
throne in its midst. And you shall drive them as sheep
that have no shepherd, and a dog shall not so much
as open its mouth at you; for these matters were told
to me according to my foreknowledge, and they were
declared to me, and I have been sent to tell you.”
20 Then her words pleased Holophernĕs and all his
servants; and they marvelled at her wisdom and said,
21 “There is no other woman from one end of the earth
to the other, both for loveliness of face, and wisdom of
words.”
22 Likewise Holophernĕs said to her, “Elohim has
done well to send you before the people, that strength
might be in our hands and destruction upon those who
disrespect my master.
23 “And now you are both lovely of face and wise in
your words; surely if you do as you have spoken, your
Elohim shall be my Elohim, and you shall dwell in the
house of sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar and shall be well
praised throughout the whole earth.”
18

12 Then he commanded to bring her in where his
plate was laid; and asked that they should prepare for
her from his own food, and that she should drink of his
own wine.
2 And Yahuḏith said, “I shall not eat of it, lest there
be a trespass; but provision may be made for me from
that which I have brought.”
3 Then Holophernĕs said to her, “If your supply
should fail, how shall we give you the same? For there
are none of your nation with us.”
4 Then Yahuḏith said to him, “As your being lives my
master, your female servant shall not use up that which
1244

JUDITH

I have before HWHY works that which He has
determined by my hand.”
5 Then the servants of Holophernĕs brought her into
the tent, and she slept till midnight. But she arose when
it was toward the morning watch,
6 and sent to Holophernĕs saying, “Let my master
now command that your female servant may go out to
prayer.”
7 Then Holophernĕs commanded his guard that they
should not hinder her; so she stayed in the camp three
days, and went out at night into the valley of Bĕyth
Yulia and washed herself in a spring of water by the
camp.
8 And when she came out, she sought HWHY Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl to direct her way for the raising up of the
children of her people.
9 So she returned clean, and remained in the tent
until she ate her food in the evening.
10 And on the fourth day Holophernĕs made a feast
for his own servants only, and called none of the
officers to the banquet.
11 Then said he to Bagoas the eunuch, who oversaw
all that he had, “Go now and persuade this Iḇri woman
who is with you, that she would come and eat and drink
with us.
12 “For look, it shall be a shame to us if we shall let
such a woman go not having had her company; for if
we do not draw her to us, she shall mock us.”
13 Then Bagoas went from the presence of
Holophernĕs, and came to her and said, “Lovely young
woman, do not fear to come to my master and be
honoured in his presence, and drink wine and rejoice
with us and become this day like one of the daughters
of Ashshur who serve in the house of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar.”
14 Then Yahuḏith said to him, “Who am I that I should
refuse my master? Surely whatever pleases him I shall
1245

YAHUḎITH

do speedily, and it shall be my joy to the day of my
death.”
15 So she arose and adorned herself with her
ornaments and all her woman’s finery, and her female
servant went and laid soft skins on the ground for her
opposite Holophernĕs, which she had received from
Bagoas for her daily use, that she might sit and eat
upon them.
16 Now when Yahuḏith came in and sat down,
Holophernĕs’ heart was captivated by her, and his
being was moved, and he desired her company
greatly; for he had waited a time to seduce her from
the day that he had seen her.
17 Then said Holophernĕs to her, “Drink now, and
rejoice with us.”
18 So Yahuḏith said, “I shall drink my master, because
this day is the greatest in my life; more than all the days
since I was born.”
19 Then she took and ate and drank before him what
her female servant had prepared.
20 And Holophernĕs took great delight in her, and
drank more wine than he had drunk at any time in one
day since he was born.

13 Now when the evening had come, his servants
hastened to depart, and Bagoas shut his tent outside
and dismissed the attendants from the presence of his
master, and they went to their beds; for they were all
weary because the feast had been long.
2 And Yahuḏith was left alone in the tent, and
Holophernĕs lying across his bed; for he was filled with
wine.
3 Now Yahuḏith had commanded her female servant
to stand outside her bedroom and to wait for her to
come out as she did daily; for she said she would go
out to her prayers. And she spake to Bagoas according
to the same words.
1246

JUDITH

So all went out and no one was left in the bedroom,
neither small nor great. Then Yahuḏith, standing by his
bed said in her heart, “O HWHY, Elohim of all power,
look at this time on the works of my hands for the
exaltation of Yerushalayim.
5 “For now is the time to help Your inheritance, and
to execute Your works to the destruction of the
enemies who have risen against us.”
6 Then she went to the bedpost which was at
Holophernĕs’ head, and took down his sword from
there,
7 and approached his bed, and took hold of the hair
of his head and said, “Strengthen me this day O HWHY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.”
8 And she struck twice upon his neck with all her
strength, and she took off his head.
9 And she rolled his body down from the bed and
pulled down the canopy from the posts. And afterward
she went out and gave the head of Holophernĕs to her
female servant;
10 and she put it in her food bag. So together they
went out to prayer according to their custom; and when
they had passed the camp, they circled around the
valley and went up the mountain of Bĕyth Yulia and
came to its gates.
11 Then from a distance Yahuḏith said to the
watchmen at the gate, “Open, open now the gate!
Elohim, even our Elohim is with us to still show His
power in Yerushalayim, and His power against the
enemy, as He has even done this day!”
12 Now when the men of her city heard her voice, they
hurried to go down to the gate of their city, and they
called the elders of the city.
13 And then they all ran together, both small and great,
for it was astonishing to them that she had come; so
they opened the gate and received them, and made a
fire for a light and stood round about them.
4

1247

YAHUḎITH

Then she said to them with a loud voice, “Praise
Elohim, praise Elohim I say, for He has not taken away
His kindness from the house of Yisra’ĕl, but has
destroyed our enemies by my hands this night!”
15 So she took the head out of the bag and showed it,
and said to them, “See the head of Holophernĕs, the
chief captain of the army of Ashshur, and see the
canopy, in which he lay in his drunkenness; and HWHY
has smitten him by the hand of a woman.
16 “As HWHY lives who has kept me in my way that I
went, my face has deceived him to his destruction, and
yet he has not committed sin with me, to defile and
shame me.”
17 Then all the people were greatly astonished and
bowed themselves and worshipped Elohim, and said
with one accord, “Baruḵ are You, O our Elohim, who
has this day brought the enemies of Your people to
nought!”
18 Then Uzziyah said to her, “O daughter, baruḵ are
you of the Most High Elohim above all the women on
the earth; and baruḵ be HWHY Elohim, who has created
the shamayim and the earth, who has guided you to
cut off the head of the chief of our enemies.
19 “For this, your trust shall not depart from the hearts
of men who remember the power of Elohim forever.
20 “And Elohim turn these to you for a praise forever,
to remember you for good because you have not
spared your life for the affliction of our nation, but have
revenged our ruin, walking a straight way before our
Elohim.” And all the people said, “Amĕn, amĕn.”
14

14 Then Yahuḏith said to them, “Hear me now my
brothers and take this head and hang it on the highest
place of your walls,
2 and as soon as the morning comes and the sun
comes up on the earth, everyone of you take his
weapons and every brave man go out of the city. And
1248

JUDITH

appoint a captain over them, as though going down to
the plain toward the watch of Ashshur; but do not go
down.
3 “Then they shall take their weapons and go into
their camp and raise up the captains of the army of
Ashshur, and shall run to the tent of Holophernĕs but
shall not find him. Then fear shall fall upon them and
they shall flee before your face.
4 “So you and all that inhabit the coast of Yisra’ĕl
shall pursue them and overthrow them as they go.
5 “But before you do these, call Aḵior the Ammonite
to me, that he may see and know he who despised the
house of Yisra’ĕl, and who sent him to us as if to his
death.”
6 Then they called Aḵior out of the house of Uzziyah;
and when he had come and saw the head of
Holophernĕs in a man’s hand in the assembly of the
people, he fell down on his face and his ruaḥ failed.
7 But when they had revived him, he fell at Yahuḏith’s
feet, and did obeisance to her and said, “Baruḵ are you
in all the tents of Yahuḏah and in all nations who
hearing your name shall be astonished.
8 “Now therefore tell me all that you have done during
these days.” Then Yahuḏith told him in the midst of the
people all that she had done, from the day that she
went out until that hour she spoke to them.
9 And when she had ended speaking, the people
shouted with a loud voice and made a joyful noise in
their city.
10 And when Aḵior had seen all that the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl had done, he believed in Elohim greatly and
circumcised the flesh of his foreskin, and was joined to
the house of Yisra’ĕl to this day.
11 And as soon as the morning dawned, they hung the
head of Holophernĕs on the wall, and every man took
his weapons, and they went out by bands to the narrow
passes of the mountain.
1249

YAHUḎITH

But when Ashshur saw them, they sent to their
leaders, who came to their captains and officers, and
to each one of their rulers.
13 So they came to Holophernĕs’ tent and said to he
who oversaw all his matters, “Wake our master now,
for the slaves have been emboldened to come down
against us to battle, that they may be utterly
destroyed.”
14 Then Bagoas went in and knocked at the door of
the tent; for he thought that he had lain with Yahuḏith.
15 But because no one answered, he opened it and
went into the bedroom, and found him thrown on the
floor dead, and his head was taken from him.
16 Therefore he cried with a loud voice with weeping
and sighing and a mighty cry, and tore his garments.
17 Afterward he went into the tent where Yahuḏith had
stayed; and when he did not find her, he leaped out to
the people and cried,
18 “These slaves have dealt treacherously! One
woman of the Iḇrim has brought shame upon the
house of sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar; for look,
Holophernĕs lies upon the ground without a head!”
19 When the captains of the army of Ashshur heard
these words, they tore their garments and their minds
were severely troubled, and there was a cry and a very
great noise throughout the camp.
12

15 And when those who were in the tents heard, they
were astonished at what was done,
2 and fear and trembling fell upon them, so no man
was bold enough to stand in the sight of his neighbour,
but rushing out all together, they fled into every way of
the plain and the hill country.
3 Those who had camped in the mountains around
Bĕyth Yulia also fled away; then all the children of
Yisra’ĕl that were armed among them, rushed out
upon them.
1250

JUDITH

Then Uzziyah sent to Bĕyth Hornasthayim and to
Bĕḇai and Ḥoḇah and Ḵola and to all the coasts of
Yisra’ĕl, to tell what had taken place, and that all
should rush out upon their enemies to destroy them.
5 Now when the children of Yisra’ĕl heard it, they all
fell upon them as one man and slew them unto Ḥoḇah;
likewise those who also came from Yerushalayim and
from all the hill country - for men had told them what
matters were done in the camp of their enemies - and
those who were in Gil’aḏ and in Galil pursued them
with a great slaughter until they were past Dammeseq
and its borders.
6 And the remainder who dwelt at Bĕyth Yulia fell
upon the camp of Ashshur and plundered them and
acquired great wealth.
7 And the children of Yisra’ĕl that returned from the
slaughter took that which remained, and the villages
and the cities that were in the mountains and in the
plain took much spoil; for the amount was very great.
8 Then Yoyaqim the kohĕn ha’gadol and the elders
of the children of Yisra’ĕl who dwelt in Yerushalayim
came to see the good that Elohim had showed to
Yisra’ĕl, and to see Yahuḏith and to greet her.
9 And when they came to her, they baraḵ her with
one accord and said to her, “You are the exaltation of
Yerushalayim, you are the great esteem of Yisra’ĕl,
you are the great joy of our nation!
10 “You have done all these matters by your hand, you
have done much good to Yisra’ĕl and Elohim is
pleased with it. Baruḵ are you of the Almighty HWHY
forever!” And all the people said, “Amĕn!”
11 And the people plundered the camp for thirty days;
and they gave Holophernĕs’ tent to Yahuḏith and all
his plates and bedding and vessels and all his utensils.
And she took it and laid it on her donkey, and made
her wagons ready and laid them on it.
4

1251

YAHUḎITH

Then all the women of Yisra’ĕl ran together to see
her, and baraḵ her, and they performed a dance for
her. And she took branches in her hand, and also gave
to the women that were with her.
13 And they put a crown of olive leaves upon her and
her female servant who was with her, and she went
before all the people in the dance, leading all the
women. And all the men of Yisra’ĕl followed with their
weapons and with crowns, and with songs in their
mouths.
12

16 Then Yahuḏith began to sing this thanksgiving
with all Yisra’ĕl, and all the people following her sang
this song of praise.
2 And Yahuḏith said:
Sing unto my Elohim with timbrels,
Sing unto HWHY with cymbals,
Raise unto Him a new psalm,
Exalt Him, and call upon His Name.
3 For Elohim breaks the battles;
For among the camps in the midst of the people,
He has delivered me from the hands of those who
persecuted me.
4 Ashshur came from the mountains from the north,
He came with ten thousands of his army,
The multitude of them stopped the rivers,
And their horsemen have covered the hills.
5 He bragged that he would burn up my borders,
And kill my young men with the sword,
And dash the nursing children against the ground,
And make my infants as prey, and my maidens as
spoil.
6 But the Almighty HWHY has put them to shame by
the hand of a woman.
7 For their mighty one did not fall by the young men,
Neither did the sons of the Repha’im smite him,
Nor tall giants fall upon him;
1252

JUDITH

But Yahuḏith the daughter of Merari weakened him
With the loveliness of her face.
8 For she put off the garment of her widowhood
For the exaltation of those who were oppressed in
Yisra’ĕl,
And anointed her face with ointment,
And bound her hair in a head-dress,
And took a linen garment to deceive him.
9 Her sandals captivated his eyes,
Her loveliness took his mind prisoner,
And the sword passed through his neck.
10 The Parasians quaked at her boldness,
And the Maḏites were discouraged at her capability.
11 Then my afflicted ones shouted for joy,
And my weak ones cried aloud;
And they trembled. They lifted up their voices,
And they were overthrown.
12 The sons of young women have pierced them
through,
And wounded them as children of fugitives;
They perished in the battle of HWHY.
13 I sing to HWHY a new song;
O HWHY, You are great and awesome,
Wonderful in strength and power.
14 Let all creation serve You;
For You spoke, and they were made,
You sent forth Your Ruaḥ, and they were created,
And there is none who can resist Your voice.
15 For the mountains shall be shaken from their
foundations with the waters,
The rocks shall melt like wax at Your presence;
Yet You are compassionate to those who revere You.
16 For every offering is too little for a sweet fragrance
to You,
And all the fat is not sufficient for Your burnt offering.
But he who reveres HWHY is great all the days.
1253

YAHUḎITH

Woe to the nations that rise up against my people!
HWHY Elohim shall take vengeance on them in the
day of judgment,
Sending fire and worms in their flesh;
And they shall feel them and weep forever.
18 Now as soon as they entered Yerushalayim, they
worshipped HWHY; and as soon as the people were
cleansed, they offered their burnt offerings and their
voluntary offerings and their gifts.
19 Yahuḏith also dedicated all the possessions of
Holophernĕs which the people had given her, and
gave the canopy which she had taken out of his
bedroom, as a gift to HWHY.
20 So the people continued feasting in Yerushalayim
before the Qodesh Place for three months, and
Yahuḏith remained with them.
21 After these days everyone returned to his own
inheritance, and Yahuḏith went to Bĕyth Yulia and
remained in her own possession, and was esteemed
throughout the land all her days.
22 And many desired her, but none knew her all the
days of her life after Menashsheh her husband had
died and was gathered to his people.
23 But she increased more and more in esteem and
grew old in her husband’s house being one hundred
and five years old, and freed her female servant. So
she died in Bĕyth Yulia, and they buried her in the cave
of her husband Menashsheh.
24 And the house of Yisra’ĕl lamented her seven days;
and before she died she distributed her goods to all
those who were the nearest relatives to Menashsheh
her husband, and to those who were the nearest of her
relatives.
25 And there was none that made the children of
Yisra’ĕl afraid any more in the days of Yahuḏith, nor
for a long time after her death.
17

1254

TOBIT

TOḆIYAH
‫טוביה‬hYBWj

1 The book of the words of Toḇiyah, son of Toḇi’ĕl, the
son of Ḥanane’ĕl, the son of Aḏu’ĕl, the son of Gaḇa’ĕl,
son of Rapha’ĕl, of Raḡu’ĕl, of the seed of Asah’ĕl, of
the tribe of Naphtali;
2 who, in the time of Shalmaneser sovereign of
Ashshur was led captive out of Thisbĕ, which is to the
right hand of that city, in Galil above Ashĕr which is
properly called Naphtali.
3 I, Toḇiyah have walked all the days of my life in the
Ways of truth and righteousness, and I did many good
works to my brothers, and my nation, who came with
me to Ninewĕh, to the land of Ashshur.
4 And when I was in my own land, in the land of
Yisra’ĕl being still young, all the tribe of my father
Naphtali fell from the House of Yerushalayim, which
was chosen out of all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, that all the
tribes should slaughter there, where the Hĕyḵal of the
dwelling of the Most High was qadosh and built forever
and ever.
5 Now all the tribes which revolted together, and the
house of my father Naphtali, slaughtered to the calf of
Ba’al,
6 but I alone went often to Yerushalayim for the
Feasts, as it was given to all the people of Yisra’ĕl as
an everlasting Law, having the first-fruits and tenths of
increase, with that which was first shorn; and I gave
them at the altar to the kohenim - the children of
Aharon.
7 The first tenth part of all increase I gave to the sons
of Aharon who served at Yerushalayim, another tenth
part I sold away, and went and spent it every year at
Yerushalayim,
8 and the third I gave to those to whom it was right,
as Deḇorah my father’s mother had commanded me,
because I was left an orphan by my father.
1255

TOḆIYAH

Furthermore, when I came to manhood, I married
Ḥannah of my own relatives, and from her I brought
forth Toḇi.
10 And when we were carried away captive to
Ninewĕh, all my brothers and those who were of my
relatives ate of the bread of the gentiles.
11 But I kept myself from eating;
12 because I remembered Elohim with all my heart.
13 And the Most High gave me favour and kindness
before Shalmaneser, so that I was his attendant.
14 And I went to Maḏai, and left ten kiḵars of silver in
trust with Gaḇa’ĕl, the brother of Gaḇriyah at Rhaḡes
a city of Maḏai.
15 Now when Shalmaneser was dead, Sanḥĕriḇ his
son reigned in his place; whose reign was troubled, so
I could not go to Maḏai.
16 And in the time of Shalmaneser I did many kind
deeds to my brothers and gave my bread to the
hungry,
17 and my garments to the naked. And if I saw any of
my nation dead or scattered around the walls of
Ninewĕh, I buried them.
18 And if Sanḥĕriḇ the sovereign had slain any when
he had come and fled from Yahuḏah, I buried them
secretly; for in his wrath he killed many; but the bodies
were not found when they were sought for by the
sovereign.
19 And when one of the Ninewites went and
complained of me to the sovereign, that I buried them
and hid myself; understanding that I was sought for to
be put to death, I withdrew myself for fear.
20 Then all my goods were forcibly taken away,
neither was there any left to me, besides my wife
Ḥannah and my son Toḇi.
21 And fifty-five days had not passed before two of his
sons killed him, and they fled into the mountains of
Ararat. And Ĕsarḥaddon his son reigned in his place,
who appointed Aḥiqar my brother Ana’ĕl’s son over his
father’s accounts and over all his affairs.
9

1256

TOBIT

And with Aḥiqar entreating for me, I returned to
Ninewĕh. Now Aḥiqar was cupbearer and keeper of
the seal and manager, and overseer of the accounts,
and Ĕsarḥaddon appointed him next to him, and he
was my brother’s son.
22

2 Now when I had come home again and my wife
Ḥannah was restored to me with my son Toḇi, at the
Festival of Shaḇuoth - which is the qodesh Feast of the
seven weeks - there was a good dinner prepared for
me, for which I sat down to eat.
2 And when I saw the abundance of food, I said to my
son, “Go and bring whatever poor man you shall find
from among our brothers, who remembers HWHY; and
see, I wait for you.”
3 But he returned and said, “Father, one of our nation
is strangled and is thrown out in the marketplace!”
4 Then before I had tasted any of the food, I stood up
and took him up into a room until the going down of the
sun.
5 Then I returned and washed myself, and ate my
food in heaviness,
6 remembering the neḇuah of Amos, when he said,
“Your Festivals shall turn into mourning, and all your
songs into lamentation.”
7 Therefore I wept; and after the going down of the
sun I went and dug a grave, and buried him.
8 But my neighbours mocked me and said, “This man
is still not afraid to be put to death for this deed; who
fled away, and yet see, he buries the dead again.”
9 I also returned the same night from the burial and
slept by the wall of my courtyard, being unclean. But
my face was uncovered,
10 and I did not know that there were sparrows on the
wall, the sparrows excreted warm dung into my eyes,
and when I opened them, a whiteness came into my
eyes. And I went to the physicians, but they could not
help me, and Aḥiqar sustained me, until I went to
Ĕylam.
1257

TOḆIYAH

And my wife Ḥannah took women’s work to do,
12 and when she had sent them home to the owners,
they paid her wages, and also gave her a young goat
as well.
13 And when it was in my house, and began to cry, I
said to her, “Where is this young goat from? Is it not
stolen? Return it to the owners, for it is not Lawful to
eat whatever is stolen.”
14 But she replied to me, “It was given for a gift in
addition to the wages.” However I did not believe her,
but told her to return it to the owners; and I was
ashamed of her. But she replied to me, “Where are
your kind deeds and your righteous deeds? See, you
and all your works are known.”
11

3 Then being grieved I wept, and in my sorrow prayed,
saying,
2 “O HWHY, You are righteous, and all Your works and
all Your Ways are kindness and truth, and You judge
truly and righteously forever.
3 “Remember me, and look on me. Do not punish me
for my sins and ignorances and the sins of my fathers
who have sinned before You.
4 “For they did not obey Your Commands, therefore
You have delivered us for plunder, and to captivity, and
to death, and for a proverb of reproach to all the
nations among whom we are dispersed.
5 “And now Your Right-Rulings are many and true.
Deal with me according to my sins and my fathers’,
because we have not guarded Your Commands, nor
walked in truth before You.
6 “Now therefore deal with me as seems best to You
and command my spirit to be taken from me, that I may
become dust, and become earth, for it is more
profitable for me to die rather than to live, because I
have heard false reproaches, and have much sorrow.
Command therefore that I may now be delivered out of
this distress, and go into the everlasting place. Do not
turn Your face away from me.”
7 It came to be the same day, that in Aḥmetha a city
1258

TOBIT

of
Maḏai,
Sarah
the
daughter of Raḡu’ĕl was also reproached by her
father’s female servants;
8 because she had been married to seven husbands,
whom Ashmeḏai the evil spirit had killed before they
had lain with her. “Do you not know,” they said, “that
you have strangled your husbands? You have already
had seven husbands, neither were you named after
any of them.
9 “Why do you punish us for them? If they are dead,
go your way after them, let us never see from you
either a son or daughter.”
10 When she heard these words, she was so very
sorrowful, that she thought to strangle herself; but she
said, “I am the only daughter of my father, and if I do
this, it shall be a reproach to him, and I shall bring his
grey hair with sorrow to the grave.”
11 Then she prayed toward the window and said,
“Baruḵ are You, O HWHY my Elohim, and Your qodesh
and esteemed Name is baruḵ and esteemed forever;
let all Your works praise You forever.
12 “And now, O HWHY, I turn my eyes and my face
toward You,
13 and say, ‘Take me out of the earth, that I may hear
the reproach no more.’
14 “You know, HWHY, that I am pure from all sin with
man,
15 and that I never polluted my name, nor the name of
my father in the land of my captivity. I am the only
daughter of my father, neither has he any child to be
his heir, neither any near relative, nor has he any living
son to whom I may keep myself for a wife. My seven
husbands are already dead, and why should I live? But
if it does not please You that I should die, command
that some compassion be had for me, and favour
shown me, that I hear no more reproach.”
16 So the prayers of them both were heard before the
excellency of the Almighty Elohim.
17 And Repha’ĕl was sent to heal them both, that is,
1259

TOḆIYAH

to scale away the whiteness of Toḇiyah’s eyes and to
give Sarah the daughter of Raḡu’ĕl as a wife to Toḇi
the son of Toḇiyah, and to bind Ashmeḏai the evil
spirit, because she belonged to Toḇi by right of
inheritance. At the same time Toḇiyah came home and
entered into his house, and Sarah the daughter of
Raḡu’ĕl came down from her upper room.

4 On that day Toḇiyah remembered the silver which
he had entrusted to Gaḇa’ĕl in Rhaḡes of Maḏai,
2 and said within himself, “I have wished for death;
why do I not call for my son Toḇi that I may inform him
of the silver before I die?”
3 And when he had called him he said, “My son,
when I am dead, bury me and do not despise your
mother, but esteem her all the days of your life, and do
that which shall please her, and do not displease her.
4 “Remember, my son, that she saw many dangers
for you when you were in her womb, and when she is
dead, bury her by me in one grave.
5 “My son, remember HWHY our Elohim all your days,
and do not let your desire be toward sin, or to
transgress His Commands. Do rightly all your life long,
and do not follow the ways of unrighteousness.
6 “For if you deal truly, your deeds shall succeed
prosperously for you, and to all those who live
righteously.
7 “Give in kindness from your supply, and when you
give in kindness, do not let your eye be evil, neither
turn your face from any poor, and the face of Elohim
shall not be turned away from you.
8 “If you have abundance, give in kindness
accordingly; if you have but a little, do not be afraid to
give according to that little.
9 “For you lay up a good treasure for yourself against
the day of distress,
10 so that kind deeds deliver from death, and withhold
against darkness.
11 “For kind deeds are a good gift to all that give it in
the sight of the Most High.
1260

TOBIT

“Beware of all whoring my son, and firstly take a
wife of the seed of your fathers, and do not take a
strange woman who is not of your father’s tribe as wife,
for we are the children of the neḇi’im: Noaḥ, Aḇraham,
Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ. Remember my son, that from
the beginning our fathers, even they all married wives
of their own relatives, and were baraḵ in their children,
and their seed shall inherit the land.
13 “Now therefore, my son, love your brothers, and do
not despise your brothers in your heart - the sons and
daughters of your people - in not taking a wife from
them; for destruction and much trouble comes from
pride, and decay and great need comes from
wickedness; for wickedness is the mother of hunger.
14 “Do not let the wages of any man, who has worked
for you, remain with you, but give it to him from your
hand; for if you serve Elohim, He shall also repay you.
My son, be considerate in all that you do, and be wise
in all your ways.
15 “Do not do to any man that which you hate; do not
drink wine to make yourself drunk, neither let
drunkenness go with you in your way.
16 “Give of your bread to the hungry, and of your
garments to those who are naked; and according to
your abundance give in kindness, and do not let your
eye be evil when you give in kindness.
17 “Pour out your bread on the burial of the righteous,
but give naught to the wicked.
18 “Ask counsel from all who are wise, and do not
despise any counsel that is useful.
19 “Baraḵ HWHY your Elohim always, and desire from
Him that your ways be directed, and that all your paths
and counsels prosper; for every nation has no counsel,
but HWHY Himself gives all that is good, and He
humbles those whom He desires, as He desires. Now
therefore, my son, remember my commands, neither
let them be forgotten.
20 “And now I write this to those whom I committed ten
kiḵars - to Gaḇa’ĕl the son of Gaḇriyah at Rhaḡes in
12

1261

TOḆIYAH

Maḏai.
21 “And do not fear, my son, that we are made poor,
for you have much wealth if you revere Elohim and
depart from all sin, and do that which is pleasing in His
sight.”

5 Toḇi then answered and said, “Father, I shall do all
that which you have commanded me,
2 but how may I receive the silver seeing I do not
know him?”
3 Then he gave him the handwriting, and said to him,
“Seek a man who would go with you while I still live,
and I shall give him wages, and go and receive the
silver.”
4 Therefore when he went to seek a man, he found
Repha’ĕl who was a messenger.
5 But he did not know; and he said to him, “Would
you go with me to Rhaḡes, and do you know those
places well?”
6 To whom the messenger replied, “I shall go with
you, and I know the way well, for I have stayed with
our brother Gaḇa’ĕl.”
7 Then Toḇi said to him, “Wait for me till I tell my
father.”
8 Then he said to him, “Go and do not delay.” So he
went in and said to his father, “See, I have found one
who shall go with me.” Then he said, “Call him to me,
so I may know of what tribe he is, and whether he is a
trustworthy man to go with you.”
9 So he called him, and he came in, and they greeted
one another.
10 Then Toḇiyah said to him, “Brother, show me of
what tribe and family you are.”
11 To whom he replied, “Do you seek for a tribe or
family, or a hired man to go with your son?” Then
Toḇiyah said to him, “Brother, may I know your
relatives and name?”
12 Then he said, “I am Azaryah the son of Ḥananyah
the elder, and of your brothers.”
13 Then Toḇiyah said, “You are welcome brother; do
1262

TOBIT

not be wroth with me because I have enquired to know
your tribe and your family; for you are my brother, of
an honest and good family; for I know Ḥananyah and
Yahonathan - sons of Shemayah the elder - for we
went together to Yerushalayim to worship, and offered
the firstborn and the tenths of the first-fruits; and they
were not seduced with the straying of our brothers. My
brother, you are of a good family.
14 “But tell me, what wages shall I give you? Would
you accept a draḵma a day, and what is necessary,
and for my own son?
15 “Even so, if you return safe, I shall add somewhat
to your wages.”
16 So they were well pleased. Then he said to Toḇi,
“Prepare yourself for the journey, and Elohim give you
a good journey.” And when his son had prepared all for
the journey, his father said, “Go with this man, and
Elohim, who dwells in the shamayim, prosper your
journey, and the messenger of Elohim keep you
company.” So they both departed, and the young
man’s dog with them.
17 But Ḥannah his mother wept, and said to Toḇiyah,
“Why have you sent our son away? Is he not the staff
of our hand, in going in and out before us?
18 “Do not be greedy to add silver to silver; but let it be
as filth in respect to our child.
19 “For that which HWHY has given us to live with is
sufficient for us.”
20 Then Toḇiyah said to her, “Do not worry my sister;
he shall return in safety, and your eyes shall see him.
21 “For the good messenger shall keep him company
and his journey shall be prosperous, and he shall
return safe.”
22 Then she ceased weeping.

6 And as they went on their journey, in the evening
they came to the River Ḥiddeqel, and they stayed
there.
2 And when the young man went down to wash
1263

TOḆIYAH

himself, a fish leaped out of the river, and would have
bitten him.
3 Then the messenger said to him, “Catch the fish.”
And the young man took hold of the fish, and pulled it
to land.
4 To whom the messenger said, “Open the fish and
take the heart and the liver and the gall, and put them
away safely.”
5 So the young man did as the messenger
commanded him, and when they had roasted the fish,
they ate it. Then they both went on their way, till they
drew near to Aḥmetha.
6 Then the young man said to the messenger,
“Brother Azaryah, what use is the heart and the liver
and the gall of the fish?”
7 And he said to him, “Regarding the heart and the
liver, if a demon or an evil spirit troubles anyone, we
must make a smoke from it before the man or the
woman, and they shall be troubled no more.
8 “As for the gall, it is good to anoint one who has
whiteness in his eyes, and he shall be healed.”
9 And when they had come near to Rhaḡes,
10 the messenger said to the young man, “Brother,
today we shall stay with Raḡu’ĕl, who is your cousin;
he also has only one daughter named Sarah. I shall
speak for her, that she may be given to you as a wife.
11 “For the right of her belongs to you, seeing only you
are from her relatives,
12 and the maiden is lovely and wise. Now therefore
listen to me and I shall speak to her father; and when
we return from Rhaḡes we shall celebrate the
marriage, for I know that Raḡu’ĕl is not able to marry
her to another according to the Law of Mosheh, but he
shall be liable to judgment, because the right of
inheritance belongs to you rather than to any other.”
13 Then the young man answered the messenger, “I
have heard brother Azaryah, that this maiden has
been given to seven men, who all died in the marriage
room.
1264

TOBIT

“And now I am the only son of my father, and I am
afraid, lest if I go in to her, I die as the others before.
For a wicked spirit loves her, which harms none except
those who come unto her; therefore I also fear lest I
die, and bring the life of my father and my mother to
the grave with sorrow because of me; for they have no
other son to bury them.”
15 Then the messenger said to him, “Do you not
remember the orders which your father gave you: that
you should marry a wife of your own relatives?
Therefore hear me O my brother, for she shall be given
to you as wife, and do not regard the evil spirit; for this
same night she shall be given to you in marriage.
16 “And when you go into the marriage room, you shall
take the ashes of incense, and shall lay some of the
heart and liver of the fish upon them, and shall make a
smoke with it.
17 “And the demon shall smell it and flee away, and
never come again any more. But when you come to
her, both of you rise up and pray to Elohim who is kind,
who shall show favour to you, and save you. Do not
fear, for she is appointed to you from the beginning;
and you shall preserve her, and she shall go with you,
and I say that she shall bear you children.” Now when
Toḇi had heard these words, he loved her, and his
heart was completely joined to her.
14

7 And when they had come to Aḥmetha, they came to
the house of Raḡu’ĕl, and Sarah met them. And after
they had greeted one another, she brought them into
the house.
2 Then Raḡu’ĕl said to Eḏna his wife, “How similar
this young man is to Toḇiyah my cousin!”
3 And Raḡu’ĕl asked them, “Where are you from
brothers?” To whom they replied, “We are of the sons
of Naphtali, who are captives in Ninewĕh.”
4 Then he said to them, “Do you know Toḇiyah our
relative?” And they said, “We know him.” Then he said,
“Is he in good health?”
1265

TOḆIYAH

And they replied, “He is both alive, and in good
health.” And Toḇi said, “He is my father.”
6 Then Raḡu’ĕl leaped up, and kissed him, and wept,
7 and baraḵ him, and said to him, “You are the son of
an honest and good man.” But when he had heard that
Toḇiyah was blind, he was sorrowful, and wept.
8 And likewise Eḏna his wife and Sarah his daughter
wept, and they welcomed them gladly. And after they
had slaughtered a ram from the flock, they lay some of
the meat on the table. Then Toḇi said to Repha’ĕl,
“Brother Azaryah, speak of that of which you spoke on
the way, and let this matter be addressed.”
9 So he spoke of the matter with Raḡu’ĕl, and
Raḡu’ĕl said to Toḇi, “Eat, drink and rejoice,
10 for it is right that you should marry my daughter;
however I shall tell you the truth.
11 “I have given my daughter in marriage to seven
men who died the night they came to her;
nevertheless, for the present rejoice!” But Toḇi said, “I
shall not eat here till we agree and swear to one
another.”
12 Raḡu’ĕl said, “Then take her from here according
to the custom, for you are her relative, and she is
yours; and Elohim who is kind give you good success
in all.”
13 Then he called his daughter Sarah and she came
to her father. And he took her by the hand, and gave
her to be wife to Toḇi saying, “See, take her according
to the Law of Mosheh, and take her to your father.” And
he baraḵ them;
14 and called Eḏna his wife, and took paper, and wrote
a deed of covenant, and sealed it.
15 Then they began to eat.
16 Afterwards Raḡu’ĕl called his wife Eḏna, and said
to her, “Sister, prepare another room, and take her in
there.”
17 When she had done as he had asked her, she
brought her there, and she wept, and she received the
tears of her daughter, and said to her,
5

1266

TOBIT

“Take courage my daughter; HWHY of the shamayim
and earth give you joy in place of your sorrow. Take
courage my daughter.”
18

8 And when they had eaten, they brought Toḇi in to
her.
2 And as he went, he remembered the words of
Repha’ĕl, and took the ashes of the incense, and put
the heart and the liver of the fish on them, and made a
smoke with it.
3 When the evil spirit had smelled the smell, it fled to
the furthermost parts of Mitsrayim, and the messenger
bound
it.
4 And after they were both shut in together, Toḇi rose
out of the bed and said, “Sister arise, and let us pray
that Elohim would show favour on us.”
5 Then Toḇi began to say, “Baruḵ are You, O Elohim
of our fathers, and baruḵ is Your qodesh and
esteemed Name forever. Let the shamayim baraḵ You,
and all Your creation.
6 “You made Aḏam, and gave him Ḥawwah his wife
for a helper and support; from them came mankind.
You have said, ‘It is not good for man to be alone, let
Us make for him a helper as his counterpart.’
7 “And now, O HWHY, I do not take this my sister for
a whore, but uprightly; therefore favourably allow that
we may grow old together.”
8 And she said with him, “Amĕn.”
9 So they both slept that night. And Raḡu’ĕl arose,
and went and dug a grave,
10 saying, “I fear lest he is also dead.”
11 And when Raḡu’ĕl had come into his house,
12 he said to his wife Eḏna, “Send one of the female
servants, and let her see whether he is alive; and if not,
that we may bury him, and no one know it.”
13 So the female servant opened the door and went
in, and found them both asleep,
14 and came out, and told them that he was alive.
1267

TOḆIYAH

Then Raḡu’ĕl praised Elohim, and said, “O Elohim,
You are worthy to be praised with all pure and qodesh
praise! Therefore let Your qodeshim praise You with
all Your creation, and let all Your messengers and
Your elect praise You forever!
16 “You are to be praised, for You have made me
joyful. And what I expected has not come to be, but
You have dealt with us according to Your great
kindness.
17 “You are to be praised because You have shown
kindness for two who were the only brought-forth
children of their fathers. Grant them kindness, O HWHY,
and complete their life in health with joy and kindness.”
18 Then Raḡu’ĕl told his servants to fill in the grave.
19 And he held the wedding feast fourteen days,
20 for before the days of the marriage were finished,
Raḡu’ĕl had spoken to him with an oath saying, “You
shall not depart till the fourteen days of the marriage
have passed,
21 and then take half of your goods, and go in safety
to your father, and then receive the remainder when
my wife and I are dead.”
15

9 Then Toḇi called Repha’ĕl, and said to him,
“Azaryah my brother, take a servant and two
camels with you, and go to Rhaḡes of Maḏai to Gaḇa’ĕl
and bring me the silver, and bring him to the wedding,
3 for Raḡu’ĕl has sworn that I shall not depart.
4 “But my father counts the days, and if I stay long,
he shall be very grieved.”
5 So Repha’ĕl departed and stayed with Gaḇa’ĕl, and
gave him the handwriting; who brought out bags which
were sealed, and gave them to him.
6 And early in the morning they both went out
together, and came to the wedding, and baraḵ his wife.
2

10 Now Toḇiyah his father counted every day, and
when the days of the journey had passed, and they did
not come,
1268

TOBIT

Toḇiyah then said, “Are they delayed, or is Gaḇa’ĕl
dead, and there is no one to give him the silver?”
3 Therefore he was very grieved.
4 Then his wife said to him, “My son is dead, seeing
he stays long.” And she began to bewail him, and said,
5 “Woe is me, since I have let you go, my son, the
light of my eyes!”
6 To whom Toḇiyah said, “Keep calm, have no
concern, for he is safe.”
7 But she said, “Keep silent and do not deceive me;
my son is dead.” And she went out every day out to the
road which they went, and ate no food in the daytime,
and every night unceasingly bewailed her son Toḇi
until the fourteen days of the wedding had passed,
which Raḡu’ĕl had sworn that he would spend there.
Then Toḇi said to Raḡu’ĕl, “Let me go, for my father
and my mother may cease to look for me.”
8 But his father-in-law said to him, “Stay with me, and
I shall send to your father, and they shall inform him
how it is with you.”
9 But Toḇi said, “No, but let me go to my father.”
10 Then Raḡu’ĕl arose, and gave him Sarah his wife
and half his goods, servants and cattle and silver.
11 And he baraḵ them, and sent them away saying,
“The Elohim of the shamayim give you a prosperous
journey my children.”
12 And he said to his daughter, “Esteem your father
and mother-in-law, who are now your parents, that I
may hear a good report of you.” And he kissed her.
Eḏna also said to Toḇi, “HWHY of the shamayim return
you my dear brother, and grant that I may see your
children of my daughter Sarah before I die, that I may
rejoice before HWHY! See, I commit my daughter to you
with special trust; therefore do not treat her wickedly.”
2

11 After this Toḇi went his way, praising Elohim that
He had given him a prosperous journey, and baraḵ
Raḡu’ĕl and Eḏna his wife, and went on his way till they
drew near to Ninewĕh.
1269

TOḆIYAH

Then Repha’ĕl said to Toḇi, “You know, brother,
how you left your father;
3 let us hasten ahead of your wife, and prepare the
house,
4 and take in your hand the gall of the fish.” So they
went their way, and the dog went after them.
5 Now Ḥannah sat looking ahead toward the road for
her son.
6 And when she saw him coming, she said to his
father, “See, your son comes, and the man that went
with him!”
7 Then Repha’ĕl said, “I know Toḇi, that your father
shall open his eyes.
8 “Therefore anoint his eyes with the gall, and with
the stinging, he shall rub, and the whiteness shall fall
away, and he shall see you.”
9 Then Ḥannah ran out and fell upon the neck of her
son, and said to him, “Seeing I have seen you, my son,
from now on I am content to die.” And they both wept.
10 Toḇiyah also came out toward the door but
stumbled, and his son ran to him,
11 and took hold of his father, and he spread of the
gall on his father’s eyes, saying, “Believe for good my
father.”
12 And when his eyes began to sting, he rubbed them,
13 and the whiteness peeled away from the corners of
his eyes. And when he saw his son, he fell upon his
neck,
14 and he wept and said, “Baruḵ are You O Elohim,
and baruḵ is Your Name forever; and baruḵ are all
Your qodesh messengers.
15 “For You have disciplined, but have taken pity on
me, for look, I see my son Toḇi!” And his son went in
rejoicing, and told his father the great matters that had
befallen him in Maḏai.
16 Then Toḇiyah went out to meet his daughter-in-law
at the gate of Ninewĕh, rejoicing and praising Elohim;
and those who saw him go marvelled, because he had
received his sight.
2

1270

TOBIT

And Toḇiyah gave thanks before them, because
Elohim showed kindness toward him. And when he
came near to Sarah his daughter-in-law, he baruḵ her
saying, “You are welcome, daughter. Baruḵ be Elohim
who has brought you to us, and baraḵ be your father
and your mother.” And there was joy among all his
brothers who were at Ninewĕh.
18 And Aḥiqar, and Naḏaḇ his brother’s son came,
19 and Toḇi’s wedding was held seven days with great
joy.
17

12 Then Toḇiyah called his son Toḇi, and said to him,
“My son, see that the man who went with you receives
his wages, and you must give him more.”
2 And Toḇi said to him, “Father, it is no trouble for me
to give him half of that which I have brought,
3 for he has brought me to you again in safety, and
healed my wife whole, and brought me the silver, and
also healed you.”
4 Then the old man said, “It is due to him.”
5 So he called the messenger, and he said to him,
“Take half of all that you have brought and go your way
in peace.”
6 Then he took them both separately and said to
them, “Baraḵ Elohim, praise Him, and exalt Him, and
thank Him for what He has done for you in the sight of
all who live. It is good to praise Elohim and exalt His
Name, and esteem to show the works of Elohim;
therefore do not be slow to praise Him.
7 “It is good to guard the secret of a sovereign, but it
is esteem to reveal the works of Elohim. Do that which
is good, and no evil shall touch you.
8 “Prayer is good with fasting and kind deeds and
righteousness. A little with righteousness is better than
much with unrighteousness. It is better to give in
kindness than to lay up gold;
9 for kindness delivers from death, and shall purge
away all sin. Those that exercise kind deeds and
righteousness shall be filled with life,
1271

TOḆIYAH

but those who sin are enemies to their own ḥai.
11 “Surely I shall keep naught from you; for I said, ‘It
was good to guard the secret of a sovereign, but that
it was esteemed to reveal the works of Elohim.’
12 “Now therefore, when you and Sarah your
daughter-in-law prayed, I brought the remembrance of
your prayers before the Qadosh One. And when you
buried the dead, I was with you also.
13 “And when you did not delay to rise up and leave
your dinner to go and cover the dead, your good deed
was not hidden from me, but I was with you.
14 “And now Elohim has sent me to heal you and
Sarah your daughter-in-law.
15 “I am Repha’ĕl, one of the seven qodesh
messengers, who present the prayers of the
qodeshim, and who go in and out before the esteem of
the Qadosh One.”
16 Then they were both troubled, and fell upon their
faces; for they were afraid.
17 But he said to them, “Do not fear, for it shall be well
with you; therefore praise Elohim!
18 “Not because any favour of mine, but by the desire
of our Elohim I came; therefore praise Him forever.
19 “All these days I appeared to you; and I neither ate
nor drank, but you saw a vision.
20 “Now therefore give thanks to Elohim, for I go up to
Him who sent me; but write all that has been done in a
book.”
21 And when they arose, they saw him no more.
22 Then they praised the great and wondrous works of
Elohim, and how the messenger of HWHY had
appeared to them.
10

13 Then Toḇiyah wrote a prayer of rejoicing, and
said, “Baruḵ be Elohim who lives forever, and baruḵ be
His reign!
2 “For He disciplines, but shows kindness. He leads
down to She’ol, and raises up again, neither is there
anyone who avoids His hand.
3 “Praise Him before the nations you children of
1272

TOBIT

Yisra’ĕl, for He has scattered us among them.
4 “Therefore declare His greatness, and extol Him
before all the living; for He is our Aḏon, and He is the
Almighty, our Father forever.
5 “And He disciplines us for our wickednesses, but
shall show favour again; and shall gather us out of all
nations among whom He has scattered us.
6 “If you turn to Him with all your heart, and with all
your being, and do righteously before Him, then He
shall turn to you, and shall not hide His face from you.
Therefore see what He does for you, and praise Him
with all your words, and praise the Aḏon of
Righteousness, and extol the everlasting Sovereign. In
the land of my captivity I praise Him, and declare His
might and excellence to a sinful nation. O you sinners,
turn and do righteousness before Him! Who shall say
if He might accept you, and show favour toward you?
7 “I shall extol my Elohim, and my being shall praise
the Sovereign of the shamayim, and shall rejoice in His
greatness.
8 “Let all men speak, and let all praise Him for His
righteousness!
9 “O Yerushalayim, the qodesh city, He shall afflict
you for the works of your children, but shall show
favour again on the sons of the righteous.
10 “Give praise to HWHY, for He is good, and praise the
everlasting Sovereign, that His Mishkan may be built
in you again with joy, and let Him bring joy there to
those who are captives, and love in you forever for
those who are miserable.
11 “Many nations shall come from afar to the Name of
HWHY Elohim with gifts in their hands, even gifts to the
Sovereign of the shamayim. All generations shall
praise You with great joy.
12 “Cursed are all those who hate You, and baruḵ
forever are all who love You.
13 “Rejoice and be glad for the children of the
righteous, for they shall be gathered together, and
shall baraḵ the righteousness of HWHY.
1273

TOḆIYAH

“Baruḵ are those who love You, for they shall
rejoice in Your peace. Baruḵ are those who have been
sorrowful for all Your affliction; for they shall rejoice in
You, when they have seen all Your esteem, and shall
rejoice forever.
15 “Let my being baraḵ Elohim the great Sovereign!
16 “For Yerushalayim shall be built up with sapphires
and emeralds, and precious stones; your walls and
towers and battlements with pure gold.
17 “And the streets of Yerushalayim shall be paved
with beryl and ruby and stones of Ophir.
18 “And all her streets shall say, ‘HalleluYah’! And they
shall praise Him, saying, ‘Baruḵ be Elohim, who has
exalted it forever.’ ”
14

14 Thus Toḇiyah ended praising Elohim.
And he was fifty-eight years old when he lost his
sight, which was restored to him after eight years. And
he gave in kindness, and he increased in the
reverence of HWHY Elohim, and praised Him.
3 And when he was very old, he called his son, and
the sons of his son, and said to him, “My son, take your
children; for see, I am old and am ready to leave this
life.
4 “Go to Maḏai my son, for I surely believe that which
Yonah the naḇi spoke about Ninewĕh, that it shall be
overthrown, and that peace shall be in Maḏai only for
a time, and that our brothers shall lie scattered on the
earth from that good land. And Yerushalayim shall be
laid waste, and the House of Elohim in it shall be
burned, and shall be laid waste for a time.
5 “But again, Elohim shall show favour on them, and
again bring them into the land, where they shall build
a Hĕyḵal, but not like the first, until the time of that age
is filled. And afterward they shall return from all the
places of their captivity, and build up Yerushalayim
with esteem. And the House of Elohim shall be built in
it forever with an esteemed building, as the neḇi’im
have spoken of.
6 “And all nations shall turn, and revere HWHY Elohim
2

1274

TOBIT

in truth, and shall bury their idols.
7 “So all nations shall praise HWHY, and His people
praise Elohim, and HWHY shall exalt His people. And
all those who love HWHY Elohim in truth and
righteousness shall rejoice, showing kindness to our
brothers.
8 “And now, my son, depart out of Ninewĕh, because
that which the naḇi Yonah spoke of shall surely come
to pass.
9 “But you, guard the Law and the Commands, and
show yourself kind and righteous, that it may be well
with you.
10 “And bury me fittingly, and your mother with me; but
no longer stay at Ninewĕh. Remember, my son, how
Naḏaḇ treated Aḥiqar who raised him, how out of light
he brought him into darkness, and how he was
rewarded again. Yet Aḥiqar was saved, but the other
had his reward, for he went down into darkness.
Menashsheh gave in kindness, and escaped the
snares of death which they had laid for him, but Naḏaḇ
fell into the snare, and perished.
11 “Now therefore my son, consider what kindness
does, and how righteousness delivers.” When he had
said these words, he breathed his last on the bed,
being a hundred and fifty-eight years old; and he
buried him with esteem.
12 And when Ḥannah his mother was dead, he buried
her with his father. But Toḇi departed with his wife and
children to Aḥmetha to Raḡu’ĕl his father-in-law,
13 where he became old with esteem, and he buried
his father and mother-in-law in esteem, and he
inherited their possessions, and that of his father
Toḇiyah.
14 And he died at Aḥmetha in Maḏai, being a hundred
and twenty-seven years old.
15 But before he died he heard of the destruction of
Ninewĕh, which was taken by Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar and
Aḥashwĕrosh. And before his death he rejoiced over
Ninewĕh.
1275

BARUCH

BARUḴ
‫ ברוך‬KWRB

1 And these are the words of the book, which Baruḵ
the son of Nĕriyah, the son of Maḥsĕyah, the son of
Tsiḏqiyahu, the son of Ḥasaḏyah, the son of Ḥilqiyahu,
wrote in Baḇel,
2 in the fifth year, and on the seventh day of the
month, at the time the Kasdites took Yerushalayim,
and burned it with fire.
3 And Baruḵ read the words of this book in the
hearing of Yeḵonyah the son of Yoyaqim sovereign of
Yahuḏah, and in the ears of all the people that came
to hear the book,
4 and in the hearing of the nobles, and of the
sovereign’s sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and
of all the people, from the least to the greatest, even of
all those who dwelt at Baḇel by the river Suḏ.
5 So they wept, fasted, and prayed before HWHY.
6 They also made a collection of silver according to
every man’s ability,
7 and they sent it to Yerushalayim to Yahoyaqim the
kohĕn ha’gadol, the son of Ḥilqiyahu, son of Shallum,
and to the kohenim, and to all the people who were
found with him in Yerushalayim.
8 At the same time he received the vessels of the
House of HWHY, that were carried out of the Hĕyḵal, to
return them to the land of Yahuḏah - on the tenth day
of the month Siwan - namely, vessels of silver, which
Tsiḏqiyahu the son of Yoshiyahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah had made,
9 after Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel had
carried away Yeḵonyah, and the princes, and the
captives, and the mighty men, and the people of the
land from Yerushalayim, and brought them to Baḇel.
1276

BARUḴ

And they said, “See, we have sent you silver to buy
burnt offerings, and sin offerings, and incense, and
prepare a grain offering, and offer on the altar of HWHY
our Elohim.
11 “And pray for the life of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign
of Baḇel, and for the life of Bĕlshatstsar his son, that
their days upon earth might be as the days of the
shamayim.
12 “And HWHY shall give us strength, and enlighten our
eyes, and we shall live under the shadow of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, and under the
shadow of Bĕlshatstsar his son, and we shall serve
them many days, and find favour in their sight.
13 “Pray for us also to HWHY our Elohim, for we have
sinned against HWHY our Elohim; and to this day the
displeasure of HWHY and His wrath has not turned from
us.
14 “And you shall read this book which we have sent
to you, to make confession in the House of HWHY, at
the Feasts and Appointed Times.
15 “And you shall say, ‘To HWHY our Elohim belongs
righteousness, but to us the shame of face, as it has
come to be this day, to those of Yahuḏah, and to the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim,
16 and to our sovereigns, and to our princes, and to
our kohenim, and to our neḇi’im, and to our fathers.’
17 “For we have sinned before HWHY,
18 and disobeyed Him, and have not listened to the
voice of HWHY our Elohim, to walk in the Commands
that He gave us openly.
19 “Since the day that HWHY brought our forefathers
out of the land of Mitsrayim, to this present day, we
have been disobedient to HWHY our Elohim, and we
have been negligent, by not obeying His voice.
20 “Therefore the evils clinged to us, and the curse,
which HWHY appointed by Mosheh His servant at the
time that he brought our fathers out of the land of
10

1277

BARUCH

Mitsrayim, to give us a land that flows with milk and
honey, as it is to this day.
21 “Nevertheless we have not listened to the voice of
HWHY our Elohim, according to all the words of the
neḇi’im, whom He sent to us;
22 but every man followed the imagination of his own
wicked heart, to serve foreign mighty ones, and to do
evil in the sight of HWHY our Elohim.

2 “Therefore HWHY has brought about His Word,
which He pronounced against us, and against our
judges who judged Yisra’ĕl, and against our
sovereigns, and against our princes, and against the
men of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah;
2 to bring upon us great plagues, such as have never
come to be under all the shamayim, as it came to be
in Yerushalayim, according to that which was written
in the Torah of Mosheh;
3 that a man should eat the flesh of his own son, and
the flesh of his own daughter.
4 “And He has delivered them to be in subjection to
all the reigns that are around us, to be a reproach and
a desolation among all the people round about, where
HWHY has scattered them.
5 “Therefore we were thrown down, and not exalted,
because we have sinned against HWHY our Elohim,
and have not been obedient to His voice.
6 “To HWHY our Elohim belongs righteousness; but
unto us and to our fathers, open shame, as it is this
day.
7 “For all these plagues have come upon us, which
HWHY has pronounced against us.
8 “Yet have we not prayed before HWHY, that every
one of us might turn from the imaginations of his
wicked heart.

1278

BARUḴ

“Therefore HWHY watched over us for evil, and
HWHY has brought it upon us; for HWHY is righteous in
all His works which He has Commanded us.
10 “Yet we have not listened to His voice, to walk in
the Commands of HWHY, that He has appointed us.
11 “And now, O HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, who has
brought Your people out of the land of Mitsrayim with
a mighty hand, and high arm, and with signs, and with
wonders, and with great power, and have made
Yourself a Name, as it is this day;
12 O HWHY our Elohim, we have sinned, we have done
wickedly, we have dealt unrighteously in all Your Torot.
13 “Let Your wrath turn from us; for we are but a
remnant left among the gentiles, where You have
scattered us.
14 “Hear our prayers, O HWHY, and our petitions, and
deliver us for Your own sake, and give us favour in the
sight of those who have led us away;
15 that all the earth may know that You are HWHY our
Elohim, because Yisra’ĕl and his descendants are
called by Your Name.
16 “O HWHY, look down from Your qodesh dwelling,
and consider us; bow down Your ear, O HWHY, to hear
us.
17 “Open Your eyes and see; for the dead who are in
the graves, whose beings are taken from their bodies,
shall neither give unto HWHY praise nor righteousness;
18 but the being that is greatly tortured, which is
stooped and feeble, and with eyes that fail, and the
hungry being, gives You praise and righteousness, O
HWHY.
19 “Therefore we do not make our humble supplication
before You, O HWHY our Elohim, for the righteousness
of our fathers, and of our sovereigns.
20 “For You have sent out Your wrath and displeasure
upon us, as You have spoken by Your servants the
neḇi’im, saying,
9

1279

BARUCH

‘Thus says HWHY, “Bow down your shoulders to
serve the sovereign of Baḇel; so shall you remain in
the land that I gave unto your fathers.
22 “But if you do not listen to the voice of HWHY, to
serve the sovereign of Baḇel,
23 I shall cause to cease out of the cities of Yahuḏah,
and from without Yerushalayim, the voice of gladness,
and the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom, and
the voice of the bride; and the whole land shall be
empty of inhabitants.” ’
24 “But we would not listen to Your voice, to serve the
sovereign of Baḇel; therefore You have confirmed the
words that You spoke by Your servants the neḇi’im,
namely, that the bones of our sovereigns, and the
bones of our fathers, would be removed from their
place.
25 “And see, they are thrown out to the heat of the day,
and to the frost of the night, and they died in great
miseries by scarcity of food, by sword, and by
pestilence;
26 and the House which is called by Your Name, You
have laid waste, as it is to be seen this day, for the
wickedness of the house of Yisra’ĕl and the house of
Yahuḏah.
27 “O HWHY our Elohim, You have dealt with us
according to all Your goodness, and according to all
Your great kindness,
28 as You spoke by Your servant Mosheh in the day
when You Commanded him to write the Torah before
the children of Yisra’ĕl saying,
29 ‘If you do not hear My voice, surely this very great
crowd shall be turned into a small remnant among the
nations, where I shall scatter them.
30 ‘For I knew that they would not hear Me, because
they are a stiff-necked people; but in the land of their
captivities they shall remember themselves;
21

1280

BARUḴ

and shall know that I am HWHY their Elohim; for I
shall give them a heart, and ears to hear.
32 ‘And they shall praise Me in the land of their
captivity, and think upon My Name,
33 and turn from their stiff neck, and from their wicked
deeds; for they shall remember the way of their fathers,
who sinned before HWHY.
34 ‘And I shall again bring them into the land which I
promised with an oath to their fathers: Aḇraham,
Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ; and they shall be masters of it,
and I shall increase them, and they shall not be
diminished.
35 ‘And I shall make an everlasting Covenant with
them to be their Elohim, and they shall be My people;
and I shall no longer drive My people of Yisra’ĕl out of
the land that I have given them.’
31

3 “O HWHY Ĕl Shaddai, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, the being
in anguish, the troubled ruaḥ cries unto You.
2 “Hear O HWHY, and show favour, for You are kind,
and show favour to us, because we have sinned
before You.
3 “For You endure forever, and we have utterly
perished.
4 “O HWHY Ĕl Shaddai, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, hear now
the prayers of the perished Yisra’ĕlites, and of their
children, who have sinned before You, and not
listened to Your voice, their Elohim; by reason of
which these plagues cling to us.
5 “Do not remember the wickednesses of our
forefathers; but now at this time remember Your
power and Your Name.
6 “For You are HWHY our Elohim, and You, O HWHY,
we shall praise.
7 “And for this cause You have put Your reverence
in our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon
Your Name, and praise You in our captivity; for we
1281

BARUCH

have remembered all the wickedness of our
forefathers, who sinned before You.
8 “See, we are still in our captivity this day, where
You have scattered us, for a reproach and a curse,
and to be punished, according to all the
wickednesses of our fathers, who departed from
HWHY our Elohim.
9 “Hear, Yisra’ĕl, the Commands of Ḥai; listen to
understand wisdom.
10 “How does it come to be O Yisra’ĕl, that you are in
the land of your enemies,
That you have grown old in a foreign land,
That you are defiled with the dead,
11 “That you are counted among those who go down
into the grave?
12 “You have forsaken the fountain of wisdom.
13 “For if you had walked in the Way of Elohim, you
would have dwelt in peace forever.
14 “Learn where there is wisdom, where there is
strength, where there is understanding;
That you may know also where there is length of
days, and ḥai, where there is light of the eyes, and
peace.
15 “Who has found out her place?
Or who has come into her storehouse?
16 “Where are the princes of the gentiles,
And those who ruled the beasts of the earth;
17 “Those who made sport of the birds of the air,
And those who hoarded silver and gold in which men
trust,
And made no end to their getting?
18 “For those who worked in silver, and were so
anxious,
And whose works are unsearchable,
19 “They have vanished and gone down to the grave,
And others have come up in their place.
1282

BARUḴ

“Young men have seen light, and dwelt upon the
earth;
But the way of knowledge have they not known,
21 “Nor understood its paths, nor laid hold of it;
Their children are far from the Way.
22 “It has not been heard in Kena’an,
Nor has it been seen in Tĕman.
23 “The sons of Haḡar who seek wisdom upon earth,
The merchants of Merran and of Tĕman,
The authors of fables, and seekers of understanding;
None of these have known the way of wisdom, or
remember her paths.
24 “O Yisra’ĕl, how great is the House of Elohim!
And how large is the place of His possession!
25 “It is great, and has no end;
High, and immeasurable.
26 “There were the giants of name from the
beginning,
Who were of such great size, and so skilled in battle.
27 “These did not choose HWHY,
Nor did He give them the Way of knowledge:
28 “And they were destroyed, because they had no
wisdom,
And perished through their own foolishness.
29 “Who has gone up into the shamayim and taken
her,
And brought her down from the clouds?
30 “Who has gone over the sea, and found her,
And acquires her for pure gold?
31 “No man knows her way, nor thinks upon her path.
32 “But He who knows all knows her, and has found
her with His understanding;
He who prepared the earth forever has filled it with
four-footed beasts;
33 “He who sends forth light, and it goes,
Calls it again, and it obeys Him with reverence.
20

1283

BARUCH

“The stars shone in their watches, and rejoiced;
When He calls them, they say, ‘Here we are.’
And so with gladness they showed light unto He who
made them.”
35 This is our Elohim, and there is no other to be
counted in comparison of Him!
36 He has found all the way of knowledge,
And has given it unto Ya’aqoḇ His servant,
And to Yisra’ĕl His beloved.
37 Afterward He showed Himself on the earth, and
conversed with men.
34

4 This is the Book of the Commands of Elohim,
and the Torah that endures forever;
All those who guard it shall attain ḥai;
But those who leave it shall die.
2 Turn, O Ya’aqoḇ, and take hold of it;
Walk in the presence of its light, that you may be
illuminated.
3 Do not give your esteem to another,
Nor those which bring you profit to a foreign nation.
4 O Yisra’ĕl, baruḵ are we;
For those who are pleasing to Elohim have been
made known to us!
5 Take courage my people, the remembrance of
Yisra’ĕl.
6 You were sold to the nations, not for destruction;
But because you moved Elohim to wrath, you were
delivered unto your enemies.
7 For you provoked He who made you by offering to
demons,
And not to Elohim.
8 You have forgotten the everlasting Elohim,who
raised you up;
And you have grieved Yerushalayim, who nursed
you.
1284

BARUḴ

For when she saw the wrath of Elohim coming
upon you, she said,
“Hear, O you who dwell around Tsiyon,
Elohim has brought upon me great mourning;
10 “For I saw the captivity of my sons and daughters,
Which the Everlasting brought upon them.
11 “With joy I nourished them;
But sent them away with weeping and mourning.
12 “Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and
forsaken by many,
Who for the sins of my children am left laid waste;
Because they departed from the Torah of Elohim.
13 “They did not know His Torot, nor walk in the Way
of His Commands,
Nor trod in the paths of discipline in His
righteousness.
14 “Let those who dwell around Tsiyon come,
And remember the captivity of my sons and
daughters,
Which the Everlasting has brought upon them.
15 “For He has brought a nation upon them from afar,
A shameless nation, and of a foreign language,
Who neither revered old men, nor shown compassion
to children.
16 “These have carried away the dearly beloved
children of the widow,
And left she who was alone lying waste without
daughters.
17 “But how shall I help you?
18 “For He who brought these plagues upon you
delivers you from the hands of your enemies.
19 “Go your way, O my children, go your way;
For I am left laid waste!
20 “I have put off the garments of peace,
And put upon myself the sackcloth of my prayer.
I cry to the Everlasting in my days.
9

1285

BARUCH

“Be of good cheer O my children,
Cry unto HWHY, and He shall deliver you from the
strength and hand of your enemies.
22 “For my expectancy is in the Everlasting, that He
shall save you;
And joy has come to me from the Qadosh One,
Because of the kindness which shall soon come to
you from the Everlasting, our Saviour.
23 “For I sent you out with mourning and weeping,
But Elohim shall give you to me again with joy and
gladness forever.
24 “For as the neighbours of Tsiyon have seen your
captivity:
So shall they soon see your salvation from our
Elohim,
Which shall come upon you with great esteem, and
brightness of the Everlasting.
25 “My children, patiently endure the wrath that has
come upon you from Elohim;
For your enemy has persecuted you;
But shortly you shall see his destruction,
And shall tread upon his neck.
26 “My delicate ones have gone rough ways,
And were taken away as a flock caught by the
enemy.
27 “Be of good comfort, O my children, and cry unto
Elohim;
For you shall be remembered by He who brought
these upon you.
28 “For as it was your heart to go astray from Elohim;
So, being returned, seek Him ten times more.
29 “For He who has brought these plagues upon you,
Brings you everlasting joy with your deliverance.”
30 Take courage, O Yerushalayim;
For He who gave you that name shall comfort you.
31 Those who afflicted you, and rejoiced at your fall
are wretched.
21

1286

BARUḴ

The cities that your children served are wretched.
She who received your sons is wretched.
33 For as she rejoiced at your ruin, and was glad of
your fall;
So she shall be grieved when she is laid waste.
34 For I shall take away the rejoicing of her great
crowd,
And her pride shall be turned into mourning.
35 For long lasting fire shall come upon her from the
Everlasting;
And she shall be a dwelling of demons for a long
time.
36 O Yerushalayim, look around you toward the East,
And see the joy that comes to you from Elohim.
37 See, your sons come, whom you sent away,
They come gathered together from the east to the
west by the word of the Qadosh One,
Rejoicing in the esteem of Elohim.
32

5 O Yerushalayim, put off the garment of mourning
and affliction,
And put on the comeliness of the esteem that comes
from Elohim forever.
2 Throw around yourself a double garment of the
righteousness which comes from Elohim;
And put a crown of the esteem of the Everlasting on
your head.
3 For Elohim shall show your brightness to every
land under the shamayim.
4 For your name shall forever be called by Elohim:
‘The Peace of Righteousness,’ and ‘The Esteem of
Worship of Elohim.’
5 Arise, O Yerushalayim, and stand on high,
And look out toward the east, and see your children
gathered from the west to the east by the word of
the Qadosh One,
Rejoicing in the remembrance of Elohim.
1287

BARUCH

For they departed from you on foot, and were led
away by their enemies;
But Elohim brings them to you exalted with esteem,
As children of the reign.
7 For Elohim has appointed every high hill, and
longstanding mountains to be thrown down,
And valleys filled up, to make the ground even,
That Yisra’ĕl may go safely in the esteem of Elohim,
8 And even the forests and every sweet smelling
tree,
Shall shade Yisra’ĕl at the command of Elohim.
9 For Elohim shall lead Yisra’ĕl with joy in the light
of His esteem,
With the kindness and righteousness that comes from
Him.
6

1288

LETTER OF JEREMIAH

LETTER OF YIRMEYAHU
‫ מכתב ירמיהו‬WhYmRY BtKm

6 A copy of a letter, which Yirmeyahu sent to those
who were to be led captive into Baḇel by the sovereign
of the Baḇelians, to make known to them, as it was
commanded him by Elohim:
Because of the sins which you have committed
before Elohim, you shall be led away captives into
Baḇel by Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel.

2

Therefore when you have come to Baḇel, you shall
remain there many years - for a long time - seven
generations; and after that I shall bring you away from
there in peace.

3

Now in Baḇel you shall see mighty ones of silver,
and of gold, and of wood, borne upon shoulders, which
cause the nations to fear.

4

Beware therefore that you by no means be like
foreigners, neither be afraid of them, when you see the
multitude before them and behind them, worshipping
them.

5

But say in your hearts, “O HWHY, we must worship
You.”

6

For My Messenger is with you, and I Myself look
after your beings.

7

As for their tongue; it is carved by the workman, and
they themselves are gilded and overlaid with silver; yet
they are false, and cannot speak.

8

And taking gold, as though for a maiden that loves
finery, they make crowns for the heads of their mighty
ones.

9

Sometimes the priests also take gold and silver
from their mighty ones, and bestow it upon
themselves,

10

1289

LETTER OF YIRMEYAHU

also giving some to the common whores - and
adorn them as men with garments - mighty ones of
silver, and mighty ones of gold, and wood.
12 Yet these mighty ones cannot save themselves
from moth and rust, though they are covered with
purple robes.
13 They wipe their faces because of the dust of the
temple, when there is much upon them.
14 And that which cannot put to death he who offends
it, holds a sceptre, as though it were a judge of the
land.
15 It also has in its right hand a dagger and an axe,
but cannot deliver itself from battle and thieves.
16 By this they are known to be no mighty ones;
therefore do not fear them.
17 For as a vessel that a man uses is worth naught
when it is broken; even so it is with their mighty ones.
When they are put up in the temple, their eyes are full
of dust through the feet of those who come in.
18 And as the doors are secured on every side against
he who offends the sovereign, as though sentenced to
death; even so the priests secure their temples with
doors, with locks and bars, lest their mighty ones be
plundered by robbers.
19 They light them candles, even more than for
themselves, of which they cannot see one.
20 They are as one of the beams of the temple, yet it
is said their hearts are gnawed upon by creeping
creatures out of the earth; but when they eat them and
their garments, they do not feel it.
21 Their faces are blackened by the smoke that comes
out of the temple.
22 Upon their bodies and heads sit bats, swallows,
and birds, and also the cats.
23 By this you may know that they are no mighty ones;
therefore do not fear them.
11

1290

LETTER OF JEREMIAH

Despite the gold that is around them to make them
lovely, unless they wipe off the tarnish, they shall not
shine; for neither did they feel it when they were
moulded.
25 Those in which there is no breath are bought for a
very high price.
26 They are borne upon shoulders, having no feet;
thereby they declare to men that they are of no worth.
27 Those who serve them are also ashamed; for if they
fall to the ground at any time, they cannot rise up again
by themselves. Nor if one puts them upright, could they
move by themselves. Neither, if they are bowed down,
could they make themselves straight; but they put gifts
before them as to dead men.
28 As for that which is offered to them, their priests sell
and misuse; similarly their wives preserve some of it in
salt; but to the poor and helpless they give none of it.
29 Women in monthly separation and women in
childbirth eat their offerings; by these you know that
they are not mighty ones. Do not fear them.
30 For how could they be called mighty ones? For
women place meat before the mighty ones of silver,
gold, and wood.
31 And the priests sit in their temples, having their
garments torn, and their heads and beards shaven,
and their heads bare.
32 They roar and cry before their mighty ones, as men
do at the feast when one is dead.
33 The priests also take off their garments, and clothe
their wives and children.
34 Whether it be evil that one does to them or good,
they are not able to repay it; they could neither appoint
a sovereign, nor put him down.
35 In like manner, they neither give wealth nor silver;
though a man makes a vow to them, and does not
guard it, they do not require it.
24

1291

LETTER OF YIRMEYAHU

They save no man from death, nor deliver the weak
from the mighty.
37 They do not restore sight to a blind man, nor help
any man in his distress.
38 They show no kindness to the widow, nor do good
to the fatherless.
39 Their mighty ones of wood, and which are overlaid
with gold and silver, are like the stones that are hewn
out of the mountain; those who worship them shall be
put to shame.
40 How should a man then think and say that they are
mighty ones, when even the Kasdites themselves
shame them?
41 For if they shall see one dumb who cannot speak,
they bring him and entreat Bĕl that he might speak, as
though it were able to understand.
42 Yet they cannot understand this themselves, and
leave them; for they have no knowledge.
43 The women with cords about them also sit in the
byways, burning bran for perfume; but if any of them,
drawn by some that passes by, lies with him, she
reproaches her companion, that she was not thought
as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.
44 Whatever is done by them is false; how is it then
even thought or said that they are mighty ones?
45 They are made by carpenters and goldsmiths; they
are no other than what the workmen wants them to be.
46 And they themselves who made them do not live
long; how could those which are made by them be
mighty ones?
47 For they left lies and reproaches to those who come
after.
48 For when any battle or plague comes upon them,
the priests consult with themselves, where they might
hide with them.
36

1292

LETTER OF JEREMIAH

How then do men not perceive that they are not
mighty ones, which neither save themselves from
battle, nor from plague?
50 For seeing they are only of wood, and overlaid with
silver and gold, it shall be known after this that they are
false.
51 And it shall clearly appear to all nations and
sovereigns that they are not mighty ones, rather the
works of men’s hands, and that there is no work of
Elohim in them.
52 Who then does not know that they are not mighty
ones?
53 For neither do they appoint a sovereign in the land,
nor give rain to men.
54 Neither could they judge their own cause, nor are
they able to correct a wrong; for they are as crows
between the shamayim and earth.
55 So when fire falls upon the house of mighty ones of
wood, or overlaid with gold or silver, their priests shall
flee away and escape; but they themselves shall be
burned up like timbers.
56 And they cannot withstand any sovereign or
enemies; how is it then thought or said that they are
mighty ones?
57 Neither are those mighty ones of wood and overlaid
with silver or gold able to escape from either thieves or
robbers.
58 Whose gold, and silver, and garments with which
they are clothed are taken by those who are strong,
and go away with it all; nor are they able to help
themselves.
59 Therefore it is better to be a sovereign that shows
his strength, or even a useful vessel in a house, which
the owner has use of, than such false mighty ones; or
to be a door in a house, to guard such objects within,
than such false mighty ones; or a column of wood in a
palace, than such false mighty ones.
49

1293

LETTER OF YIRMEYAHU

For sun, moon, and stars, being bright and sent to
do their service, are obedient.
61 In like manner the lightning when it breaks is easy
to be seen; and after the same manner the wind blows
in every land.
62 And when Elohim commands the clouds to go over
the whole world, they do as they are ordered.
63 And the fire sent from above to consume hills and
woods does as it is commanded; but these are like
them neither in appearance nor power.
64 Therefore it is neither to be supposed nor said that
they are mighty ones, seeing they are neither able to
judge causes, nor to do good to men.
65 Knowing therefore that they are not mighty ones,
do not fear them,
66 for they neither curse nor baraḵ sovereigns;
67 neither they show signs in the shamayim among
the gentiles, nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the
moon.
68 The beasts are better than they; for they move
under cover and help themselves.
69 It is then by no means apparent to us that they are
mighty ones; therefore do not fear them.
70 For as a scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers
guards naught; so are their mighty ones of wood, laid
over with silver and gold.
71 And likewise their mighty ones of wood, and laid
over with silver and gold, are like a thornbush in an
orchard, on which every bird perches; as also like a
dead body, that is cast into the darkness.
72 And you shall know them to be non mighty ones by
the bright purple that rots upon them; and they
themselves afterward shall be consumed, and shall be
a reproach in the land.
73 Better therefore is the righteous man that has no
idols; for he shall be far from reproach.
60

1294

MANASSEH

PRAYER OF MENASHSHEH
‫ תפילה מנששה‬hvv!m hLYpt

1 O HWHY, Ĕl Shaddai of our fathers, Aḇraham,
Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ, and of their righteous seed; who
has made the shamayim and earth, with all its
adornment; who has bound the sea by the word of
Your Command; who has shut up the deep, and
sealed it by Your awesome and esteemed Name;
whom all men revere, and tremble before Your power.
For the greatness of Your esteem is not able to be
borne, and Your threatening wrath toward sinners is
unbearable; but Your kind promise is immeasurable
and unsearchable. For You are the Most High Ĕl, of
great compassion, patient, very kind, and grieves of
the evils of men. You, O HWHY, according to Your great
goodness have promised repentance and forgiveness
to those who have sinned against You, and from Your
infinite kindnesses have appointed repentance to
sinners, that they may be saved. You therefore, O
HWHY, who is Elohim of the righteous, have not
appointed repentance to the righteous, as to Aḇraham,
and Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ, who have not sinned
against You; but You have appointed repentance to
me who is a sinner; for I have sinned above the
number of the sands of the sea. My transgressions, O
HWHY, are multiplied! My transgressions are multiplied,
and I am not worthy to look and see the height of the
shamayim for the multitude of my wickednesses. I am
bowed down with many iron bands, so that I am unable
to lift up my head, neither have any release, for I have
provoked Your wrath, and done wickedness before
You. I did not do Your desire, neither have I kept Your
Commands. I have put up abominations, and have
many stumblings. Now therefore I bow the knee of my
heart, asking You for favour. I have sinned, O HWHY, I
have sinned, and I acknowledge my wickednesses.
Therefore, I humbly ask You, forgive me, O HWHY,
forgive me, and do not destroy me in my wickedness.
1295

MENASHSHEH

Do not be wroth with me forever, by reserving
displeasure for me; neither condemn me to the lower
parts of the earth. For You are Elohim, even the Elohim
of those who repent, and in me You shall show all Your
goodness; for You shall save me, who is unworthy,
according to Your great kindness. Therefore I shall
praise You forever all the days of my life. For all the
powers of the shamayim praise You, and Yours is the
esteem forever and ever. Amĕn.

1296

PRAYER OF AZARYAH

PRAYER OF AZARYAH
‫ תפילה אזריה‬hYRzA hLYpt

1 And they walked in the midst of the fire, praising
Elohim, and beraḵah HWHY.
2 Then Azaryah stood up, and prayed in this way:
and opening his mouth in the midst of the fire said,
3 “Baruḵ are You, O HWHY Elohim of our fathers! Your
Name is worthy to be praised and esteemed forever,
4 for You are righteous in all that You have done to
us. Indeed, all Your works are true, Your Ways are
right, and all Your Right-Rulings are truth.
5 “In all that You have brought upon us, and upon the
qodesh city of our fathers, even Yerushalayim, You
have executed true judgment; for according to truth
and Right-Ruling You brought all these matters upon
us because of our sins.
6 “For we have sinned and done wickedly, departing
from You.
7 “In all matters we have trespassed, and not obeyed
Your Commands, nor guarded them, neither done as
You have Commanded us, that it might be well with us.
8 “Therefore all that You have brought upon us, and
every matter that You have done to us, You have done
in true right-ruling.
9 “And You delivered us into the hands of lawless
enemies, most hateful forsakers of Elohim, and to an
unrighteous sovereign, and the most wicked in all the
earth.
10 “And now, we cannot open our mouths; we have
become a shame and a reproach to Your servants, and
to those who worship You.
11 “Yet do not deliver us up completely, for Your
Name’s sake, neither annul Your Covenant!
12 “And do not cause Your kindness to depart from us,
for the sake of Aḇraham Your beloved, for the sake of
Your servant Yitsḥaq, and for the sake of Your qodesh
one Yisra’ĕl;
1297

PRAYER OF AZARYAH

to whom You have spoken and promised, that You
would multiply their seed as the stars of the shamayim,
and as the sand that lies upon the seashore.
14 “For we, O HWHY, have become less than any
nation, and are held under this day in all the earth
because of our sins.
15 “Neither is there at this time prince, or naḇi, or
leader, or burnt offering, or slaughtering, or offering, or
incense, or place to slaughter before You, and to find
favour.
16 “Nevertheless in a repentant heart and a humble
spirit let us be accepted.
17 “As in the burnt offerings of rams and bulls, and as
in ten thousand fat of lambs; so let our slaughtering be
in Your sight this day, and grant that we may follow
You completely; for those who put their trust in You
shall not be put to shame.
18 “And now, we follow You with all our heart, we
revere You, and seek Your face.
19 “Do not put us to shame, but deal with us according
to Your favour, and according to Your many
kindnesses.
20 “Deliver us also according to Your marvellous
works, and give esteem to Your Name, O HWHY, and
let all those who do evil to Your servants be put to
shame;
21 “And let them be put to shame in all their strength
and might, and let their strength be broken.
22 “And let them know that You are Elohim. The only
Elohim! And esteemed over all the earth!”
23 And the sovereign’s servants, that put them in, did
not cease heating the oven with resin, pitch, tow, and
kindling,
24 so that the flame gushed out above the furnace
forty-nine ammah.
25 And it passed through, and burned those Kasdites
found around the furnace.
13

1298

PRAYER OF AZARYAH

But the Messenger of HWHY came down into the
oven together with Azaryah and his friends, and smote
the flame of the fire out of the oven,
27 and made the middle of the furnace as though it
were a moist whistling wind, so that the fire did not
touch them at all, neither harm nor troubled them.
28 Then the three, with one voice, praised, esteemed,
and baraḵ, Elohim in the furnace, saying:
29 Baruḵ are You, O HWHY Elohim of our fathers;
And to be praised and exalted above all forever.
30 And baruḵ is Your esteemed and qodesh Name;
And to be praised and exalted above all forever.
31 Baruḵ are You in the Hĕyḵal of Your qodesh
esteem;
And to be praised and esteemed above all forever.
32 Baruḵ are You that see the depths, and sit upon
the keruḇim;
And to be praised and exalted above all forever.
33 “Baruḵ are You on the esteemed throne of Your
reign;
And to be praised and esteemed above all forever.
34 Baruḵ are You in the expanse of the shamayim;
And to be praised and esteemed above all forever.
35 Baraḵ HWHY all you works of HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever,
36 Baraḵ HWHY you shamayim;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
37 Baraḵ HWHY you messengers of HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
38 Baraḵ HWHY all waters that are above the
shamayim;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
39 Baraḵ HWHY all powers of HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
40 Baruḵ HWHY sun and moon;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
41 Baraḵ HWHY stars of the shamayim;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
26

1299

PRAYER OF AZARYAH

Baraḵ HWHY every shower and dew;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
43 Baraḵ HWHY all winds;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever,
44 Baraḵ HWHY fire and heat;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
45 Baruḵ HWHY winter and summer;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
46 Baraḵ HWHY dews and storms of snow;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
47 Baraḵ HWHY nights and days;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
48 Baraḵ HWHY light and darkness;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
49 Baraḵ HWHY ice and cold;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
50 Baraḵ HWHY frost and snow;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
51 Baraḵ HWHY lightnings and clouds;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
52 O let the earth baraḵ HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
53 Baraḵ HWHY you mountains and small hills;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
54 Baraḵ HWHY all matters that grow in the earth;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
55 Baraḵ HWHY you mountains;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
56 Baraḵ HWHY you seas and rivers;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
57 Baraḵ HWHY you fish, and all that move in the
waters;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
58 Baraḵ HWHY all you birds of the shamayim;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
59 Baraḵ HWHY all you beasts and cattle;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
60 Baraḵ HWHY you children of men;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
42

1300

PRAYER OF AZARYAH

Baraḵ HWHY O Yisra’ĕl;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
62 Baraḵ HWHY you kohenim of HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
63 Baraḵ HWHY you servants of HWHY;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
64 Baraḵ HWHY you spirits and beings of the
righteous;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
65 Baraḵ HWHY you qodesh and humble men of
heart;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever.
66 Baraḵ HWHY Ḥananyah, Azaryah, and Misha’ĕl;
Praise and exalt Him above all forever:
For He has delivered us from Gĕy-Hinnom, and
saved us from the hand of death,
And delivered us out of the midst of the furnace and
burning flame:
Even out of the midst of the fire He has delivered us.
67 O give thanks to HWHY, because He shows favour:
For his kindness endures forever.
68 O all you that worship HWHY, baraḵ the Elohim of
mighty ones;
Praise Him, and give Him thanks;
For His kindness endures forever.
61

1301

DANIEL ADDITIONS

BĔL AND THE DRAGON
‫! בל והדרקון‬WqRdhW LB

14 And Sovereign Astuages was gathered to his
fathers, and Koresh of Paras received his reign.
2 And Dani’ĕl spoke with the sovereign, and was
esteemed above all his friends.
3 Now the Baḇelians had an idol, called Bĕl, and
every day there was spent upon it: twelve large
measures of fine flour, and forty sheep, and six vessels
of wine.
4 And the sovereign revered it and went daily to
worship it, but Dani’ĕl worshipped his own Elohim. And
the sovereign said to him, “Why do you not worship
Bĕl?”
5 Who answered and said, “Because I do not worship
idols made with hands, but the living Elohim, who has
created the shamayim and the earth, and reigns over
all flesh.”
6 Then the sovereign said to him, “Do you not think
that Bĕl is a living mighty one? Do you not see how
much he eats and drinks every day?”
7 Then Dani’ĕl smiled, and said, “O sovereign, do not
be deceived; for this is but clay within, and bronze
without, and never ate or drank any.”
8 So the sovereign was wroth, and called for his
priests, and said to them, “If you do not tell me who this
is that devours these expenses, you shall die!
9 “But if you shall prove that Bĕl devours them, then
Dani’ĕl shall die; for he has spoken blasphemy against
Bĕl.” And Dani’ĕl said to the sovereign, “Let it be
according to your word.”
10 Now there were seventy priests of Bĕl, besides
their wives and children. And the sovereign went with
Dani’ĕl into the temple of Bĕl.
1302

BEL AND THE DRAGON

So the priests of Bĕl said, “See, we shall go out, but
you, O sovereign, place the meat, and prepare the
wine, and shut the door firmly and seal it with your own
signet.
12 “And tomorrow when you come in, if you do not find
that all has been eaten up, we shall suffer death, or
else Dani’ĕl, who speaks falsely against us.”
13 But they gave little regard, for under the table they
had made a secret entrance, by which they entered in
continually, and ate these.
14 So when they had gone out, the sovereign placed
food before Bĕl. Now Dani’ĕl had commanded his
servants to bring ashes, and they scattered them
throughout the whole temple in the presence of the
sovereign alone; then they went out, and shut the door,
and sealed it with the sovereign’s signet, and so
departed.
15 Now in the night, the priests came with their wives
and children, as was their habit, and ate and drank all.
16 And it came to be in the morning, the sovereign
arose, and Dani’ĕl with him.
17 And the sovereign said, “Dani’ĕl, are the seals
whole?” And he said, “Yes, O sovereign, they are
whole.”
18 And as soon as he had opened the door, the
sovereign looked upon the table, and cried with a loud
voice, “You are great, O Bĕl, and in you is no deceit at
all!”
19 Then Dani’ĕl laughed, and held the sovereign that
he should not go in, and said, “See now the pavement,
and note well whose footsteps are there.”
20 And the sovereign said, “I see the footsteps of men,
women, and children.” And then the sovereign was
wroth,
21 and took the priests, with their wives and children,
who showed him the secret doors, where they came
in, and ate that which was on the table.
11

1303

DANIEL ADDITIONS

Therefore the sovereign slew them, and gave Bĕl
over to Dani’ĕl’s authority, who destroyed it and its
temple.
23 And in that same place there was a great dragon,
which those of Baḇel worshipped.
24 And the sovereign said to Dani’ĕl, “Shall you also
say that this is of bronze? See, he lives, he eats and
drinks. You cannot say that he is no living mighty one;
therefore worship him.”
25 Then Dani’ĕl said to the sovereign, “I worship HWHY
my Elohim; for He is the living Elohim.
26 “But allow me, O sovereign, and I shall slay this
dragon without sword or staff.” And the sovereign said,
“I allow you.”
27 Then Dani’ĕl took pitch and fat and hair, and boiled
them together, and made lumps from it. This he put in
the dragon’s mouth, and so the dragon burst open.
And Dani’ĕl said, “See, these are the mighty ones you
worship.”
28 When those of Baḇel heard this, they were greatly
enraged, and conspired against the sovereign, saying,
“The sovereign has become a Yahuḏi, and he has
destroyed Bĕl. He has slain the dragon, and put the
priests to death.”
29 So they came to the sovereign, and said, “Give us
Dani’ĕl, or else we shall destroy you and your house!”
30 Now when the sovereign saw that they pressed him
greatly, being compelled, he handed Dani’ĕl over to
them,
31 who threw him into the lions’ den, where he was six
days.
32 And in the den there were seven lions, and every
day they had given them two carcasses of two sheep;
which then were not given to them, with the intent they
would devour Dani’ĕl.
33 Now there was among the Yahuḏim, a naḇi called
Ḥaḇaqquq, who had made stew, and had broken
22

1304

BEL AND THE DRAGON

bread in a bowl, and was going to the field, to take it to
the reapers.
34 But the messenger of HWHY said to Ḥaḇaqquq, “Go,
carry the dinner that you have into Baḇel to Dani’ĕl,
who is in the lions’ den.”
35 But Ḥaḇaqquq said, “Master, I never saw Baḇel;
neither do I know where the den is.”
36 Then the messenger of HWHY took him by the head,
and carried him by the hair of his head, and through
the power of His Ruaḥ placed him in Baḇel over the
den.
37 And Ḥaḇaqquq cried, saying, “O Dani’ĕl, Dani’ĕl!
Take the meal which Elohim has sent you.”
38 And Dani’ĕl said, “You have remembered me, O
Elohim, neither have You forsaken those who seek
You and love You.”
39 So Dani’ĕl arose, and ate, and the messenger of
HWHY immediately placed Ḥaḇaqquq in his own place
again.
40 On the seventh day the sovereign went to mourn
for Dani’ĕl, but when he came to the den, he looked in,
and see, Dani’ĕl was sitting!
41 Then the sovereign cried out with a loud voice,
saying, “Great is HWHY, Elohim of Dani’ĕl, and there is
none other besides Him!”
42 And he pulled him out, and threw those who were
the cause of his destruction into the den, and they were
devoured in a moment before his face.

1305

SUSANNA

SHOSHANNAH
‫ שושנה‬h!vWv

1 There dwelt a man in Baḇel, called Yoyaqim,
and he took a wife, whose name was Shoshannah,
the daughter of Ḥilqiyahu, a very lovely woman, and
one that revered HWHY.
3 Her parents were also righteous, and taught their
daughter according to the Torah of Mosheh.
4 Now Yoyaqim was a very wealthy man, and had a
lovely garden adjoining his house, and the Yahuḏim
came to him because he was more esteemed than all
others.
5 The same year two of the elders of the people were
appointed to be judges, of whom HWHY said,
“Wickedness came from Baḇel from elders who were
judges, who were supposed to govern the people.”
6 These were often at Yoyaqim’s house, and all that
had any matter of law came to them.
7 Now when the people departed at noon,
Shoshannah went into her husband’s garden to walk.
8 And the two elders saw her going in every day, and
walking, therefore their lust was inflamed toward her.
9 And they perverted their own mind, and turned
away their eyes, that they might not look to the
shamayim, nor remember righteous Right-Rulings.
10 And although they both were smitten with her love,
they dared not show one another his grief,
11 for they were ashamed to admit their lust, that they
desired to have to do with her.
12 Even so, they watched diligently from day to day to
see her.
13 And the one said to the other, “Let us now go home,
for it is mealtime.”
14 So when they were gone out, they parted from one
another, but turning back again they came to the same
place. And after that they had asked one another the
cause, they acknowledged their lust. They then both
2

1306

SHOSHANNAH

appointed a time together, when they might find her
alone.
15 And it came to be, as they watched for an
opportune time, she went in as before with only two
female servants, and she desired to wash herself in
the garden, for it was hot.
16 And there was no one there except the two elders,
that had hidden themselves, watching her.
17 Then she said to her female servants, “Bring me oil
and washing balm, and shut the garden doors, that I
may wash myself.”
18 And they did as she asked them, and shut the
garden doors, and went out themselves at private
doors to fetch that which she had commanded them;
but they did not see the elders, because they were
hidden.
19 Now when the female servants had gone out, the
two elders rose up, and ran to her, saying,
20 “See, the garden doors are shut, so that no one see
us, and we are in love with you; therefore consent to
us, and lie with us.
21 “If you shall not, we shall witness against you, that
a young man was with you, and that is why you sent
away your female servants from you.”
22 Then Shoshannah sighed, and said, “I am trapped
on every side; for if I do this deed, it is death unto me;
and if I do not do it I cannot escape your hands.
23 “It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not
do it, than to sin in the sight of HWHY.”
24 With that Shoshannah cried with a loud voice, and
the two elders cried out against her.
25 Then the one ran, and opened the garden door.
26 So when the servants of the house heard the cry in
the garden, they rushed in at the private door, to see
what was done to her.
27 But when the elders had spoken their words, the
servants were greatly ashamed, for there was never
such a report made of Shoshannah.
1307

SUSANNA

And it came to be the next day, when the people
were assembled to her husband Yoyaqim, the two
elders also came full of evil intentions against
Shoshannah to put her to death,
29 and said before the people, “Send for Shoshannah,
the daughter of Ḥilqiyahu, Yoyaqim’s wife.” And so
they sent.
30 So she came with her father and mother, her
children, and all her relatives.
31 Now Shoshannah was a very delicate woman, and
lovely to look at.
32 And these wicked men commanded to uncover her
face - for she was covered - that they might be filled
with her loveliness.
33 Therefore her friends and all that saw her wept.
34 Then the two elders stood up in the midst of the
people, and laid their hands upon her head.
35 And she, weeping, looked up toward the
shamayim, for her heart trusted in HWHY.
36 And the elders said, “As we walked in the garden
alone, this woman came in with two female servants,
and shut the garden doors, and sent the female
servants away.
37 “Then a young man, who was hid there, came to
her, and lay with her!
38 “Then we that stood in a corner of the garden,
seeing this wickedness, ran toward them.
39 “And when we saw them together, we could not
hold the man, for he was stronger than we, and opened
the door, and leaped out.
40 “But having taken this woman, we asked who the
young man was, but she would not tell us! These
matters we do witness.”
41 Then the assembly believed them, as they were the
elders and judges of the people; so they condemned
her to death.
42 Then Shoshannah cried out with a loud voice, and
said, “O everlasting Elohim, who knows the secrets,
and knows all before they come to be.
28

1308

SHOSHANNAH

“You know that they have borne false witness
against me, and, see, I must die; whereas I never did
such matters as these men have maliciously devised
against me!”
44 And HWHY heard her voice.
45 Therefore when she was led to be put to death,
HWHY raised up the qodesh spirit of a young man
whose name was Dani’ĕl,
46 who cried with a loud voice, “I am clear from the
blood of this woman!”
47 Then all the people turned toward him, and said,
“What do you mean by these words that you have
spoken?”
48 So he, standing in the midst of them said, “Are you
such fools, you sons of Yisra’ĕl, that without
examination or knowledge of the truth you have
condemned a daughter of Yisra’ĕl?
49 “Return again to the place of judgment, for they
have borne false witness against her.”
50 Therefore all the people turned again in haste, and
the elders said to him, “Come, sit down among us, and
show us, seeing Elohim has given you the esteem of
an elder.”
51 Then Dani’ĕl said to them, “Put these two aside,
one far from another, and I shall examine them.”
52 So when they were put apart, one from another, he
called one of them, and said to him, “O you that have
grown old in wickedness, now your sins which you
have committed previously have come to light.
53 “For you have pronounced false judgment and
have condemned the innocent and have let the guilty
go free; although HWHY says, ‘The innocent and
righteous you shall not slay.’
54 “Now then, if you have seen her, tell me under what
tree you saw them joining together?” Who answered,
“Under a mastic tree.”
55 And Dani’ĕl said, “Very well. You have also lied
against your own head. For even now the messenger
43

1309

SUSANNA

of Elohim has received the sentence of Elohim to cut
you in two.”
56 So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the
other, and said to him, “O you seed of Kena’an, and
not of Yahuḏah, loveliness has deceived you, and lust
has perverted your heart.
57 “Thus have you dealt with the daughters of Yisra’ĕl,
and they for fear joined with you. But the daughter of
Yahuḏah would not abide your wickedness.
58 “Now therefore tell me, under what tree did you
catch them joining together?” Who answered, “Under
an evergreen tree.”
59 Then Dani’ĕl said to him, “Very well. You have also
lied against your own head. For the messenger of
Elohim waits with the sword to cut you in two, that he
may destroy you.”
60 With that, all the assembly cried out with a loud
voice, and praised Elohim, who saves those who trust
in Him.
61 And they rose up against the two elders, for Dani’ĕl
had convicted them of false witness by their own
mouth.
62 And according to the Torah of Mosheh, they did to
them such as they had maliciously intended to do to
their neighbour, and they put them to death. Thus the
innocent blood was saved that very day.
63 Therefore Ḥilqiyahu and his wife praised Elohim for
their daughter Shoshannah, with Yoyaqim her
husband, and all their relatives, because there was no
dishonesty found in her.
64 From that day onward, Dani’ĕl was held in high
regard in the sight of the people.

1310

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER

HAḎASSAH
‫ הדסה‬hsdh

10 And Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh laid compulsory
labour on the land and the islands of the sea.
2 And all the acts of his strength and his might, and
the exact account of the greatness of Mordeḵai, with
which the sovereign made him great, are they not
written in the book of the annals of the sovereigns of
Maḏai and Paras?
3 For Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi was second to Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh, and great among the Yahuḏim and
pleasing to his many brothers, seeking the good of his
people and speaking peace to all his seed.
4 Then Mordeḵai said, “Elohim has done these
matters.
5 “For I remember a dream which I saw concerning
these matters, and none of them have failed.
6 “A little fountain became a river, and there was light,
and the sun, and much water. This river is Estĕr, whom
the sovereign married, and made Sovereigness.
7 “And the two dragons are Haman and I,
8 and the nations are those who were assembled to
destroy the name of the Yahuḏim.
9 “And my nation is this Yisra’ĕl, which cried to
Elohim, and were saved! For HWHY has saved His
people, and HWHY has delivered us from all those evils,
and Elohim has wrought signs and great wonders,
which have not been done among the gentiles.
10 “Therefore He has made two lots: one for the
people of Elohim, and another for all the gentiles.
11 “And these two lots came at the hour, and time, and
day of judgment, before Elohim among all nations.”
12 So Elohim remembered His people, and rightlyruled His inheritance.
13 Therefore those days shall be unto them in the
month Aḏar, the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the
same month, with an assembly, and joy, and with
1311

HAḎASSAH ADDITIONS

gladness before Elohim, according to their generations
forever among His people.

11 In the fourth year of the reign of Ptolemaeus and
Cleopatra, Dositheos, who said he was a kohĕn and
Lĕwite, and Ptolemaeus his son, brought this letter of
Purim, which they said was the same, and that
Lusimaḵos the son of Ptolemaeus, that was in
Yerushalayim, had interpreted it.
2 In the second year of the reign of Artaḥshashta the
great, on the first day of the month Nisan, Mordeḵai the
son of Ya’ir, the son of Shim’i, the son of Qish, of the
tribe of Binyamin, had a dream –
3 who was a Yahuḏi, and dwelt in the city of Shushan,
a great man, being an attendant in the sovereign’s
court.
4 He was also one of the captives, which
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel carried from
Yerushalayim with Yeḵonyah sovereign of Yahuḏah,
and this was his dream:
5 See, a noise of uproar, with thunder, and
earthquakes, and disruption in the land!
6 And, see, two great dragons came forth ready to
fight, and their cry was great.
7 And at their cry all nations were prepared for battle,
that they might fight against the righteous people.
8 And see, a day of darkness and gloom, distress and
anguish, affliction and great uproar upon the earth.
9 And the whole righteous nation was troubled,
fearing their own evils, and were prepared to perish.
10 Then they cried to Elohim, and upon their cry, as it
were from a little fountain, a great flood was made,
even much water.
11 The light and the sun rose up, and the lowly were
exalted, and devoured the great.
12 Now when Mordeḵai, who had seen this dream,
and what Elohim had determined to do, awoke, he
regarded this dream in mind until night, and desired to
know it by all means.
1312

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER

12 And Mordeḵai took his rest in the court with
Gabatha and Tharra, the two eunuchs of the
sovereign, and guards of the palace.
2 And he heard their schemes, and searched out
their purposes, and learned that they were about to lay
hands upon Artaḥshashta the sovereign; and so he
informed the sovereign of them.
3 Then the sovereign examined the two eunuchs,
and after they had confessed it, they were hanged.
4 And the sovereign made a record of these matters,
and Mordeḵai also wrote of them.
5 So the sovereign commanded, Mordeḵai to serve
in the court, and for this he rewarded him.
6 However, Haman the son of Hammeḏatha the
Agagite, who was great in esteem with the sovereign,
sought to torture Mordeḵai and his people because of
the two eunuchs of the sovereign.

13 The copy of the letters was this: The great
Sovereign Artaḥshashta writes these matters to the
princes and governors that are under him from Hodu
to Kush in a hundred and twenty-seven provinces.
2 After I became ruler over many nations and reigned
over the whole world, not lifted up with presumption of
my authority, but carrying myself always with
straightness and kindness, I purposed to settle my
subjects continually in a quiet life, and make my reign
peaceable, and open for passage to the farthest
coasts, to renew peace, which is desired of all men.
3 Now when I asked my counsellors how this might
be brought to pass, Haman, who excelled in wisdom
among us, and was approved for his continual
kindness and steadfast trustworthiness, and had the
esteem of the second place in the reign,
4 declared to us, that in all nations throughout the
world there was scattered a certain malicious people,
that had Laws contrary to all nations, and continually
despised the commands of sovereigns, so that the
1313

HAḎASSAH ADDITIONS

uniting of our reigns, with esteem intended by us would
not go forward.
5 Seeing therefore, we understand that these people
alone are continually in opposition to all men, differing
in the strange manner of their Laws, and evilly
disposed toward our reign, working all the evil they
may that our reign may not be firmly established;
6 therefore we have commanded that all those who
are indicated in writing to you by Haman, who is
appointed over the affairs, and is next to us, shall be
utterly destroyed by the sword of their enemies, with
all their wives and children without any kindness or
pity, the fourteenth day of the twelfth month Aḏar of
this present year.
7 That they, who of old and now also are malicious,
shall in one day with violence go into the grave, and
so, from now on cause our affairs to be well settled,
and without trouble.
8 Then Mordeḵai thought upon all the works of HWHY,
and made his prayer to Him,
9 saying, “O Aḏonai HWHY, the Sovereign Almighty!
For the whole world is in Your power, and if You have
appointed to save Yisra’ĕl, there is none that disputes
You.
10 “For You have made the shamayim and earth, and
all the wonders under the shamayim.
11 You are Aḏon of all, and there is none that resists
You, who is HWHY!
12 “You know all, and You know, HWHY, that it was
neither in contempt nor pride, nor for any desire of
esteem, that I did not bow down to proud Haman.
13 “For I could have been content for the salvation of
Yisra’ĕl to kiss the soles of his feet with kindness.
14 “But I did this, that I might not prefer the esteem of
man above the esteem of Elohim; neither shall I
worship any but You, O Elohim, neither shall I do it in
pride.
15 “And now, O HWHY Elohim and Sovereign, spare
Your people, for their eyes are upon us to bring us to
1314

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER

naught! Indeed, they desire to destroy the inheritance,
that has been Yours from the beginning.
16 “Do not despise the portion, which you have
delivered out of Mitsrayim for Yourself.
17 “Hear my prayer, and be kind to Your inheritance.
Turn our sorrow into joy, that we may live, O HWHY, and
praise Your Name, and do not destroy the mouths of
those who praise you, O HWHY.”
18 All Yisra’ĕl likewise cried most earnestly to HWHY,
because their death was before their eyes.

14 Sovereigness Estĕr also, being in fear of death,
came to HWHY,
2 and laid aside her splendid apparel, and put on the
garments of anguish and mourning. And instead of
precious ointments, she covered her head with ashes
and dung, and she humbled her body greatly, and all
the places of her joy she filled with her torn hair.
3 And she prayed to HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
“O Aḏonai, You alone are our Sovereign. Help me, an
empty woman, who has no helper but You;
4 for my danger is at my hand!
5 “From my youth I have heard in the tribe of my
family that You, O HWHY, took Yisra’ĕl from among all
people, and our fathers from all their forefathers, for an
inheritance forever, and you have performed whatever
You promised them.
6 “And now we have sinned before You. Therefore
You have given us into the hands of our enemies,
7 because we worshipped their mighty ones. O
HWHY, You are righteous!
8 “Nevertheless it does not satisfy them that we are
in bitter captivity; but they have vowed to their idols
9 that they shall abolish that which You have
established with Your mouth, and destroy Your
inheritance and stop the mouth of those who praise
You, and quench the esteem of Your House and of
Your altar.
1315

HAḎASSAH ADDITIONS

“And open the mouths of the gentiles to give the
praises to their idols, and to exalt a fleshly sovereign
forever.
11 “O HWHY, do not give Your sceptre to those who are
naught, and do not let them laugh at our fall; but turn
their scheme upon themselves, and make an example
of he who has begun this against us.
12 “Remember O HWHY, make Yourself known in the
time of our affliction, and give me boldness, O
Sovereign of the nations, and Aḏon of all power.
13 “Give me eloquent speech in my mouth before the
lion; turn his heart to hate he who fights against us, that
there may be an end of him and of all that are likeminded as him.
14 “But deliver us with Your hand, and help me, who
is abandoned, and who has no other help but You.
15 “You know all, O HWHY; You know that I hate the
esteem of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of the
uncircumcised and of all the gentiles.
16 “You know my need; for I abhor the sign of my high
estate, which is upon my head in the days in which I
show myself, and that I abhor it as a menstrual cloth,
and that I do not wear it when I am alone by myself,
17 and that your female servant has not eaten at
Haman’s table, and that I have not greatly esteemed
the sovereign’s feast, nor drunk the wine of the drink
offerings.
18 Neither has Your female servant had any joy since
the day that I was brought here to the present, but in
You, O HWHY, Elohim of Aḇraham.
19 “You O mighty Elohim above all, hear the voice of
the destitute and deliver us out of the hands of the evildoers, and deliver me from my fear.
10

15 And on the third day, when she had ended her
prayers, she put away her mourning garments, and put
on her splendid apparel.
2 And being adorned in esteem, after she had called
upon Elohim, who sees all and is Deliverer of all, she
took two female servants with her,
1316

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER

and she leaned on the one, to carry herself daintily;
4 and the other followed, bearing up her train.
5 And she was tanned through the perfection of her
beauty, and her countenance was cheerful and very
delightful; but her heart was in anguish for fear.
6 Then having passed through all the doors, she
stood before the sovereign, who sat upon his royal
throne, and was clothed with all his splendid robes, all
glittering with gold and precious stones; and he was
very frightening.
7 Then lifting up his face that shone with splendour,
he looked very fiercely upon her. And the
Sovereigness fell down, and went pale and fainted,
and bowed herself upon the head of the female
servant that went before her.
8 Then Elohim changed the spirit of the sovereign
into compassion, who in alarm leaped from his throne,
and took her in his arms till she came to herself again,
and comforted her with loving words and said to her,
9 “Estĕr, what is the matter? I am your brother, take
courage.
10 “Though our law is established, you shall not die.
Come near.”
11 And so he held up his golden sceptre, and laid it
upon her neck,
12 and embraced her, and said, “Speak to me.”
13 Then she said to him, “I saw you, my master, as a
messenger of Elohim, and my heart was troubled for
fear of your greatness.
14 “For you are wondrous, master, and your face is full
of favour.”
15 And as she was speaking, she fell down from
faintness.
16 Then the sovereign was troubled, and all his
servants comforted her.
3

16 The great Sovereign Artaḥshashta, to the princes
and governors of a hundred and twenty-seven
provinces from Hodu to Kush, and to all our trustworthy
subjects, greetings:
1317

HAḎASSAH ADDITIONS

For many, the more often they are esteemed with
the great bounty of their esteemed princes, the
prouder they have grown;
3 and do their best not only to harm our subjects, but
not being able to handle wealth, also undertake to do
against those who do good to them!
4 And not only take respect away from among men,
but also lifted up with the esteemed words of wicked
men that were never good, they think to escape the
judgment of Elohim, who sees all and hates evil.
5 Also often flattering speech of those who are put in
trust to manage the affairs of their friends, has caused
many that are in authority to be partakers of innocent
blood, and has surrounded them in incurable evils,
6 deceiving with the falsehood and deceit of their evil
disposition the innocence and goodness of princes.
7 Now you may see this, as we have declared, not so
much by ancient histories, as you may, if you search
what has been done evilly of late through the corrupt
behaviour of those who are unworthily placed in
authority.
8 And we must guard for the time to come, that our
reign may be at rest and peaceable for all men,
9 both by changing our purposes, and always rightly
ruling that which is evident with more equal
proceeding.
10 For
Haman, a Makedonian, the son of
Hammeḏatha, being indeed a foreigner of Parasian
blood, and far removed from our goodness, and as a
foreigner received by us,
11 had obtained the favour that we show toward every
nation so much, that he was called ‘our father,’ and
was continually esteemed by all being the second to
the sovereign.
12 But he, not upholding his greatness, went about to
deprive us of our reign and life;
13 having by many crafty deceits also sought from us
the destruction of Mordeḵai, who saved our life, and
2

1318

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER

continually worked for our good, as well as blameless
Estĕr, a member of our reign, with their whole nation.
14 For by these means he thought, finding us lacking
friends, to have the reign of Paras transferred to the
Makedonians.
15 But we find that the Yahuḏim, whom this wicked
wretch has delivered to utter destruction, are not
evildoers, but live by most righteous Laws,
16 and that they are children of the Most High and
Almighty, living Elohim, who has appointed the reign
both to us and to our forefathers in the most excellent
manner.
17 Therefore you shall do well not to put into action the
letters sent to you by Haman the son of Hammeḏatha,
18 for he who was the worker of these matters, has
been hanged at the gates of Shushan with all his family
- Elohim, who rules over all, speedily rendering
vengeance to him according to his deeds.
19 Therefore you shall publish the copy of this letter in
all places, that the Yahuḏim may freely live after their
own Laws.
20 And you shall aid them, even the same day, being
the thirteenth day of the twelfth month Aḏar, that they
may be avenged on those, who in the time of their
affliction shall assault them.
21 For Ĕl Shaddai has turned the day to joy for them,
in which the chosen people should have perished.
22 You shall therefore guard it a high day among your
solemn Feasts with all feasting,
23 that both now and hereafter there may be safety for
us and the highly respected of Paras. But to those who
conspire against us - a remembrance of destruction.
24 Therefore every city and land whatever, which shall
not do according to these matters, shall be destroyed
without kindness with fire and sword, and shall be
made not only impassable for men, but also greatly
loathed by wild beasts and birds forever.
1319

1 EZRA

1 ESDRAS
‫ עזרא א‬A ARz[

1 And Yoshiyahu held the Feast of the Pesaḥ in
Yerushalayim to his Aḏon, and offered the Pesaḥ on
the fourteenth day of the first month;
2 having appointed the kohenim according to their
daily services, being dressed in long garments, in the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
3 And he spoke to the Lĕwites, the qodesh servants
of Yisra’ĕl, that they should qadosh themselves to
HWHY, to place the qodesh ark of HWHY in the House
that sovereign Shelomoh the son of Dawiḏ had built.
4 And he said, “You shall no longer bear the ark upon
your shoulders; now therefore serve HWHY your
Elohim, and serve His people Yisra’ĕl, and prepare
yourselves according to your families and clans,
5 according to the order of Dawiḏ the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, and according to the splendour of his son
Shelomoh. And stand in the Hĕyḵal according to the
heads of the families of the Lĕwites, who serve in the
presence of your brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl.
6 Slaughter the Pesaḥ in order, and prepare the
offerings for your brothers, and guard the Pesaḥ
according to the Command of HWHY, which was given
to Mosheh.”
7 And to the people who were found there,
Yoshiyahu gave thirty thousand lambs and young
goats, and three thousand calves; these were given to
the people from the sovereign’s allowance, according
to his promise, to the kohenim, and to the Lĕwites.
8 And Ḥilqiyahu, Zeḵaryah,
and Yeḥi’ĕl, the
governors of the Hĕyḵal, gave to the kohenim two
thousand six hundred sheep, and three hundred
calves for the Pesaḥ.
9 And Yeḵonyah and Shemayah and Nethan’ĕl his
brother and Ḥashaḇyah, and Aḥi’ĕl and Yoram,
captains over thousands, gave to the Lĕwites five
1320

1 ESDRAS

thousand sheep, and seven hundred calves for the
Pesaḥ.
10 And when these were done, the kohenim and
Lĕwites, having the unleavened bread, stood in proper
order according to their clans,
11 and according to the nobility of the fathers before
the people, to offer to HWHY, as it is written in the Book
of Mosheh. And thus they did in the morning,
12 and they roasted the Pesaḥ with fire, as required.
As for the slaughterings, they boiled them in bronze
pots and cauldrons with a pleasing flavour,
13 and put them before all the people; and afterward
they prepared for themselves, and for the kohenim
their brothers, the sons of Aharon.
14 For the kohenim offered the fat until evening, and
the Lĕwites prepared for themselves, and their
brothers the kohenim, the sons of Aharon.
15 Also the qodesh singers, the sons of Asaph, were
in their service, according to the appointment of Dawiḏ,
that is: Asaph, Zeḵaryah, and Yeḏuthun, who were of
the sovereign’s servants.
16 And the gatekeepers were at every gate - it was not
lawful for any to go from his regular service - for their
brothers the Lĕwites prepared for them.
17 Thus the matters which pertained to the
slaughterings of HWHY were accomplished on that day,
that they might hold the Pesaḥ,
18 and offer slaughterings upon the altar of HWHY,
according to the command of sovereign Yoshiyahu.
19 So the children of Yisra’ĕl who were present held
the Pesaḥ at that time, and the Feast of Matstsoth
seven days;
20 and such a Pesaḥ was not kept in Yisra’ĕl since the
time of the naḇi Shemu’ĕl.
21 Even all the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl did not keep
such a Pesaḥ as Yoshiyahu, and the kohenim and the
Lĕwites and the Yahuḏim held with all Yisra’ĕl who
were found dwelling at Yerushalayim.
1321

1 EZRA

In the eighteenth year of the reign of Yoshiyahu this
Pesaḥ was kept.
23 And the works of Yoshiyahu were upright before his
Aḏon with a reverent heart.
24 As for that which came to be in his time, they were
written in former times, concerning those who sinned,
and acted wickedly against HWHY above all people and
reigns, and how they grieved Him exceedingly, so that
the words of HWHY rose up against Yisra’ĕl.
25 Now after all these acts of Yoshiyahu, it came to be
that Pharaoh the sovereign of Mitsrayim came to battle
at Karkemish on the Perath; and Yoshiyahu went out
against him.
26 But the sovereign of Mitsrayim sent to him, saying,
“What have I to do with you, O sovereign of Yahuḏah?
27 I am not sent out against you by HWHY Elohim; for
my battle is at Perath. And now indeed, HWHY is with
me. HWHY is with me urging me forward. Depart from
me, and do not be against HWHY.”
28 However Yoshiyahu did not turn back his chariot
from him, but undertook to fight with him, not regarding
the words of the naḇi Yirmeyahu spoken by the mouth
of HWHY;
29 but joined in battle against him in the plain of
Meḡiddo, and the princes came against sovereign
Yoshiyahu.
30 Then the sovereign said to his servants, “Carry me
away out of the battle; for I am very weak.” And
immediately his servants took him away out of the
battle.
31 Then mounting his second chariot, and being
brought back to Yerushalayim, he died and was buried
in his father’s tomb;
32 and all the Yahuḏim mourned for Yoshiyahu. Also
Yirmeyahu the naḇi lamented for Yoshiyahu, and the
chief men with the women made lamentation for him to
this day. And this was ordained for a law to be done
continually in all the nation of Yisra’ĕl.
22

1322

1 ESDRAS

These are written in the Book of the Annals of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah, and every one of the acts that
Yoshiyahu did, and his esteem and his understanding
in the Law of HWHY and that which he had done before
and these now reported, are written in the Book of the
Sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.
34 And the people took Yaho’aḥaz the son of
Yoshiyahu, and made him sovereign instead of
Yoshiyahu his father, when he was twenty-three years
old.
35 And he reigned in Yahuḏah and in Yerushalayim
three months; and then the sovereign of Mitsrayim
removed him from the reign in Yerushalayim.
36 And he placed a tax over the land of a hundred
kiḵars of silver and one kiḵar of gold.
37 The sovereign of Mitsrayim also made sovereign
Yahoyaqim his brother sovereign of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim.
38 And Yahoyaqim imprisoned the nobles, but he
seized Tseruyah his brother, and brought him out of
Mitsrayim.
39 Yahoyaqim was twenty-five years old when he was
made sovereign in the land of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim; and he did evil before HWHY.
40 Therefore Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel
came up against him, and bound him with chains of
bronze, and carried him away to Baḇel.
41 Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar also took the qodesh vessels of
HWHY, and carried them away, and put them in his own
temple at Baḇel.
42 And those matters that are written concerning him,
and of his uncleanness and unrighteousness, are
written in the annals of the sovereigns.
43 And Yoyaqim his son reigned in his place; he was
made sovereign being eighteen years old;
44 and he reigned only three months and ten days in
Yerushalayim; and did evil before HWHY.
33

1323

1 EZRA

So after a year, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sent and had him
brought to Baḇel along with the qodesh vessels of
HWHY,
46 and made Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, when he was twenty-one years old; and
he reigned eleven years.
47 And he also did evil in the eyes of HWHY, and took
no heed of the words that were spoken to him by the
naḇi Yirmeyahu from the mouth of HWHY.
48 And after sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had made
him swear by the Name of HWHY, he broke his oath,
and rebelled; and hardening his neck and his heart, he
transgressed the Laws of HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
49 The governors of the people and of the kohenim
also did much against the Laws, and surpassed all the
abominations of the other nations, and defiled the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY, which was qadosh in Yerushalayim.
50 Nevertheless the Elohim of their fathers sent His
messenger to call them back, because He spared
them and also His Mishkan.
51 But they mocked His messengers; and see, when
HWHY spoke to them, they mocked His neḇi’im
52 so much that He, being wroth with His people for
their great unrighteousness, commanded the
sovereigns of the Kasdites to come up against them;
53 who slew their young men with the sword, even
also within the surroundings of their qodesh Hĕyḵal,
and spared neither young man nor maiden, old man
nor child among them; for He delivered all into their
hands.
54 And they took all the qodesh vessels of HWHY, both
small and great, with the vessels of the ark of Elohim,
and the sovereign’s treasures, and carried them away
to Baḇel.
55 As for the House of HWHY, they burned it, and broke
down the walls of Yerushalayim, and lit her towers on
fire.
56 And as for her esteemed objects, they never
ceased till they had consumed and brought them all to
45

1324

1 ESDRAS

naught. And the people that were not slain with the
sword, he carried to Baḇel,
57 who became servants to him and his children, till
the Parasians reigned, to fill the Word of HWHY spoken
by the mouth of Yirmeyahu:
58 “Until the land had enjoyed her Shabbathoth. As
long as she lay waste she kept Shabbath, until seventy
years were completed.”

2 In the first year of Koresh sovereign of Paras, in
order to accomplish the Word of HWHY by the mouth of
Yirmeyahu,
2 HWHY stirred up the spirit of Koresh sovereign of
Paras, so that he called out in all his reign, and also
put it in writing,
3 saying, “Thus said Koresh sovereign of Paras;
HWHY of Yisra’ĕl, the Most High Ĕl, has made me
sovereign of the whole world,
4 and commanded me to build Him a House at
Yerushalayim in Yahuḏah.
5 “If therefore there are any of you who are of His
people, let HWHY, even his Aḏon, be with him, and let
him go up to Yerushalayim that is in Yahuḏah, and
build the House of HWHY of Yisra’ĕl, for He is HWHY who
dwells in Yerushalayim.
6 “Whoever then dwells in the places round about, I
say, let them help him - those who are his neighbours
- with gold and with silver,
7 with gifts, with horses and with cattle, and other
goods which have been presented with a vow, for the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY at Yerushalayim.”
8 Then the chiefs of the families of Yahuḏah and of
the tribe of Binyamin stood up; the kohenim also, and
the Lĕwites and all those whose heart HWHY had
moved to go up and to build a House for HWHY at
Yerushalayim.
9 And those who dwelt round about them helped
them in all matters with silver and gold, with horses and
cattle, and with very many gifts of a great number
whose hearts were stirred up to do so.
1325

1 EZRA

sovereign Koresh also brought out the qodesh
vessels, which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had carried away
from Yerushalayim, and had put up in his temple of
idols.
11 Now when Koresh sovereign of Paras had brought
them out, he delivered them to Mithreḏath his
treasurer;
12 And by him they were delivered to Shĕshbatstsar
the governor of Yahuḏah.
13 And this was the number of them: one thousand
gold cups, and one thousand of silver, twenty-nine
silver fire holders, thirty bowls of gold, and two
thousand four hundred and ten of silver, and one
thousand other vessels.
14 So all the vessels of gold and of silver which were
carried away, were five thousand four hundred and
sixty-nine.
15 These were brought back by Shĕshbatstsar,
together with those in captivity, from Baḇel to
Yerushalayim.
16 But in the time of Artaḥshashta sovereign of Paras
Bishlam, and Mithreḏath, and Taḇe’ĕl, and Reḥum the
governor, and Shimshai the scribe, with others that
were in commission with them dwelling in Shomeron
and other places, wrote to him against those who dwelt
in Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim these following words:
17 To sovereign Artaḥshashta our master, your
servants - Reḥum the governor, and Shimshai the
scribe and the rest of their council and the judges that
are in Koĕlĕ-Suria and Phoinikĕ.
18 Let it be known to our master the sovereign, that
the Yahuḏim who came up from you to us, having
come to Yerushalayim, that rebellious and wicked city,
are building the marketplaces, and repairing the walls
of it and laying the foundation of the Hĕyḵal.
19 Now if this city and its walls are built up again, they
shall not only refuse to give tribute, but also rebel
against sovereigns.
10

1326

1 ESDRAS

And because that which pertains to the Hĕyḵal are
now in hand, we think it right not to neglect such a
matter,
21 but to speak to our master the sovereign, to the
intent that, if it be your pleasure, it may be sought out
in the books of your fathers;
22 and you shall find in the annals which are written
concerning these matters, and shall understand that
this city was rebellious, troubling both sovereigns and
cities;
23 and that the Yahuḏim were rebellious, and raised
continuous wars; which is the very reason this city was
made desolate.
24 Therefore we do now declare unto you, O master
the sovereign, that if this city be built again, and its
walls rebuilt, you shall no longer have passage into
Koĕlĕ-Suria and Phoinikĕ.
25 Then the sovereign wrote back again to Reḥum the
governor, to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of
their companions, and dwellers in Shomeron and Suria
and Phoinikĕ, after this manner:
26 I have read the letter which you have sent to me;
therefore I commanded to make diligent search, and it
has been found that this city was from the beginning
exercising against sovereigns;
27 And the men within were given to rebellion and
fighting, and that mighty and harsh sovereigns were in
Yerushalayim, who reigned and exacted tributes in
Koĕlĕ-Suria and Phoinikĕ.
28 Now therefore I have commanded to prevent those
men from building the city, and take heed that there be
no more done in it;
29 and that those wicked workers proceed no further
to the annoyance of sovereigns.
30 Then when the letter from sovereign Artaḥshashta
had been read, Reḥum and Shimshai the scribe and
the rest of their companions hurried to Yerushalayim
with a troop of horsemen, and a crowd of people in
battle array began to hinder the builders; and the
20

1327

1 EZRA

building of the Hĕyḵal in Yerushalayim ceased until the
second year of the reign of Dareyawesh sovereign of
Paras.

3 Now when Dareyawesh reigned, he made a great
feast for all his subjects and for all his household and
for all the princes of Maḏai and Paras,
2 and for all the governors and captains and viceroys
that were under him, from Hodu to Kush, in a hundred
and twenty-seven provinces.
3 And when they had eaten and drank, and being
satisfied had gone home, then Dareyawesh the
sovereign went into his bedroom and slept, and soon
after awoke.
4 Then three young men who were of the guards that
guarded the sovereign personally spoke one to
another,
5 “Let each one of us speak a word of that which is
strongest, and whose words shall seem wiser than the
others, to him shall the sovereign Dareyawesh give
great gifts, and great esteem in overcoming;
6 to be clothed in purple, to drink from gold, and to
sleep on gold, and a chariot with bridles of gold, and a
turban of fine linen, and a chain about his neck.
7 “And he shall sit next to Dareyawesh because of
his wisdom, and shall be called a relative of
Dareyawesh.”
8 And then every one wrote his words, sealed it, and
laid it under the pillow of sovereign Dareyawesh;
9 and said, “When the sovereign has risen, someone
shall give him the writings; and of whose side the
sovereign and the three princes of Paras shall judge
his words to be the wisest, he shall have overcome, as
was agreed.”
10 The first wrote: Wine is the strongest.
11 The second wrote: The sovereign is strongest.
12 The third wrote: Women are strongest; but above
all, truth shall overcome.
1328

1 ESDRAS

Now when the sovereign had risen, they took their
writings, and delivered them to him, and so he read
them.
14 And having sent, he called all the princes of Paras
and Maḏai, and the governors, and the captains, and
the viceroys, and the chief officers;
15 and he sat down on the royal seat of judgment; and
the writings were read before them.
16 And he said, “Call the young men, and they shall
declare their own words.” So they were called, and
came in.
17 And he said to them, “Speak to us your thoughts
concerning the writings.” Then the first, who had
spoken of the strength of wine, began,
18 and he said, “O you men, how exceedingly strong
is wine! It causes all men who drink it to stray.
19 “It makes the mind of the sovereign and of the
fatherless child to all be equal; of the slave and the
free, of the poor and the wealthy.
20 “It also turns every thought into joy and rejoicing, so
that a man remembers neither sorrow nor debt,
21 and it brings wealth to every heart, so that a man
remembers neither sovereign nor governor; and it
causes to speak of all in coins.
22 “And when they are in their cups, they forget their
love to both friends and brothers, and a little after draw
out swords.
23 “But when they are from the wine, they do not
remember what they have done.
24 “O you men, is not wine, that forces to do this, the
strongest?” And when he had so spoken, he remained
silent.
13

4 Then the second, that had spoken of the strength of
the sovereign, began to speak:
2 “O you men, do not men who reign over sea and
land and all in them excel in strength?
3 “And yet the sovereign is mightier; for he is master
of all these, and rules over them, and whatever he
commands them they do.
1329

1 EZRA

“If he commands them to fight, one against the
other, they do it; if he sends them out against their
enemies, they go, and tear down mountains, walls and
towers.
5 “They slay and are slain, but do not disobey the
sovereign’s command. If they overcome, they bring all
to the sovereign, as well the spoil, and all other
matters.
6 “Likewise for those who are not soldiers, and have
naught to do with wars, but are farmers; when they
have reaped again that which they had sown, they
bring it to the sovereign, and compel one another to
pay tribute to the sovereign.
7 “And yet he is but one man. If he commands to kill,
they kill; if he commands to spare, they spare;
8 “If he commands to smite, they smite; if he
commands to destroy, they destroy; if he commands
to build, they build;
9 if he commands to cut down, they cut down; if he
commands to plant, they plant.
10 “So all his people and his armies obey him;
furthermore he lies down, he eats and drinks, and
takes his rest,
11 and these keep watch around about him, neither
may anyone depart, and do his own business, nor do
they disobey him in any matter.
12 “O you men, how should not the sovereign be
mightiest, when he is obeyed in such a way?” And he
kept silent.
13 Then the third, who had spoken of women, and of
the truth - this was Zerubbaḇel - began to speak:
14 “O you men, it is not the great sovereign, nor the
crowd of men, neither is it wine that excels. Who is it
then that rules them, or has the rulership over them?
Are they not women?
15 “Women have borne the sovereign and all the
people that reign by sea and land.
4

1330

1 ESDRAS

“Even from them they have come, and they
nourished those who planted the vineyards, from
where the wine comes.
17 “These also make garments for men; these bring
esteem to men, and without women, men cannot be.
18 “Indeed, and if men have gathered together gold
and silver, or any other luxury, do they not love a
woman who is lovely in appearance and loveliness?
19 “And letting all those go, do they not gape, and
even with open mouth fix their eyes fast on her; and do
not all men have more desire for her than for silver or
gold, or any luxury whatever?
20 “A man leaves his own father who raised him, and
his own land, and clings to his wife.
21 “He does not remain, and remembers neither
father, nor mother, nor land, to spend his life with his
wife.
22 “By this you also must know that women have rule
over you. Do you not labour and toil, and bring and give
all to the woman?
23 “Indeed, a man takes his sword, and goes his way
to rob and to steal, to sail over the sea and upon rivers,
24 and faces a lion, and goes in the darkness; and
when he has stolen, plundered, and robbed, he brings
it to his love.
25 “Therefore a man loves his wife better than father
or mother.
26 “Indeed, there are many that have lost their minds
for women, and become servants for their sakes.
27 “Many also have perished, have strayed, and
sinned, for women.
28 “And now do you not believe me? Is not the
sovereign great in his power? Do not all countries fear
to touch him?
29 “Yet I saw him and Apamĕ the sovereign’s
concubine, the daughter of the admirable Bartakos,
sitting at the right hand of the sovereign,
16

1331

1 EZRA

and taking the crown from the sovereign’s head,
and putting it upon her own head; she also struck the
sovereign with her left hand.
31 “And yet for all this the sovereign gaped and gazed
upon her with open mouth. If she laughed at him, he
laughed also; but if she took any displeasure in him,
the sovereign was eager to flatter, that she might be
reconciled to him again.
32 “O you men, how could it be but women are
strongest, seeing they do this?”
33 Then the sovereign and the princes looked at each
other, so he began to speak of the truth:
34 “O you men, are not women strong? Great is the
earth, high is the shamayim, swift is the sun in its
course, for it makes the circuit of the shamayim, and
follows its course again to its own place in one day.
35 “Is He who makes these not great? Therefore the
truth is great, and stronger than all.
36 “All the earth calls upon the truth, and the
shamayim baraḵ it. All works shake and tremble at it,
and there is no unrighteousness with it.
37 “Wine is wicked, the sovereign is wicked, women
are wicked, all the children of men are wicked, and
such are all their wicked works and there is no truth in
them, and in their unrighteousness they shall also
perish.
38 “As for the truth, it endures, and is always strong; it
lives and overcomes forever.
39 “With her there is no partiality or preference; but
she does that which is righteous, and refrains from all
unrighteousness and wickedness; and all men
approve of her works.
40 “Nor is there any unrighteousness in her judgment;
but she is the strength, reign, power, and excellence,
of all ages. Baruḵ be the Elohim of truth.”
41 And with that he remained silent. And all the people
then shouted, and said, “Great is Truth, and strongest
of all!”
30

1332

1 ESDRAS

Then the sovereign said to him, “Ask what you
would, more than what is appointed in the writing, and
we shall give it to you, because you have been found
wisest; and you shall sit next to me, and shall be called
my relative.”
42

Then he said to the sovereign, “Remember your
vow to build Yerushalayim, which you swore in the day
when you came to your reign,
43

and to send all the vessels that were taken away
from Yerushalayim, which Koresh put aside, when he
vowed to destroy Baḇel, and to send them there again.
44

“You have also vowed to rebuild the Hĕyḵal, which
the Eḏomites burned when Yahuḏah was laid waste by
the Kasdites.
45

“And now, O master the sovereign, this is that
which I require, and which I desire from you, and this
is the princely kindness proceeding from yourself: I
desire therefore that you fulfill the vow, the works of
which you have vowed with your own mouth to the
Sovereign of the shamayim.”
46

Then Dareyawesh the sovereign stood up, and
kissed him, and wrote letters for him to all the
treasurers and viceroys and captains and governors,
that they should safely transfer both he, and all those
who would go up with him to rebuild Yerushalayim.
47

He also wrote letters to the viceroys that were in
Koĕlĕ-Suria and Phoinikĕ, and to those in Leḇanon,
that they should bring cedar wood from Leḇanon to
Yerushalayim, and that they should build the city with
him.
48

And he wrote for all the Yahuḏim that went out of
his reign up into Yahuḏah, concerning their freedom,
that no officer, no ruler, no viceroy, nor treasurer,
should forcibly enter into their doors;
49

and that all the land which they hold should be free
without tribute; and that the Eḏomites should give up
the villages of the Yahuḏim which they held;
50

1333

1 EZRA

even that there should be given twenty kiḵars
yearly toward the building of the Hĕyḵal, until the time
that it was built;
52 and another ten kiḵars yearly, to maintain the burnt
offerings on the altar every day, for they had a
Command to offer seventeen;
53 and that all those who went from Baḇel to build the
city should have freedom, they as well as their
descendants, and all the kohenim that went away.
54 He also wrote concerning their support, and the
garments of the kohenim in which they serve;
55 and also for the support of the Lĕwites to be given
to them until the day that the House was finished, and
Yerushalayim built up.
56 And he commanded to give land and wages to all
who guarded the city.
57 He also sent away all the vessels from Baḇel that
Koresh had put aside; and all that Koresh had
commanded to be given, he also commanded the
same to be done, and sent to Yerushalayim.
58 Now when the young man went out, he lifted up his
face to the shamayim toward Yerushalayim, and
praised the Sovereign of the shamayim,
59 and said, “From You comes deliverance, from You
comes wisdom, and Yours is the esteem, and I am
Your servant.
60 “Baruḵ are You, who has given me wisdom; for I
give thanks to You, O HWHY of our fathers.”
61 And so he took the letters, and went out, and came
to Baḇel, and told all his brothers,
62 and they praised the Elohim of their fathers,
because He had given them release and freedom
63 to go up, and to build Yerushalayim, and the Hĕyḵal
which is called by His Name. And they feasted with
musical instruments and gladness seven days.
51

5 After this the heads of the families were chosen
according to their tribes, to go up with their wives and
sons and daughters, with their male servants and
female servants, and their cattle.
1334

1 ESDRAS

And Dareyawesh sent a thousand horsemen with
them, till they had brought them back to Yerushalayim
safely, and with musical instruments, tambourines and
flutes.
3 And all their brothers played, and he made them go
up together with them.
4 And these are the names of the men who went up,
according to their families among their tribes, after
their several heads.
5 The kohenim, the sons of Pineḥas the son of
Aharon: Yĕshua the son of Yotsaḏaq, the son of
Serayah, and Yoyaqim the son of Zerubbaḇel, the son
of She’alti’ĕl, of the house of Dawiḏ, from the relatives
of Perets, of the tribe of Yahuḏah;
6 who spoke wise words before Dareyawesh the
sovereign of Paras in the second year of his reign, in
the month of Nisan, which is the first month.
7 And these are those of the Yahuḏim who came up
from the captivity, where they dwelt as foreigners,
whom Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel had
carried away to Baḇel.
8 And they returned to Yerushalayim, and to the
other parts of Yahuḏah, every man to his own city, who
came with Zerubbaḇel, with Yĕshua, Neḥemyah and
Zeḵaryah and Serayah, Naḥamani, Mordeḵai, Bilshan,
Mispar, Re’ĕlayah, Reḥum, and Ba’anah, their guides.
9 The number of those of the nation, and their
governors: sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred
and seventy-two; the sons of Shaphat, four hundred
and seventy-two;
10 the sons of Araḥ, seven hundred and fifty-six;
11 the sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ, two thousand eight
hundred and twelve;
12 the sons of Ĕylam, one thousand two hundred and
fifty-four; the sons of Zattu, nine hundred and forty-five;
the sons of Zakkai, seven hundred and five; the sons
of Bani, six hundred and forty-eight;
2

1335

1 EZRA

the sons of Bĕḇai, six hundred and twenty-three;
the sons of Azgaḏ, three thousand two hundred and
twenty-two;
14 the sons of Aḏoniqam, six hundred and sixtyseven; the sons of Biḡwai, two thousand and sixty-six;
the sons of Aḏin, four hundred and fifty-four;
15 the sons of Atĕr of Ḥizqiyah, ninety-two; the sons of
Kilan and Azetah sixty-seven; the sons of Azzur, four
hundred and thirty-two;
16 the sons of Ḥananyah, one hundred and one; the
sons of Arom, thirty-two; and the sons of Bĕsai, three
hundred and twenty-three; the sons of Ḥariph, one
hundred and two;
17 the sons of Bether, three thousand and five; the
sons of Bĕyth Leḥem, one hundred and twenty-three:
18 those of Netophah, fifty-five; those of Anathoth, one
hundred and fifty-eight; those of Bĕyth Shemesh, fortytwo;
19 those of Qiryathayim, twenty-five; those of
Kephirah and Be’ĕroth, seven hundred and forty-three;
those of Pira, seven hundred;
20 those of Qaḏĕsh and Ḥumtah, four hundred and
twenty-two; those of Ramah and Geḇa, six hundred
and twenty-one;
21 those of Maḥlon, one hundred and twenty-two;
those of Bĕyth Ĕl, fifty-two; the sons of Naphish, one
hundred and fifty-six;
22 the sons of Loḏ, Ḥaḏiḏ and Ono, seven hundred
and twenty-five; the sons of Yeriḥo, two hundred and
forty-five;
23 the sons of Sena’ah, three thousand three hundred
and thirty.
24 The kohenim: the sons of Yeḏayah, the son of
Yĕshua among the sons of Elyashiḇ, nine hundred and
seventy-two; the sons of Immĕr, one thousand and
fifty-two;
25 The sons of Pashḥur, one thousand and fortyseven; the sons of Ḥarim, one thousand and
seventeen.
13

1336

1 ESDRAS

The Lĕwites: the sons of Yĕshua, and Qaḏmi’ĕl,
and Ba’anah, and Hoḏawyah, seventy-four.
27 The qodesh singers: the sons of Asaph, one
hundred and twenty-eight.
28 The gatekeepers: the sons of Shallum, the sons of
Atĕr, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Aqquḇ, the sons
of Ḥatita, the sons of Shoḇai, one hundred and thirtynine in all.
29 The Nethinim: the sons of Tsiḥa, the sons of
Ḥasupha, the sons of Tabba’oth, the sons of Qĕros,
the sons of Si’aha, the sons of Paḏon, the sons of
Leḇanah, the sons of Ḥaḡaḇah,
30 the sons of Aqquḇ, the sons of Uzza, the sons of
Kataḇ, the sons of Ḥaḡaḇ, the sons of Shamlai, the
sons of Ḥanan, the sons of Giddĕl, the sons of Gaḥar,
31 the sons of Re’ayah, the sons of Retsin, the sons
of Neqoḏa, the sons of Ḥashuḇah, the sons of
Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Pasĕaḥ, the
sons of Azaryah, the sons of Bĕsai, the sons of Asnah,
the sons of Me’unim, the sons of Nephusim, the sons
of Baqbuq, the sons of Ḥaqupha, the sons of Ḥarḥur,
the sons of Pharaqim, the sons of Batsluth,
32 the sons of Meḥiḏa, the sons of Kutha, the sons of
Ḥarsha, the sons of Barqos, the sons of Sisera, the
sons of Tĕmaḥ, the sons of Netsiyaḥ, the sons of
Ḥatipha.
33 The sons of the servants of Shelomoh: the sons of
Sophereth, the sons of Peruḏa, the sons of Ya’ala, the
sons of Darqon, the sons of Yisra’ĕl, the sons of
Shephatyah,
34 the sons of Ḥattil, the sons of Poḵereth, the sons of
Tseḇayim, the sons of Tsereth, the sons of Masias, the
sons of Gar, the sons of Addus, the sons of Tsoḇa, the
sons of Apherra, the sons of Barodis, the sons of
Sheḇat, the sons of Allon.
35 All the Nethinim, and the sons of the servants of
Shelomoh, were three hundred and seventy-two.
36 These came up from Tĕl Melaḥ and Tĕl Ḥarsha,
Keruḇ, Addan, and Immĕr;
26

1337

1 EZRA

though could not show their families, nor their seed,
how they were of Yisra’ĕl: the sons of Delayah, the son
of Toḇiyah, the sons of Neqoḏa, six hundred and fiftytwo.
38 And of the kohenim that assumed the office of the
kehunnah, and were not found: the sons of Ḥaḇayah,
the sons of Qots, the sons of Yaddua, who married
Ḥaggiyah one of the daughters of Barzillai, and was
named after his name.
39 And when the genealogy of the relatives of these
men was sought in the register, and was not found,
they were removed from performing the office of the
kehunnah;
40 for Neḥemyah the governor said to them that they
should not be partakers of the qodesh matters, till there
rose up a kohĕn ha’gadol wearing the Urim and the
Tummim.
41 So from those twelve years old and upward of
Yisra’ĕl, besides male and female servants, all
numbered forty two thousand three hundred and sixty.
42 Their male and female servants were seven
thousand three hundred and forty-seven; the male and
female singers, two hundred and forty-five;
43 four hundred and thirty-five camels, seven
thousand and thirty-six horses, two hundred and fortyfive mules, five thousand five hundred and twenty-five
beasts for the yoke.
44 And some of the chiefs of their families, when they
came to the Hĕyḵal of Elohim that is in Yerushalayim,
vowed to put up the House again in its place according
to their ability,
45 and to give into the qodesh treasury, one thousand
minas of gold, five thousand of silver for the work, and
one hundred garments for the kehunnah.
46 And so the kohenim and the Lĕwites and the people
dwelt in Yerushalayim, and in the land; also the singers
and the gatekeepers, and all Yisra’ĕl in their villages.
47 But when the seventh month came, and when the
children of Yisra’ĕl were each in his own place, they all
37

1338

1 ESDRAS

came together with one accord into the open place of
the first gate which is toward the east.
48 Then Yĕshua the son of Yotsaḏaq stood up, and
his brothers the kohenim and Zerubbaḇel the son of
She’alti’ĕl, and his brothers, and prepared the altar of
the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
49 to offer burnt offerings upon it according to the
Command in the Book of Mosheh, the man of Elohim.
50 And some from the other nations of the land were
gathered to them. And they put up the altar in its place,
because all the nations of the land were at enmity with
them, and oppressed them; and they brought offerings
at the appointed times, and burnt offerings to HWHY
both morning and evening.
51 They also held the Feast of Sukkoth, as it is
commanded in the Torah, and brought offerings daily,
as appointed.
52 And after that, the continual offerings, and the
offering of the Shabbathoth, and of the new moons,
and of all qodesh Feasts.
53 And all those who had made any vow to Elohim
began to offer offerings to Elohim from the first day of
the seventh month, although the Hĕyḵal of HWHY had
not yet been built.
54 And they gave silver, food and drink to the masons
and carpenters with gladness.
55 To those of Tsiḏon and Tsor they also gave by
weight, that they should bring cedars from Leḇanon,
which would be brought by boat to the harbour of
Yapho, according to the command given them by
Koresh sovereign of Paras.
56 And in the second year and second month after
their coming to the Hĕyḵal of Elohim at Yerushalayim,
Zerubbaḇel the son of She’alti’ĕl, and Yĕshua the son
of Yotsaḏaq, and their brothers, and the kohenim, and
the Lĕwites began, and all those who had come to
Yerushalayim out of the captivity;
57 and they laid the foundation of the House of Elohim
on the first day of the second month, in the second
1339

1 EZRA

year after they had come to Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim.
58 And they appointed the Lĕwites from twenty years
old over the works of HWHY. Then Yĕshua stood up,
and his sons and brothers, and Qaḏmi’ĕl his brother,
and the sons of Mĕyḏeḇa, with the sons of Yaḏa the
son of Elyaḏa, with their sons and brothers; all Lĕwites,
with one accord pressed forward with the work,
labouring to advance the work on the House of Elohim.
So the workmen built the Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
59 And the kohenim stood dressed in their garments
with musical instruments and trumpets; and the
Lĕwites, the sons of Asaph had cymbals,
60 singing songs of thanksgiving, and praising HWHY,
as directed by Dawiḏ the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
61 And they sang songs to the praise of HWHY with
loud voices, because His kindness and esteem in all
Yisra’ĕl is forever.
62 And all the people sounded trumpets, and shouted
with a loud voice, singing songs of thanksgiving to
HWHY for the raising of the House of HWHY.
63 Also of the kohenim and Lĕwites, and of the chief
of their families, the elders who had seen the former
House came to the building with crying and great
weeping.
64 And many with trumpets and joy shouted with a
loud voice,
65 so that the trumpets could not be heard for the
weeping of the people; yet the crowd sounded greatly,
so that it was heard from afar.
66 Therefore when the enemies of the tribe of
Yahuḏah and Binyamin heard it, they came to know
what the noise of trumpets meant.
67 And they perceived that those who were from the
captivity had built the Hĕyḵal to HWHY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
68 So they went to Zerubbaḇel and Yĕshua, and to the
heads of the families, and said to them, “We shall build
together with you,
1340

1 ESDRAS

for we also, as you, obey your Aḏon, and have
slaughtered to Him from the days of Ĕsarḥaddon the
sovereign of Ashshur, who brought us here.”
70 Then Zerubbaḇel and Yĕshua and the heads of the
families of Yisra’ĕl said to them, “It is not for you and
us to build a House to HWHY our Elohim together.
71 “We ourselves alone shall build to HWHY of Yisra’ĕl,
according to the command given us by Koresh the
sovereign of Paras.”
72 But the foreigners of the land relying heavily on the
inhabitants of Yahuḏah, and restricting their supplies,
hindered their building;
73 and by their secret schemes, and popular
persuasions and unrest, they hindered the completion
of the building the whole time that sovereign Koresh
lived; so they were hindered from building for the
space of two years, until the reign of Dareyawesh.
69

6 Now in the second year of the reign of Dareyawesh
Ḥaggai and Zeḵaryah the son of Iddo, the neḇi’im,
naḇa to the Yahuḏim in Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim in
the Name of HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, which was upon
them.
2 Then Zerubbaḇel the son of She’alti’ĕl stood up,
and Yĕshua the son of Yotsaḏaq, and began to build
the House of HWHY at Yerushalayim, assisted by the
neḇi’im of HWHY who were with them.
3 At the same time Tattenai the governor of Suria
came to them and Phoinikĕ, with Shethar-Bozenai and
his companions, and said to them,
4 “By whose decree do you build this House and this
roof, and doing all these other matters? And who are
the workmen that perform these?”
5 Nevertheless the elders of the Yahuḏim obtained
favour, because HWHY had overseen the captivity;
6 and they were not hindered from building, until such
time as word was given to Dareyawesh concerning
them, and an answer received.
7 The copy of the letters which Tattenai, governor of
Suria and Phoinikĕ, and Shethar-Bozenai, with their
1341

1 EZRA

companions, rulers in Suria and Phoinikĕ, wrote and
sent to Dareyawesh: To sovereign Dareyawesh,
greetings.
8 Let all matters be known to our master the
sovereign, that having come into the land of Yahuḏah,
and entered into the city of Yerushalayim we found in
the city of Yerushalayim the elders of the Yahuḏim who
were of the captivity
9 building a great and new House to HWHY, of hewn
and costly stones, and the timber already laid upon the
walls.
10 And those works are done with great speed, and
the work is prospering in their hands, and being done
with all esteem and diligence.
11 Then we asked these elders, saying, “By whose
command are you building this House, and laying the
foundations of these works?”
12 Therefore with the purpose that we might make
known to you in writing, we demanded of those who
were the chief workers, and we required from them the
names of their heads in writing.
13 So they gave us this answer, “We are the servants
of HWHY who made the shamayim and earth.
14 “And as for this House, it was built many years ago
by a great and strong sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, and was
finished.
15 “But when our fathers provoked Elohim to wrath,
and sinned against HWHY of Yisra’ĕl who is in the
shamayim, He gave them over to the power of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, of the Kasdites;
16 who pulled down the House, and burned it, and
carried away the people captive to Baḇel.
17 “But in the first year that sovereign Koresh reigned
over the land of Baḇel, Koresh the sovereign wrote to
build up this House.
18 “And the qodesh vessels of gold and silver that
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had carried away out of the House at
Yerushalayim, and had put them in his own temple;
these Koresh the sovereign brought out again from the
1342

1 ESDRAS

temple at Baḇel, and they were delivered to
Zerubbaḇel and to Shĕshbatstsar the ruler
19 with orders that he should take these same
vessels, and put them in the Hĕyḵal at Yerushalayim;
and that the Hĕyḵal of HWHY should be built in its place.
20 “Then the same Shĕshbatstsar, having come here,
laid the foundations of the House of HWHY at
Yerushalayim; and from that time to this, is still under
construction; it is not yet fully complete.
21 “Now therefore, if it seems good to the sovereign,
let a search be made among the records of sovereign
Koresh;
22 and if it is found that the building of the House of
HWHY at Yerushalayim has been done with the consent
of sovereign Koresh, and if our master the sovereign
approves, let him inform us of this.”
23 Then sovereign Dareyawesh commanded to
search among the records at Baḇel; and so at
Aḥmetha the palace, which is in the land of Maḏai,
there was found a scroll in which these matters were
recorded.
24 In the first year of the reign of Koresh, sovereign
Koresh ordered that the House of HWHY at
Yerushalayim should be built again, where they offer
with continual fire;
25 the height of which shall be sixty ammah and the
width sixty ammah, with three rows of hewn stones,
and one row of new wood from the land; and the
expenses of it to be given out of the house of sovereign
Koresh;
26 and that the qodesh vessels of the House of HWHY,
both of gold and silver, that Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar took out
of the House at Yerushalayim, and brought to Baḇel,
should be restored to the House at Yerushalayim, and
be put in the place where they were before.
27 And he also commanded that Tattenai the governor
of Suria and Phoinikĕ, and Shethar-Bozenai, and their
companions, and those who were appointed rulers in
Suria and Phoinikĕ, should bear in mind not to strive
1343

1 EZRA

with the place, but allow Zerubbaḇel, the servant of
HWHY, and governor of Yahuḏah, and the elders of the
Yahuḏim, to build the House of HWHY in that place.
28 I have also commanded to have it built up complete
again; and that they look diligently to help those who
are of the captivity of the Yahuḏim, till the House of
HWHY is finished;
29 and out of the tribute of Koĕlĕ-Suria and Phoinikĕ a
portion diligently to be given to these men for the
slaughterings of HWHY, that is, to Zerubbaḇel the
governor; for bulls and rams and lambs;
30 and also corn, salt, wine and oil, and continually
every year without further question, what is required by
the kohenim who are in Yerushalayim to be used daily;
31 that offerings may be made to the Most High Elohim
for the sovereign and for his children, and that they
may pray for their lives.
32 And
he commanded that whoever would
transgress, or even diminish any word spoken or
written before, a timber should be taken out of his own
house, and he be hanged upon it, and all his goods
seized for the sovereign.
33 Therefore may HWHY, whose Name is called upon
there, utterly destroy every sovereign and nation, that
stretches out his hand to hinder or damage the House
of HWHY in Yerushalayim.
34 I, Dareyawesh the sovereign have ordained that it
be done according to these words with diligence.

7 Then following the commands of sovereign
Dareyawesh, Tattenai the governor of Koĕlĕ-Suria and
Phoinikĕ,
and
Shethar-Bozenai,
with
their
companions,
2 oversaw the qodesh works, diligently assisting the
elders of the Yahuḏim and governors of the Hĕyḵal.
3 And so the qodesh works prospered, when Ḥaggai
and Zeḵaryah the neḇi’im naḇa.
4 And they completed these by the Command of
HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and with the consent of
1344

1 ESDRAS

Koresh, Dareyawesh, and Artaḥshashta, sovereigns of
Paras;
5 and so, the Qodesh House was finished in the
twenty-third day of the month Aḏar, in the sixth year of
Dareyawesh sovereign of Paras.
6 And the children of Yisra’ĕl, the kohenim and the
Lĕwites and others who were of the captivity that were
added to them, did according to the words written in
the Book of Mosheh.
7 And for the dedication of the Hĕyḵal of HWHY they
offered a hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four
hundred lambs
8 and twelve goats for the sin of all Yisra’ĕl, according
to the number of the heads of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
9 The kohenim and the Lĕwites also stood dressed
in their garments, according to their clans, in the
service of HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, according to the
Book of Mosheh; and the gatekeepers at every gate.
10 And the children of Yisra’ĕl who were of the
captivity held the Pesaḥ the fourteenth day of the first
month, after the kohenim and the Lĕwites were
qadosh.
11 Those who were of the captivity were not all qadosh
together; but the Lĕwites were all qadosh together,
12 and so they offered the Pesaḥ for all those of the
captivity, and for their brothers the kohenim, and for
themselves.
13 And the children of Yisra’ĕl that came out of the
captivity ate, even all those who had separated
themselves from the abominations of the people of the
land, and sought HWHY.
14 And they performed the Feast of Matstsoth seven
days, rejoicing before HWHY,
15 for He had turned the counsel of the sovereign of
Ashshur toward them, to strengthen their hands in the
works of HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.

8 And after these matters, when Artaḥshashta the
sovereign of Paras reigned, Ezra came, the son of
1345

1 EZRA

Serayah, the son of Azaryah, the son of Ḥilqiyahu, the
son of Shallum,
2 the son of Tsaḏoq, the son of Aḥituḇ, the son of
Amaryah, the son of Azaryah, the son of Merayoth, the
son of Zeraḥyah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Buqqi, the
son of Aḇishua, the son of Pineḥas, the son of Eli’ezer,
the son of Aharon the chief kohĕn.
3 This Ezra went up from Baḇel, as a scribe, being
very skilled in the Law of Mosheh, that was given by
the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And the sovereign esteemed him; for he found
favour in his sight in all his requests.
5 There also went up with him to Yerushalayim, some
of the children of Yisra’ĕl, of the kohenim of the
Lĕwites, of the qodesh singers, gatekeepers and
servants of the Hĕyḵal,
6 in the seventh year of the reign of Artaḥshashta, in
the fifth month. This was the sovereign’s seventh year;
for they went from Baḇel in the first day of the first
month, and came to Yerushalayim, according to the
prosperous journey which HWHY gave them.
7 For Ezra had such great knowledge, that he
omitted naught from the Torah and Commands of
HWHY, but taught all Yisra’ĕl the Torot and RightRulings.
8 Now the copy of the commission, which was written
from Artaḥshashta the sovereign, and came to Ezra
the kohĕn and reader of the Torah of HWHY, is as
follows:
9 sovereign Artaḥshashta, to Ezra the kohĕn and
reader of the Torah of HWHY, greetings.
10 Having determined to deal favourably, I have given
an order, that those of the nation of the Yahuḏim and
of the kohenim and Lĕwites being within our reign, who
desire and are willing, should go with you to
Yerushalayim.
11 As many therefore as have a heart to do so, let
them depart with you, as it has seemed good both to
me and my seven friends the counsellors;
1346

1 ESDRAS

that they may look to the affairs of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, agreeable to that which is in the Torah
of HWHY;
13 and carry the gifts to HWHY of Yisra’ĕl to
Yerushalayim, which I and my friends have vowed,
and all the gold and silver that is found in the land of
Baḇel, to HWHY in Yerushalayim;
14 also with that which is given from the people for the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY their Elohim at Yerushalayim; and that
silver and gold may be collected for bulls, rams, and
lambs, and matters pertaining to it;
15 so that they may offer slaughterings to HWHY upon
the altar of HWHY their Elohim, which is in
Yerushalayim.
16 And whatever you and your brothers do with the
silver and gold, do so according to the desire of your
Elohim.
17 And the qodesh vessels of HWHY, which have been
given to you for the use of the Hĕyḵal of your Elohim,
which is in Yerushalayim, you shall put before your
Elohim in Yerushalayim;
18 and whatever else you shall remember for the use
of the Hĕyḵal of your Elohim, you shall give it out of the
sovereign’s treasury.
19 And
I sovereign Artaḥshashta have also
commanded the keepers of the treasuries in Suria and
Phoinikĕ, that whatever Ezra the kohĕn and the reader
of the Torah of the Most High Elohim shall send for,
they should give it to him with haste,
20 to the sum of one hundred kiḵars of silver, likewise
also of wheat even to a hundred kors, and a hundred
baths of wine, and other matters in abundance.
21 Let all be performed after the Torah of Elohim
diligently unto the Most High Elohim, so that wrath
does not come upon the reign of the sovereign and his
sons.
22 I also command you, that you require no tax, nor
any other tribute from any of the kohenim, or Lĕwites,
or qodesh singers, or gatekeepers, or servants of the
12

1347

1 EZRA

Hĕyḵal, or from any who are employed in this Hĕyḵal,
and that no man has authority to impose any matter
upon them.
23 And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of Elohim,
appoint judges and Right-Rulings, that they may judge
in all Suria and Phoinikĕ all those who know the Torah
of your Elohim; and those who do not know it, you shall
teach;
24 and whoever transgresses the Torah of your
Elohim, and of the sovereign, shall be strictly
punished, whether it be by death, or other punishment,
by penalty of silver, or by imprisonment.
25 Then Ezra the scribe said, “Baruḵ be the only Aḏon,
Elohim of my fathers, who has put these into the heart
of the sovereign, to esteem His House that is in
Yerushalayim,
26 and has esteemed me in the sight of the sovereign,
and his counsellors, and all his friends and nobles.”
27 Therefore I was encouraged with the help of HWHY
my Elohim, and gathered together men of Yisra’ĕl to
go up with me.
28 And these are the heads according to their families
and several nobles, that went up with me from Baḇel
in the reign of sovereign Artaḥshashta:
29 Of the sons of Pineḥas, Gĕreshon; of the sons of
Ithamar, Dani’ĕl; of the sons of Dawiḏ, Ḥattush the son
of Sheḵanyah;
30 of the sons of Perets, Zeḵaryah; and a hundred and
fifty men were counted with him.
31 Of the sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ, Elyaho’ĕynai, the son
of Zeraḥyah, and two hundred men with him.
32 Of the sons of Zattu, Sheḵanyah the son of
Yaḥazi’ĕl, and with him three hundred men. Of the
sons of Aḏin, Oḇĕḏ the son of Yahonathan, and two
hundred and fifty men with him.
33 Of the sons of Ĕylam, Yoshiyahu son of Geḏalyahu,
and seventy men with him.
34 Of the sons of Shephatyah, Tseruyah son of
Miḵa’ĕl, and seventy men with him.
1348

1 ESDRAS

Of the sons of Yo’aḇ, Oḇaḏyah son of Yizli’ah, and
two hundred and twelve men with him.
36 Of the sons of Shelomith, the son of Yosiphyah,
and a hundred and sixty men with him.
37 Of the sons of Bĕḇai, Zeḵaryah son of Bĕḇai, and
twenty-eight men with him.
38 Of the sons of Azgaḏ, Yoḥanan son of Haqqatan,
and a hundred and ten men with him.
39 Of the sons of Aḏoniqam the last, and these are the
names of them: Eliphelet, Ye’i’ĕl, and Shemayah, and
seventy men with them.
40 Of the sons of Biḡwai, Uthai the son of Zabbuḏ, and
seventy men with him.
41 And I gathered these together to the river called
Ahawa, where we pitched our tents for three days; and
then I inspected them.
42 But when I had found there none of the kohenim
and Lĕwites,
43 then I sent to Eli’ezer, and Deu’ĕl, and
Mishmannah,
44 and Elnathan, and Shemayah, and Yoyariḇ, and
Nathan, Yahonathan, Zeḵaryah, and Meshullam,
leaders and learned.
45 And I told them that they should go to Iddo the
captain, who was treasurer in the place;
46 and ordered them that they should speak to Iddo,
and to his brothers, and to the treasurers in that place,
to send us such men who might execute the office of
the kohenim in the House of HWHY.
47 And by the mighty hand of our Aḏon they brought
to us skilled men of the sons of Maḥli the son of Lĕwi,
the son of Yisra’ĕl: Shereḇyah, and his sons, and his
brothers, eighteen.
48 And Ḥashaḇyah, and Bani, and Hoshĕa his brother,
of the sons of Ḥananyah, and their sons, were twenty
men.
49 And of the servants of the Hĕyḵal whom Dawiḏ had
appointed, and the leaders of the service of the
Lĕwites, that is, the servants of the Hĕyḵal: two
35

1349

1 EZRA

hundred and twenty, the list of whose names were
shown.
50 And there I proclaimed a fast to the young men
before our Aḏon, to seek from Him a prosperous
journey for both us and they who were with us, for our
children, and for the cattle;
51 for I was ashamed to ask from the sovereign
footmen and horsemen and conduct for safeguard
against our adversaries.
52 For we had said to the sovereign, that the power of
HWHY our Elohim would be with those who seek Him,
to support them in all ways.
53 And again we sought our Aḏon regarding these,
and found Him favourable to us.
54 Then I separated twelve of the heads of the
kohenim, Shereḇyah, and Ḥashaḇyah, and ten men of
their brothers with them;
55 and I weighed them the gold, and silver, and the
qodesh vessels of the House of our Aḏon, which the
sovereign and his council and the princes, and all
Yisra’ĕl, had given.
56 And when I had weighed it, I gave six hundred and
fifty kiḵars of silver to them, and silver vessels of a
hundred kiḵars, and a hundred kiḵars of gold,
57 and twenty golden vessels, and twelve vessels of
bronze, even of fine bronze, glittering like gold.
58 And I said to them, “Both you and the vessels are
qodesh to HWHY, and the gold and the silver is vowed
to HWHY, the Aḏon of our fathers.
59 “Watch, and guard them till you deliver them to the
heads of the kohenim and the Lĕwites, and to the
leaders of the families of Yisra’ĕl, in Yerushalayim, into
the rooms of the House of our Elohim.”
60 So the kohenim and the Lĕwites, who had received
the silver and gold and the vessels, brought them to
Yerushalayim, into the Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
61 And from the River Ahawa we departed the twelfth
day of the first month, and came to Yerushalayim by
the mighty hand of our Aḏon, who was with us; and
1350

1 ESDRAS

from the beginning of our journey HWHY delivered us
from every enemy, and so we came to Yerushalayim.
62 And when we had been there three days, the gold
and silver that was weighed was delivered on the
fourth day into the House of our Aḏon, to Merĕmoth
the kohĕn, the son of Uriyah.
63 And with him was Eli’ezer the son of Pineḥas, and
with them were Yozaḇaḏ the son of Yĕshua and
No’aḏyah the son of Binnui, Lĕwites - all was delivered
to them by number and weight,
64 and all the weight of them was recorded that same
hour.
65 And those who were come out of the captivity
brought an offering to HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, even
twelve bulls for all Yisra’ĕl, ninety-six rams,
66 seventy-two lambs, twelve goats for a peace
offering; all of them slaughterings to HWHY.
67 And they delivered the sovereign’s orders to the
sovereign’s trustees and to the governors of KoĕlĕSuria and Phoinikĕ; and they esteemed the people and
the Hĕyḵal of Elohim.
68 Now when these matters were done, the rulers
came to me, and said,
69 “The nation of Yisra’ĕl, the princes, the kohenim
and Lĕwites, have not put away the foreigners of the
land from them, nor the defilements of the gentiles that
is, of the Kena’anites, Ḥittites, Perizzites, Yeḇusites,
and the Mo’aḇites, Mitsrites, and Eḏomites.
70 For both they and their sons have married with their
daughters, and the qodesh seed is mixed with the
foreigners of the land; and from the beginning, the
rulers and the great men have taken part in this
wickedness.”
71 And as soon as I had heard this, I tore my
garments, and the qodesh garment, and pulled the hair
from my head and beard, and sat down grieved and
very heavy.
72 So all those who were then moved at the Word of
HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl assembled to me, while I
1351

1 EZRA

mourned for the wickedness; but I sat full of heaviness
until the evening offering.
73 Then rising from the fast with my garments and the
qodesh garment torn and bowing my knees and
stretching out my hands to HWHY,
74 I said, “O HWHY, I am disappointed and ashamed
before Your face;
75 for our sins have multiplied above our heads, and
our ignorances have reached up to the shamayim.
76 “For ever since the time of our fathers we have
been and are in great sin, even to this day.
77 “And for ours and our fathers’ sins, we with our
brothers and our sovereigns and our kohenim were
given up to the sovereigns of the earth, to the sword,
and to captivity, and for a prey with shame, unto this
day.
78 “And now in some measure, kindness has been
shown to us from You, O HWHY, that there should be
left to us a root and a name in the place of Your
Miqdash;
79 and to uncover for us a light in the House of HWHY
our Elohim, and to give us food in the time of our
service.
80 “Indeed, when we were in bondage, we were not
forsaken by our Aḏon; but He made us favourable
before the sovereigns of Paras, so that they gave us
food;
81 and also esteemed the Hĕyḵal of our Aḏon, and
raised up Tsiyon that was laid waste, and they have
given us a permanent place in Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim.
82 “And now, O HWHY, what shall we say, having
these? For we have transgressed Your Commands,
which You gave by the hand of Your servants the
neḇi’im, saying,
83 ‘The land, which you enter in to possess as an
inheritance, is a land defiled with the abominations of
the gentiles of the land, and they have filled it with their
uncleanness.
1352

1 ESDRAS

‘Now therefore, you shall not join your daughters
unto their sons, neither shall you take their daughters
for your sons.
85 ‘And you shall never seek to have peace with them,
that you may be strong, and eat the good of the land,
and that you leave the inheritance of the land to your
children forever.’
86 “And all that has come to be has been done to us
because of our wicked works and great sins! And You,
O HWHY, lifted our sins,
87 and gave to us a root, but we have turned back
again to transgress Your Torah, and to mingle
ourselves with the uncleanness of the nations of the
land.
88 “Were You not wroth with us to destroy us, till You
had left us neither root, seed nor name?
89 “O HWHY of Yisra’ĕl, You are true! For we are left a
root this day.
90 “See, we are now before You in our wickednesses,
for we cannot stand any longer by reason of these
matters before You.”
91 And as Ezra made his confession in his prayer,
weeping and lying flat on the ground before the
Hĕyḵal, a very great crowd of men, women and
children there gathered to him from Yerushalayim; for
there was great weeping among the crowd.
92 Then Sheḵanyah the son of Yeḥi’ĕl, one of the sons
of Yisra’ĕl, called out, and said, “O Ezra, we have
sinned against HWHY Elohim, we have married foreign
women of the nations of the land, but now there is
expectancy for all Yisra’ĕl!
93 “Let us make an oath to HWHY, that we shall put
away all our wives which we have taken from the
gentiles, with their children,
94 as you have said, and as many who obey the Torah
of HWHY.
95 “Arise and act on this; for this is your word, and we
shall be with you. Be strong.”
84

1353

1 EZRA

So Ezra arose, and made the chief of the kohenim
and Lĕwites of all Yisra’ĕl swear to do after these
matters; and so they swore.
96

9 Then rising from the court of the Hĕyḵal, Ezra went
to the room of Yoḥanan the son of Elyashiḇ,
2 and remained there, and ate no bread nor drank
water, mourning for the great wickednesses of the
multitude.
3 And there was a call in all Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim to all those who were of the captivity,
that they should be gathered together at
Yerushalayim;
4 and that whoever did not meet there within two or
three days according to when the ruling elders
appointed, their cattle should be seized for the use of
the Hĕyḵal, and himself thrown out from those who
were of the captivity.
5 And in three days, all those of the tribe of Yahuḏah
and Binyamin were gathered together at
Yerushalayim, the twentieth day of the ninth month.
6 And all the crowd sat shivering in the outer court of
the Hĕyḵal because of the bad weather present.
7 So Ezra arose up, and said to them, “You have
transgressed the Torah in marrying foreign wives, and
so have increased the sins of Yisra’ĕl.
8 “And now in confessing, give esteem to HWHY
Elohim of our fathers,
9 and do His desire, and separate yourselves from
the gentiles of the land, and from the foreign women.”
10 Then the whole crowd spoke, and cried with a loud
voice, “As you have spoken, so we shall do!
11 “But because the people are many, and it is bad
weather, we cannot stand in the open, and this is not
a work of a day or two, seeing our sin in this has spread
far;
12 therefore let the rulers of the multitude stay, and let
all those of our dwellings who have foreign wives come
at the time appointed,
1354

1 ESDRAS

and the rulers and judges of every place with them,
till we turn away the wrath of HWHY from us for this
matter.”
14 Then Yahonathan son of Asah’ĕl and Yaḥzeyah
son of Tiqwah opposed this matter upon them, and
Meshullam and Shabbethai the Lĕwite supported
them.
15 But those who were of the captivity did according to
all these matters.
16 And Ezra the kohĕn chose for himself the leaders
of their families, all by name; and on the first day of the
tenth month they sat together to examine the matter.
17 So the cases of those who held foreign wives was
brought to an end on the first day of the first month.
18 And the kohenim who had come together, and
found to have foreign wives were:
19 Of the sons of Yĕshua son of Yotsaḏaq, and his
brothers; Ma’asĕyah and Eli’ezer, and Yariḇ and
Geḏalyahu.
20 And they gave their hand to put away their wives
and to offer rams to make atonement for their sins.
21 And of the sons of Immĕr; Ḥanani, and Zeḇaḏyah,
and Ma’asĕyah, and Shemayah, and Yeḥi’ĕl, and
Uzziyah.
22 And of the sons of Pashḥur; Elyo’ĕynai, Ma’asĕyah,
Yishma’ĕl, and Nethan’ĕl, and Yozaḇaḏ and El’asah.
23 And of the Lĕwites: Yozaḇaḏ, and Shim’i, and
Qĕlayah, who was called Qelita, and Pethaḥyah, and
Yahuḏah, and Eli’ezer.
24 Of the qodesh singers: Elyashiḇ, and Zakkur.
25 Of the gatekeepers; Shallum, and Telem.
26 Of those of Yisra’ĕl, of the sons of Parosh: Ramyah,
and Yizziyah, and Malkiyah, and Miyamin, and El’azar,
and Malkiyah, and Benayah.
27 Of the sons of Ĕylam: Mattanyah, Zeḵaryah, and
Aḇdi, and Yerĕmoth, and Ĕliyahu.
28 And of the sons of Zattu: Elyo’ĕynai, Elyashiḇ,
Mattanyah, Yerĕmoth, and Zaḇaḏ, and Aziza.
13

1355

1 EZRA

Of the sons of Bĕḇai; Yahoḥanan, and Ḥananyah
and Zabbai, and Athlai.
30 Of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluk, Aḏayah,
Yashuḇ, She’al, and Ramoth.
31 And of the sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ; Aḏna, and
Ma’asĕyah, Kelal, and Benayah, and Mattanyah, and
Betsal’ĕl, Binnui, and Menashsheh.
32 And of the sons of Ḥarim; Eli’ezer and Yishshiyah,
and Malkiyah, and Shemayah, and Shim’on.
33 And of the sons of Ḥashum; Mattenai, and
Mattattah, and Zaḇaḏ, Eliphelet, and Yirmeyah,
Menashsheh, and Shim’i.
34 And of the sons of Bani; Ma’aḏai, Amram, U’ĕl,
Benayah, and Bĕḏeyah, and Wanyah, Merĕmoth, and
Elyashiḇ, and Mattenai, Ya’asu, Bani, Binnui, Shim’i,
Shelemyah, Nathan. And of the sons of Ezra; Shashai,
Azar’ĕl, Azi’ĕl, Shemaryah, Amaryah, Yosĕph.
35 And of the sons of Neḇo; Mattithyah, Zaḇaḏ,
Yaddu, Yo’ĕl, Benayah.
36 All these had taken foreign wives, and they put
them away with their children.
37 And the kohenim and Lĕwites, and those who were
of Yisra’ĕl, dwelt in Yerushalayim, and in the land on
the first day of the seventh month; so the children of
Yisra’ĕl were in their dwellings.
38 And the whole crowd came together with one
accord into the open place of the qodesh porch toward
the east;
39 and they spoke to Ezra the kohĕn and reader, to
bring the Torah of Mosheh, that was given of HWHY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
40 So Ezra the chief kohĕn brought the Torah to the
whole crowd from man to woman, and to all the
kohenim, to hear the Torah on the first day of the
seventh month.
41 And he read in the open court before the qodesh
porch from morning to noon, before both men and
women; and the crowd gave heed to the Torah.
29

1356

1 ESDRAS

And Ezra the kohĕn and reader of the Torah stood
up on a wooden platform, which was made for that
purpose.
43 And beside him stood Mattithyah, Shema, Anayah,
Azaryah, Uriyah, Ḥilqiyah, Ma’asĕyah, on the right
hand;
44 And on his left hand stood Peḏayah, Misha’ĕl,
Malkiyah, Ḥashum, and Ḥashbaddanah and Zeḵaryah.
45 Then Ezra took the Book of the Torah before the
crowd - for he sat esteemed at the head in the sight of
them all 46 and when he opened the Torah, they all stood
straight up. So Ezra baraḵ HWHY Elohim Most High, the
Elohim of hosts, Almighty.
47 And all the people answered, “Amĕn!” And lifting up
their hands they fell to the ground, and worshipped
HWHY.
48 Also Yĕshua, Bani, Shĕrĕḇyah, Yamin, Aqquḇ,
Shabbethai, Hoḏiyah, Ma’asĕyah, and Qelita,
Azaryah, and Yozaḇaḏ, and Ḥanan, Pelayah, the
Lĕwites, taught the Torah of HWHY, making them all to
understand it.
49 Then the governor spoke to Ezra the chief kohĕn
and reader, and to the Lĕwites that taught the crowd,
even to all, saying,
50 “This day is qodesh to HWHY.” - For they all wept
when they heard the Torah 51 “Go then, and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and
send portions to those who have none;
52 for this day is qodesh to HWHY, and be not
sorrowful; for HWHY shall exalt you.”
53 So the Lĕwites proclaimed to all the people saying,
“This day is qodesh to HWHY; do not be sorrowful.”
54 Then they went their way, every one to eat and
drink, and be joyful, and to give portions to those who
had none, and to rejoice;
55 because they understood the Words in which they
were instructed, and for the reason they had been
assembled.
42

1357

2 EZRA

2 ESDRAS
‫ עזרא ב‬B ARz[

1 The second book of the naḇi Ezra son of Serayah,
son of Azaryah, son of Ḥilqiyah, son of Shallum, son
of Tsaḏoq, son of Aḥituḇ,
2 son of Aḥiyah, son of Pineḥas, son of Ĕli, son of
Amaryah, son of Azaryah, son of Merĕmoth, son of
Arna, son of Uzzi, son of Buqqi, son of Aḇishua,
Pineḥas, son of Eli’ezer,
3 son of Aharon, of the tribe of Lĕwi; who was captive
in the land of the Maḏites, in the reign of Artaḥshashta
sovereign of Paras.
4 And the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
5 “Go your way, and show My people their sinful
deeds, and their children their wickedness which they
have done against Me; that they may tell their
children’s children.
6 “Because the sins of their fathers are increased in
them; for they have forgotten Me, and have offered to
foreign mighty ones.
7 “Am not I even He who brought them out of the land
of Mitsrayim, from the house of bondage? But they
have provoked Me to wrath, and despised My
counsels.
8 “Pull off the hair from your head, and throw all evil
upon them, for they have not been obedient to My Law,
but are a rebellious people.
9 “How long shall I endure them, to whom I have
done so much good?
10 “I have destroyed many sovereigns for their sakes;
I have struck down Pharaoh with his servants and all
his strength.
11 “I have destroyed all the nations before them, and
in the east I have scattered the people of two
provinces, even of Tsor and Tsiḏon, and have slain all
their enemies.
12 “Therefore you speak to them, saying, ‘Thus says
hWhY,
1358

2 ESDRAS

“I led you through the sea and from the beginning
gave you a wide and safe passage. I gave you Mosheh
for a leader, and Aharon for a kohĕn.
14 “I gave you light in a pillar of fire, and I have done
great wonders among you; yet have you forgotten Me,”
says hWhY.
15 ‘Thus says hWhY the Almighty, “The quails were as
a sign to you; I gave you booths for your safety; still
you grumbled there,
16 and did not overcome in My Name for the
destruction of your enemies, but even to this day you
still grumble.
17 “Where is the good that I have done for you? When
you were hungry and thirsty in the wilderness, did you
not cry out to Me,
18 saying, ‘Why have You brought us into this
wilderness to kill us? It would have been better for us
to have served the Mitsrites, than to die in this
wilderness!’
19 “Then I took pity on your groaning, and gave you
manna to eat; so you ate bread of messengers.
20 “When you were thirsty, did I not split the rock, and
waters flowed out to your fill? For the heat I covered
you with the leaves of the trees.
21 “I divided among you a fruitful land, I drove out the
Kena’anites, the Perizzites and the Pelishtites before
you. What more shall I do for you?” says hWhY.
22 ‘Thus says hWhY the Almighty, “When you were in
the wilderness, at the river of the Amorites, thirsting,
and blaspheming My Name,
23 I did not send fire for your blasphemies, but threw
a branch in the water, and made the river sweet.
24 “What shall I do unto you, O Ya’aqoḇ? You,
Yahuḏah, would not obey me. I shall turn myself to
other nations, and to them I shall give My Name, that
they may guard My Laws.
25 “Seeing you have forsaken Me, I shall also forsake
you. When you desire for Me to show favour to you, I
shall show no kindness to you.
13

1359

2 EZRA

“Whenever you call upon Me, I do not hear you; for
you have defiled your hands with blood, and your feet
are swift to commit murder.
27 “It is not as though you have forsaken Me, but your
own selves,” says hWhY.
28 ‘Thus says hWhY the Almighty, “Have I not treated
you as a father his sons, as a mother her daughters,
and a nurse her young infants,
29 that you would be my people, and I should be your
Elohim; that you would be my children, and I should be
your Father?
30 “I gathered you together, as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings; but now, what shall I do to
you? I shall throw you out from My presence.
31 “When you offer unto Me, I shall turn my face from
you; for I have rejected your Moedim, your new moons,
and your circumcisions.
32 “I sent to you My servants the neḇi’im, whom you
have taken and slain, and torn their bodies in pieces,
whose blood I shall require of your hands,” says hWhY.
33 ‘Thus says the Almighty, “Your house is laid waste,
I shall cast you out as the wind does stubble.
34 “And your children shall not be fruitful; for they have
despised My Command, and done that which is evil
before Me.
35 “I shall give your houses to a people that shall
come; who having not yet heard of Me, shall believe
Me; to whom I have showed no signs, yet they shall do
what I have Commanded them.
36 “They have seen no neḇi’im, yet they call their sins
to remembrance, and acknowledge them.
37 “I call to witness the favour of the people to come,
whose little ones rejoice in gladness, and though they
have not seen Me with bodily eyes, yet in spirit they
believe the Word that I say.
38 “And now brother, see what esteem; and see the
people that come from the East,
26

1360

2 ESDRAS

to whom I shall give for leaders, Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq
and Ya’aqoḇ, Hoshĕa, Amos and Miḵah, Yo’ĕl,
Oḇaḏyah and Yonah,
40 Naḥum and Ḥaḇaqquq, Tsephanyah, Ḥaggai,
Zeḵaryah and Mal’aḵi, who is also called a messenger
of HWHY.” ’
39

2 ‘Thus says hWhY, “I brought this people out of
bondage, and I gave them My Commands by My
servants the neḇi’im; whom they would not hear, but
despised My counsels.
2 “The mother that bore them says to them, ‘Go your
way, you children; for I am a widow and forsaken.
3 ‘I brought you up with gladness; but with sorrow and
heaviness I have lost you; for you have sinned before
HWHY your Elohim, and done that which is evil before
Him.
4 ‘But what shall I now do for you? I am a widow and
forsaken; go your way, O My children, and ask
kindness from hWhY.’
5 “As for Me, O father, I call upon you for a witness
over the mother of these children, who would not guard
My Covenant;
6 that you bring them to confusion, and their mother
to ruin, that there may be no offspring from them.
7 “Let them be scattered abroad among the gentiles,
let their names be blotted out from the earth; for they
have despised My Covenant.
8 “Woe to you, Ashshur, you that hide the
unrighteous within you! O you wicked people,
remember what I did to Seḏom and Amorah;
9 whose land lies in lumps of tar and piles of ashes;
even so I shall do the same to those who do not listen
to Me.” says hWhY the Almighty.’ ”
10 Thus says hWhY to Ezra, “Tell my people that I shall
give them the reign of Yerushalayim, which I would
have given to Yisra’ĕl.
11 “I shall also take their esteem to Myself, and give
others the everlasting dwellings, which I had prepared
for them.
1361

2 EZRA

“They shall have the tree of ḥai for an ointment of
sweet savour; they shall neither labour, nor be weary.
13 “Go, and you shall receive; pray that your days are
few, that they may be shortened. The reign is already
prepared for you; watch!
14 “Call the shamayim and earth to witness; for I have
broken the evil in pieces, and created the good; for I
live.” Says hWhY.
15 “Mother, embrace your children, and bring them up
with gladness, make their feet as steady as a pillar; for
I have chosen you.” Says hWhY.
16 “And those who are dead I shall raise up again from
their places, and bring them out of the graves; for I
have acknowledged My Name in Yisra’ĕl.
17 “Do not fear, you mother of the children; for I have
chosen you,” says hWhY.
18 “For your help I shall send My servants Yeshayahu
and Yirmeyahu, after whose counsel I have qadosh
and prepared for you twelve trees laden with different
fruits,
19 and as many fountains flowing with milk and honey,
and seven mighty mountains, on which there grow
roses and lilies, whereby I shall fill your children with
joy.
20 “Do right to the widow, judge for the fatherless, give
to the poor, defend the orphan, clothe the naked,
21 heal the broken and the weak, do not mock a lame
man, defend the crippled, and let the blind man come
into the sight of My brightness.
22 “Guard the old and young within your walls.
23 “Wherever you find the dead, take them and bury
them, and I shall give you the first place in My
resurrection.
24 “Remain, O My people, and take your rest, for your
rest is still to come.
25 “Nourish your children, O you good nurse; establish
their feet.
12

1362

2 ESDRAS

“As for the servants whom I have given you, not one
of them shall perish; for I shall require them from
among your number.
27 “Do not be weary; for when the day of trouble and
heaviness comes, others shall weep and be sorrowful,
but you shall be joyful and have abundance.
28 “The gentiles shall envy you, but they shall be able
to do naught against you.” Says hWhY.
29 “My hands shall cover you, so that your children
shall not see She’ol.
30 “Be joyful, O you mother, with your children; for I
shall deliver you,” says hWhY.
31 “Remember your children who sleep, for I shall
bring them out from the breadth of the earth, and show
kindness to them; for I am kind,” says hWhY Almighty.
32 “Embrace your children until I come and show
kindness to them; for My wells run over, and My favour
does not fail.”
33 I Ezra received a command from hWhY on mount
Ḥorĕḇ, that I should go to Yisra’ĕl; but when I came to
them, they disregarded and despised the Command of
hWhY.
34 And therefore I say unto you, “O you gentiles that
hear and understand, look for your Shepherd, He shall
give you everlasting rest; for He is near at hand, who
shall come at the end of the world.
35 “Be ready for the reward of the reign, for the
everlasting light shall shine upon you forever.
36 “Flee the shadow of this world, receive the joy of
your esteem; I witness of my Saviour openly.
37 “O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad,
giving thanks to He who has led you to the reign of the
shamayim.
38 “Arise and stand, see the number of those who are
sealed at the Feast of hWhY;
39 who have departed from the shadow of this world,
and have received garments of esteem from hWhY.
26

1363

2 EZRA

“Take your number, O Tsiyon, and enclose those in
you who are clothed in white, who have filled the Law
of hWhY.
41 “The number of your children, whom you long for is
filled; plead the power of hWhY, that your people, who
have been called from the beginning, may be qadosh.”
42 I Ezra saw upon Mount Tsiyon a great people
whom I could not number, and they all praised hWhY
with songs.
43 And in the midst of them there was a young Man of
tall stature - taller than all the rest; and upon every one
of their heads He placed crowns, and was more
exalted; at which I marvelled at greatly.
44 So I asked the messenger, and said, “Master, who
are these?”
45 He answered and said to me, “These are those who
have put off the mortal garments, and put on the
immortal, and have confessed the Name of Elohim;
now they are crowned, and receive palms.”
46 Then I said to the messenger, “What young Man is
this who crowns them, and gives them palms in their
hands?”
47 So he answered and said to me, “It is the Son of
Elohim, whom they have confessed in the world.” Then
I began to greatly commend those who stood so
steadfastly for the Name of hWhY.
48 Then the messenger said to me, “Go your way, and
tell my people how great and how many are the
wonders of hWhY your Elohim, which you have seen.”
40

3 In the thirtieth year after the ruin of the city, I was in
Baḇel, and lay troubled upon my bed, and my thoughts
overwhelmed my heart;
2 for I saw the desolation of Tsiyon, and the wealth of
those who dwelt in Baḇel.
3 And my spirit was greatly moved, so that I began to
speak words full of reverence to the Most High, and
said,

1364

2 ESDRAS

“O hWhY who reigns, You spoke in the beginning,
when You established the earth, and by You alone,
and commanded the dust,
5 and gave a body to Aḏam without being, which was
the workmanship of Your hands, and breathed into him
the breath of life, and he was made living before You.
6 “And You led him into paradise, which Your right
hand had planted, before the earth ever appeared.
7 “And You gave a Command to him to love Your
Way; which he transgressed, and immediately You
appointed death in him and in his generations, from
whom came nations, tribes, people, and clans, without
number.
8 “And all people walked after their own desire, and
acted arrogantly before You, and despised Your
Commands.
9 “And again it came to be, You brought the flood
upon those who dwelt on the earth, and destroyed
them.
10 “And it came to be in each of them, that as death
was to Aḏam, so was the flood to these.
11 “Nevertheless You left one of them, namely, Noaḥ
with his household, from whom came all righteous
men.
12 “And it came to be, that when those who dwelt upon
the earth began to multiply, and had brought forth
many children, and were a great people, they began
again to be more wicked than the first.
13 “Now when they lived so wickedly before You, You
chose a man from among them, whose name was
Aḇraham.
14 “You loved him, and You showed Your desire to
him alone,
15 and made an everlasting Covenant with him,
promising to him that You would never forsake his
seed.
16 “And to him you gave Yitsḥaq, and to Yitsḥaq you
also gave Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw. As for Ya’aqoḇ You
4

1365

2 EZRA

chose him for Yourself, and put Ĕsaw aside; and so
Ya’aqoḇ became a great multitude.
17 “And it came to be, that when You led his seed out
of Mitsrayim, You brought them up to Mount Sinai.
18 “And bowing the shamayim, You established the
earth, moved the whole world, and made the depths to
tremble, and troubled the men at that time.
19 “And Your esteem passed through four gates, of
fire and of earthquake and of wind and of cold; that
You might give the Law to the seed of Ya’aqoḇ, and
Commandments to the generation of Yisra’ĕl.
20 “And yet You did not take away from them a wicked
heart, that Your Law might bring forth fruit in them.
21 “For the first Aḏam bearing a wicked heart
transgressed, and was overcome; and so are all those
who are descended from him.
22 “Thus sickness was made permanent; and the Law
in the heart of the people with the evil root; so that the
good departed, and the evil still stayed.
23 “So the days passed, and the years were brought
to an end; then You raised You up a servant, named
Dawiḏ,
24 whom You commanded to build a city for Your
Name, and to offer incense and offerings to You within
it.
25 “When this was done many years, then those who
inhabited the city forsook You,
26 and acted in all manner even as Aḏam and all his
generations had done; for they also had a wicked
heart.
27 “And so You gave Your city over into the hands of
Your enemies.
28 “Are their deeds then any better who inhabit Baḇel,
that they should therefore have the reign over Tsiyon?
29 “For when I came there, and had seen
unrighteousnesses without number, and my being saw
many evil-doers in these thirty years, so that my heart
failed me.
1366

2 ESDRAS

“For I have seen how You endure those sinning and
have spared evil-doers; and have destroyed Your
people, and have preserved Your enemies, and have
not declared it.
31 “I do not remember how to depart from this way.
Are those of Baḇel then better than those of Tsiyon?
32 “Or is there any other people that knows You
besides Yisra’ĕl, or what generation has believed Your
Covenants so much as Ya’aqoḇ?
33 “And yet their reward does not appear, and their
labour has no fruit; for I have gone here and there
among the gentiles, and I see that they overflow in
wealth, and do not think upon Your Commands.
34 “Now therefore weigh our wickedness in the
balance, and also theirs who dwell on the earth; and
so shall Your Name be found nowhere but in Yisra’ĕl.
35 “Or when was it that those who dwell on the earth
have not sinned in Your sight, or what people have so
kept Your Commands?
36 “You shall find that Yisra’ĕl by name has kept Your
Orders; but not the gentiles.”
30

4 And the messenger that was sent to me, whose
name was Uri’ĕl, answered me
2 and said, “Your heart has gone too far regarding
this world, and do you think to understand the way of
the Most High?”
3 Then I said, “Yes, my master.” And he answered
me, and said, “I have been sent to show you three
ways, and to put forth three situations before you;
4 of which if you declare to me one, I shall also show
you the way that you desire to see, and I shall show
you from where the wicked heart comes.”
5 And I said, “Speak on, my master.” Then he said to
me, “Go your way, weigh the weight of fire, or measure
the blast of the wind, or recall the day that is past.”
6 Then I answered and said, “What man is able to do
this, that you should ask such matters of me?”
7 And he said to me, “If I should ask you how many
dwellings are in the midst of the sea, or how many
1367

2 EZRA

springs are in the source of the deep, or how many
fountains are above the expanse, or which are the
exits of She’ol, or the entrances of paradise?
8 “However you might say to me, ‘I never went down
into the deep, neither as yet into She’ol, nor did I ever
climb up into the shamayim.’
9 “Nevertheless I have only asked you of the fire and
wind, and of the day through which you have passed,
and of that from which you cannot be separated, and
yet, you give me no answer of them.”
10 He said further to me, “That which is your own, and
what you have grown up with, you cannot know.
11 “How then should your mind be able to know the
way of the Most High, and the world being now
outwardly corrupted, to understand the corruption that
is clearly in my sight?”
12 Then I said to him, “It would be better that we were
not at all, than that we should still live in wickedness,
and to suffer, and not to know why.”
13 He answered me, and said, “I went into a forest into
a plain, and the trees took counsel
14 and said, ‘Come, let us go and fight against the sea
that it may depart before us, and that we may make
more forests.’
15 “The floods of the sea also similarly took counsel,
and said, ‘Come, let us go up and subdue the forests
of the plain, that there also we may make ourselves
more territory.”
16 The plan of the forest was in vain, for the fire came
and consumed it.
17 The plan of the floods of the sea came likewise to
naught, for the sand stood up and stopped them.
18 If you were judge now between these two, whom
would you begin to declare right, or whom would you
condemn?
19 I answered and said, “Truly it is a foolish thought
that they have both devised, for the ground is given to
the forest, and the sea also has its place to hold its
floods.”
1368

2 ESDRAS

Then he answered me, and said, “You have given
a right judgment, but why do you not judge yourself
also?
21 “For as the ground is given to the forest, and the
sea to its floods; even so those who dwell on the earth
may understand naught but that which is on the earth;
and He who dwells above the shamayim may only
understand that which is above the height of the
shamayim.”
22 Then I answered and said, “Please, hWhY, let me
have understanding.
23 “For it was not my thought to be curious of the ways
above, but of such that pass by us daily, namely, why
Yisra’ĕl is given up as a reproach to the gentiles, and
for what cause the people whom You have loved are
given over to wicked nations, and why the Law of our
forefathers is brought to naught, and the written
Covenants nullified?
24 “And we pass away out of the world as
grasshoppers, and our life is astonishment and fear,
and we are not worthy to obtain kindness.
25 “What shall He then do for His Name by which we
are called? Of these matters I have asked.”
26 Then he answered me, and said, “The more you
search, the more you shall marvel; for the world
hastens to pass away,
27 and cannot understand that which is promised to
the righteous in time to come; for this world is full of
unrighteousness and sickness.
28 “But concerning that of which you ask me, I shall
tell you; for the evil is sown, but its destruction has not
yet come.
29 “If therefore that which is sown is not removed, and
if the place where the evil is sown is not turned over,
then it cannot become sown with good.
30 “For the grain of evil seed has been sown in the
heart of Aḏam from the beginning, and how much
wickedness has it produced to this time? And how
20

1369

2 EZRA

much shall it yet bring forth until the time of threshing
comes?
31 “Consider now for yourself, what great fruits of
wickedness the grain of evil seed has brought forth.
32 “And when the heads are cut down, which are
without number, how great a floor they shall fill!”
33 Then I answered and said, “How, and when shall
these come to pass? Why are our years few and evil?”
34 And he answered me, saying, “Do not hasten more
than the Most High; for it is worthless for your haste to
be more than His, for you have over-exceeded.
35 “Did not the beings of the righteous also ask
question of these in their rooms, saying, ‘How long
shall I have expectancy in this way? When does the
reward of our harvest come?’
36 “And to these Uri’ĕl the chief messenger answered
them, and said, ‘When the number of seeds has been
filled in you; for He has weighed the world in the
balance.
37 ‘By measure He has measured the times; and by
number He has numbered the times; and He does not
move nor stir them, until the said measure is filled.’ ”
38 Then I answered and said, “O hWhY who reigns, we
are all full of unrighteousness,
39 and possibly it is for our sake that the floors of the
righteous are not filled, because of the sins of those
who dwell on the earth!”
40 So he answered me, and said, “Go your way to a
woman with child, and ask her when she has
completed her nine months, if her womb may keep the
birth any longer within her.”
41 Then I said, “No master, she cannot.” And he said
to me, “The rooms of beings in the grave are like the
womb of a woman;
42 for as a woman in childbirth hastens to escape the
necessity of the childbirth; even so do these places
hasten to deliver those who are entrusted to them.
43 “From the beginning, look, what you desire to see,
it shall be shown you.”
1370

2 ESDRAS

Then I answered and said, “If I have found favour
in Your sight, and if it is possible, and if I am able,
45 show me then whether there is more to come than
is past, or more past than is to come.
46 “What is past I know, but what is to come I do not
know.”
47 And he said to me, “Stand on the right, and I shall
explain the parable to you.”
48 So I stood and looked, and see, a hot burning torch
passed before me; and it came to be that when the
flame had passed I looked, and see, the smoke still
remained.
49 After this there passed before me a watery cloud,
and sent down much rain with a storm; and when the
stormy rain had passed, the drops still remained.
50 Then he said to me, “Consider for yourself; as the
rain is more than the drops, and as the fire is greater
than the smoke; so the quantity which is past is
greater, but the drops and the smoke remained.”
51 Then I prayed, and said, “Do you think I shall live
until that time? Or what shall come to be in those
days?”
52 He answered me, and said, “As for the signs of
which you ask me, I may tell you of them in part; but
regarding your life, I am not sent to show you; for I do
not know it.
44

5 “But regarding the signs, see, the days shall come,
that those who dwell upon the earth shall be taken in a
great number, and the Way of truth shall be hidden,
and the land shall be barren of belief.
2 “But wickedness shall be increased above that
which you now see, or that you have heard long ago.
3 “And the land, which you now see to have a root,
you shall see suddenly laid waste.
4 “But if the Most High grants you to live, you shall
see after the third trumpet that the sun shall suddenly
shine again in the night, and a third of the moon in that
day.
1371

2 EZRA

“And blood shall drip from wood, and the stone shall
give its cry, and the people shall be troubled;
6 and one shall rule, whom those who dwell upon the
earth do not expect, and the birds shall take flight away
together.
7 “And the Sea of Seḏom shall throw out fish, and
make a noise in the night, which many have not known;
but they shall all hear the sound of it.
8 “There shall also be confusion in many places, and
the fire shall be often sent out again, and the wild
beasts shall change their places, and women during
uncleanness shall bring forth monsters.
9 “And salt water shall be found with the sweet, and
all friends shall destroy one another; then knowledge
shall hide itself, and understanding withdraw itself into
its secret room,
10 and shall be sought by many, and yet not be found.
Then unrighteousness and lack of self control shall be
multiplied on earth.
11 “One land shall also ask another, and say, ‘Has
righteousness that makes a man righteous passed
through you?’ And it shall say, ‘No.’
12 “At the same time men shall have expectancy, but
do not obtain; they shall labour, but their ways shall not
prosper.
13 “To show you such signs I have permission; and if
you pray again, and weep as now, and fast seven
days, you shall hear yet greater matters.”
14 Then I woke, and an extreme fear went through my
entire body, and my mind was so troubled, that I
fainted.
15 So the messenger that had come to talk with me
held me, comforted me, and stood me up on my feet.
16 And on the second night it came to be, that
She’alti’ĕl the leader of the people came to me, saying,
“Where have you been, and why is your countenance
so heavy?
17 “Do you not know that Yisra’ĕl is entrusted to you
in the land of their captivity?
5

1372

2 ESDRAS

“Rise therefore, and eat bread, and do not forsake
us, as the shepherd that leaves his flock in the hands
of cruel wolves.”
19 Then I said to him, “Go away from me, and do not
come near me.” And he heard what I said, and went
from me.
20 And so I fasted seven days, mourning and
weeping, as Uri’ĕl the messenger commanded me.
21 And after seven days it came to be, that the
thoughts of my heart were very grievous to me again,
22 and my being recovered the spirit of understanding,
and I began to speak with the Most High again,
23 and said, “O hWhY who reigns, over every forest of
the earth, and all the trees in it, You have chosen Your
one and only vine.
24 “And of all lands of the whole earth You have
chosen Your one cistern, and of all the flowers of it;
one lily.
25 “And of all the depths of the sea You have filled
Your one river. And of all cities built, You have qadosh
Tsiyon unto Yourself.
26 “And of all the birds that are created You have
named Your one dove. And of all the beasts that are
made You have supplied Your one sheep.
27 “And among all the multitudes of people You have
chosen Your one people. And unto this people, whom
You loved, You gave a Law that is acceptable for all.
28 “And now, O hWhY, why have You given this one
people over to many, and upon the one root You have
prepared others, and why have You scattered Your
one and only people among many?
29 “And those who denied Your promises, and did not
believe Your Covenants, have trodden them down.
30 “If You hated Your people so much, should You
punish them with Your own hands?”
31 Now when I had spoken these words, the
messenger that came to me the night before was sent
to me,
18

1373

2 EZRA

and said to me, “Hear me, and I shall instruct you;
listen to the word that I speak, and I shall tell you
more.”
33 And I said, “Speak on, master.” Then he said to me,
“You are greatly troubled in heart for the sake of
Yisra’ĕl. Do you love that people more than He who
made them?”
34 And I said, “No, master, but of very grief I have
spoken, for my kidneys pain me every hour, while I
labour to understand the Way of the Most High, and to
seek out part of His Right-Ruling.”
35 And he said to me, “You cannot.” And I said, “Why,
master? For what was I born then, or why was my
mother’s womb not my grave, that I might not have
seen the trouble of Ya’aqoḇ, and the wearisome toil of
the race of Yisra’ĕl?”
36 And he said to me, “Number for me that which has
not yet come; gather together for me the dross that is
scattered abroad, make the flowers that are withered
green again,
37 open for me the places that are closed, and bring
forth for me the winds that in them are shut up, show
me the image of a voice; and then I shall declare to
you that which you labour to know.”
38 And I said, “O hWhY who reigns, who may know
these, but He whose dwelling is not with men?
39 “As for me, I am unwise; how may I then speak of
these matters of which You ask me?”
40 Then He said to me, “As you are unable to do any
of these that I have spoken of, even so you cannot find
out My judgment, or the love in the end that I have
promised to My people.”
41 And I said, “See, O hWhY, You are still near to those
who are reserved till the end; but what shall they do
who have been before me, or we who are here now, or
those who shall come after us?”
42 And He said to me, “I shall liken My judgment to a
circle; as there is no slackness for the last, even so
there is no swiftness for the first.”
32

1374

2 ESDRAS

So I answered and said, “Could you not make those
who have been made, and are now, and who are to
come, at once; that You might show Your judgment
sooner?”
44 Then He answered me, and said, “The creature
cannot hasten more than the Maker; neither could the
world hold at once those who shall be created within.”
45 And I said, “As You have said to Your servant, that
You, who gives life to all, have given life at once to the
creatures that You have created, and the creation bore
it; even so it might also bear those who are now
present at once.”
46 And He said to me, “Ask the womb of a woman, and
say to her, ‘If you bring forth children, why not do them
all together, but one after another?’ Ask her therefore
to bring forth ten children at once.”
47 And I said, “She cannot; but must do it over a span
of time.”
48 Then He said to me, “Even so have I given the
womb of the earth to those who are sown in it in their
times.
49 “For as a young child cannot bring forth those that
belong to the aged, even so have I subjected the world
which I created.”
50 And I asked, and said, “Seeing You have now given
me an occasion, I shall proceed to speak before You;
for our mother, of whom You have told me that she is
young, now draws near to age.”
51 He answered me, and said, “Ask a woman that
bears children, and she shall tell you.
52 “Say to her, ‘Why are those whom you have now
brought forth like those who were before, but smaller
in size?’
53 “And she shall answer you, ‘Those who are born in
the strength of youth are of one form, and those who
are born in the time of age, when the womb fails, are
otherwise.’
54 “Consider yourself also therefore, how you are less
of stature than those who were before you,
43

1375

2 EZRA

and so are those who come after you lesser than
you, as the creation which now begins to age, and has
passed over the strength of youth.”
56 Then I said, “Please hWhY, if I have found favour in
Your sight, show Your servant by whom You visit your
creation.”
55

6 And He said to me, “In the beginning, when the
earth was made, before the borders of the world stood,
or the winds ever blew;
2 before it thundered and lightning struck, or before
the foundations of paradise were laid;
3 before the lovely flowers were seen, or ever the
moveable powers were established, before the
innumerable multitude of messengers were gathered
together,
4 or before the heights of the shamayim were lifted
up, before the measures of the expanse were named,
or before the footstool of Tsiyon was established,
5 and before the present years were sought out, and
before the deeds of those who now sin were turned,
before those who have gathered belief for a treasure
were sealed.
6 “Then I considered these, and they all were made
through Me alone, and through none other; by Me they
shall also be ended, and by none other.”
7 Then I answered and said, “What shall be the
dividing of the times, or when shall be the end of the
first, and the beginning of that which follows?”
8 And he said to me, “From Aḇraham to Yitsḥaq,
when Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw were born to him, Ya’aqoḇ’s
hand first held the heel of Ĕsaw.
9 “For Ĕsaw is the end of the world, and Ya’aqoḇ is
the beginning of that which follows.
10 “The hand of man is between the heel and the
hand; other questions, Ezra, do not ask.”
11 Then I answered and said, “O hWhY who reigns, if I
have found favour in Your sight,
12 please, show Your servant the end of Your signs,
of which You showed me in part the last night.”
1376

2 ESDRAS

So He answered and said to me, “Stand up on your
feet, and hear a mighty sounding voice.
14 “And there shall be a great shaking; but the place
where you stand shall not be moved.
15 “And so, when it sounds do not be afraid; for the
word is of the end, and the foundation of the earth
understands.
16 “And why? Because the sound of these trembles
and is moved; for it knows that the end of these must
be changed.”
17 And it came to be, that when I heard it I stood up
on my feet, and listened, and see, there was a voice
that spoke, and the sound of it was like the sound of
many waters.
18 And it said, “See, the days come, that I shall begin
to draw near, and to visit those who dwell on the earth,
19 and shall begin to make inquiry of them, what harm
they have done unrighteously with their wickedness,
and when the affliction of Tsiyon shall be complete;
20 and when the world, that shall begin to vanish
away, is finished, then I shall show these signs: the
Books shall be opened before the expanse, and they
all shall see together.
21 “And children a year old shall speak with their
voices, the women with child shall bring forth children
prematurely of three or four months old, and they shall
live, and be raised up.
22 “And suddenly the sown places shall appear
unsown, the full storehouses shall suddenly be found
empty;
23 and the trumpet shall give a sound, which when
every man hears, they shall be suddenly afraid.
24 “At that time friends shall fight against one another
as enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those
who dwell in it; the springs of the fountains shall stand
still, and in three hours they shall not flow.
25 “Whoever remains from all these that I have told
you shall escape, and see My deliverance, and the end
of your world.
13

1377

2 EZRA

“And those who are received shall see it, who have
not tasted death from their birth; and the heart of
inhabitants shall be changed, turned into another spirit.
27 “For evil shall be blotted out, deception shall be
quenched.
28 “As for belief, it shall flourish; corruption shall be
overcome, and the truth, which has been so long
without fruit, shall be declared.”
29 And when he talked with me, see, I looked little by
little upon him before whom I stood.
30 And these words he said to me, “I have come to
show you the time of the night to come.
31 “If you pray further, and fast seven days again, I
shall tell you greater matters by day than you have
heard.
32 “For your voice is heard before the Most High; for
the Almighty has seen your righteous dealing, He has
also seen your blamelessness, which you have had
since your youth.
33 “And therefore He has sent me to show you all
these, and to say to you, ‘Take courage and do not
fear.’
34 “And do not hasten to think worthlessly about the
past times, so that you do not hasten from the latter
times.”
35 And it came to be after this, that I wept again, and
fasted seven days in similar manner, that I might
complete the three weeks which he told me.
36 And on the eighth night my heart was tortured
within me again, and I began to speak before the Most
High;
37 for my spirit burned greatly, and my being was in
distress.
38 And I said, “O hWhY, You spoke from the beginning
of the creation, even the first day, and said, ‘Let the
shamayim and earth be made,’ and Your word became
a perfect work.
26

1378

2 ESDRAS

“And then the Ruaḥ and darkness and silence were
on every side; the sound of man’s voice was not yet
formed.
40 “Then You commanded a good light to come forth
from Your treasures, that Your work might appear.
41 “On the second day You created the breath of the
expanse, and commanded it to divide, and to make a
division between the waters, that one part would go up,
and the other remain beneath.
42 “On the third day You commanded the waters to be
gathered into a seventh part of the earth; six parts You
dried up, and kept them, in order that some of these
being planted by Elohim and tilled might serve You.
43 “For as soon as Your word went forth the work was
made,
44 for immediately there was great and innumerable
fruit, and many and varied pleasures for the taste, and
flowers of unchangeable colour, and fragrances of
wondrous smell; and these were created the third day.
45 “On the fourth day You commanded that the sun
should shine, and the moon give its light, and the stars
should be in order;
46 and commanded them to do service to man, who
was to be made.
47 “On the fifth day You spoke to the seventh part,
where the waters were gathered, that it should bring
forth living creatures, birds and fish; and so it came to
be.
48 “For the silent, lifeless water brought forth living
creatures at the command of Elohim, that all people
might praise Your wondrous works.
49 “Then You appointed two living creatures, the one
you called Behĕmoth, and the other Liwiathan,
50 and separated the one from the other; for the
seventh part, namely, where the water was gathered
together, would not hold them both.
51 “Unto Behĕmoth You gave one part, which was
dried up the third day, that it should dwell in the same
part, in which are a thousand hills:
39

1379

2 EZRA

“But to Liwiathan You gave the seventh part, that
is, the waters; and have kept it to be consumed by
whom You want, and when.
53 “On the sixth day You gave command to the earth,
that it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and creeping
creatures before You.
54 “And after these, Aḏam also, whom You made
master of all your creatures; from him we have all
come, and also the people whom You have chosen.
55 “All this have I spoken before You, O hWhY,
because You made the world for our sakes.
56 “As for the other people, who also come from
Aḏam, You have said that they are naught, but are as
spittle; and have likened the abundance of them to a
drop that falls from a vessel.
57 “And now, O hWhY, see, these gentiles, who have
always been regarded as naught, have begun to be
masters over us, and to consume us.
58 “But we Your people, whom You have called Your
first-born, Your only brought forth, and Your dearly
beloved, are given into their hands.
59 “If the world is now made for our sakes, why do we
not possess an inheritance with the world? How long
shall this endure?”
52

7 And when I had finished speaking these words, the
messenger who had been sent to me the nights before
was sent to me.
2 And he said to me, “Rise, Ezra, and hear the words
that I have come to tell you.”
3 And I said, “Speak on, my master.” Then he said to
me, “The sea is put in a wide place, that it might be
deep and great.
4 “But if it were that the entrance were narrow, and
like a river;
5 who then could go into the sea to look upon it, and
to navigate it? If he did not go through the narrow, how
could he come into the wide?
6 “There is also another example: a city is built, and
put on a broad field, and is filled with all good.
1380

2 ESDRAS

“Its entrance is narrow, and is put in a dangerous
place to fall, so there is a fire on the right hand, and a
deep moat on the left,
8 and only one path between them both, even
between the fire and the water, so narrow that only one
man could go through at once.
9 “If this city now were given to a man as an
inheritance, if he should never pass the danger placed
before it, how shall he receive this inheritance?”
10 And I said, “It is so, master.” Then he said to me,
“So also is Yisra’ĕl’s portion.
11 “Because for their sakes I made the world; and
when Aḏam transgressed My Laws, then what is now
done was established.
12 “Then the entrances of this world were made
narrow, full of sorrow and hardship. They are but few
and evil, full of dangers, and very laboursome.
13 “For the entrances of the greater world were wide
and sure, and brought forth incorruptible fruit.
14 “If then those who live do not strive to go through
these distresses and futilities, they shall never receive
that which is laid up for them.
15 “Now therefore why do you worry yourself, seeing
you are but a corruptible man? And why are you
disturbed, for you are only mortal?
16 “Why have you not considered in your heart that
which is to come, rather than that which is present?”
17 Then I answered and said, “O hWhY who reigns,
You have ordained in Your Law, that the righteous
should inherit these, but that the wicked should perish.
18 “Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer distresses,
but have expectancy for the expanse; yet those who
have done wickedly have suffered distresses, but shall
not see the expanse.”
19 And he said to me. “There is no judge above
Elohim, and none that has understanding above the
Most High.
20 “For there are many who perish in this life, because
they despise the Law of Elohim that is put before them.
7

1381

2 EZRA

“For Elohim has given a strict Command to those
who came, what they should do to live, even as they
came, and what they should observe to avoid
punishment.
22 “Nevertheless they were not obedient to Him; but
spoke against Him, and plotted in vain;
23 and deceived themselves by their wicked deeds;
and said of the Most High, that He did not exist; and
did not know His ways.
24 “But they have despised His Torah, and denied His
Covenants; they have not been trustworthy in His
Laws, and have not performed His works.
25 “And therefore, Ezra, emptiness is for the empty,
and fullness is for the full.
26 “See, the time shall come, that these signs which I
have told you shall come to pass, and the bride shall
appear, and her coming forth shall be seen, which now
is withheld from the earth.
27 “And whoever is delivered from the evils spoken of
shall see My wonders.
28 “For My Bĕn {vWHY shall be revealed with those
who are with Him, and those who remain shall rejoice
within four hundred years.
29 “After these years Ha’Mashiaḥ My Bĕn shall die,
and all men who have life.
30 “And the world shall be turned into the silence of old
seven days, as in the former judgments; so that no one
remains.
31 “And after seven days, the world that is not yet
awake, shall be raised up, and that which is corrupt
shall die,
32 and the earth shall restore those who are asleep
within, and the dust and the secret places shall deliver
those who dwell in silence, and those beings who were
given to them.
33 “And the Most High shall appear upon the seat of
judgment, and anguish shall pass away, and patience
shall come to an end.
21

1382

2 ESDRAS

“But only judgment shall remain, truth shall stand,
and belief shall grow strong.
35 And the works shall follow, and the rewards be
revealed, and the good deeds shall be firm, and
wicked deeds shall not reign.
36 “The pit of torture shall appear, and opposite shall
be the place of rest; and the furnace of Gĕy-Hinnom
shall be uncovered and the paradise of delight
opposite.
37 “Then the Most High shall say to the nations that
have been raised from the dead, ‘See, and know whom
you have denied, whom you have not served, whose
Commands you have despised.
38 ‘Look on this side and that; here is delight and rest,
and there are fire and torture.’ So He shall speak to
them on the day of judgment;
39 a day that has no sun or moon or stars,
40 or cloud or thunder or lightning, or wind or water or
air, or darkness or evening or morning,
41 or summer or spring or heat, or winter or frost or
cold, or hail or rain or dew,
42 or noon or night, or dawn or shining or bright light,
but only the splendour of the esteem of the Most High,
by which all shall see what has been appointed.
43 “It shall last as if for a week of years.
44 “This is My judgment and its appointed order; and
to you alone have I shown these.”
45 And I answered and said, “O hWhY who reigns, I
said then and say now: Baruḵ are those who are alive
and guard Your Commandments!
46 “But what of those for whom I prayed? For who
among the living have not sinned, or who is there
among mortal man that has not transgressed Your
Covenant?
47 “And now I see that the world to come shall bring
delight to few, but torture to many.
48 “For an evil heart has grown up within us which has
separated us from Elohim, and has brought us into
corruption and the ways of death, and has shown us
34

1383

2 EZRA

the paths of destruction and removed us far from ḥai;
and not only for a few, but for almost all who have been
created.”
49 And he answered me and said, “Listen to me Ezra,
and I will teach you, and shall admonish you once
more.
50 “For this reason the Most High has not made one
world, but two.
51 “Because you have said that the righteous are few,
while the wicked are many; hear the explanation for
this.
52 If you have only a few precious stones, would you
add lead and clay to them?
53 And I said, “Aḏonai, how could this be?”
54 And He said to me, “Not only this, but ask the earth
and it shall tell you; submit to it and it shall declare to
you;
55 and say to it, ‘You produce gold and silver and
copper, and also iron and lead and clay;
56 but silver is more plentiful than gold, and copper
than silver, and iron than copper, and lead than iron,
and clay than lead.’
57 “So judge which is more precious and desirable,
that which is plentiful or that which is rare?”
58 And I said, “O hWhY who reigns, what is plentiful is
of less value, for what is rare is more precious.”
59 And He answered me and said, “Consider within
yourself what you have thought, for the one who has
what is hard to obtain rejoices more than the one who
has what is plentiful.
60 “So also shall be the judgement that I have
promised; for I shall rejoice over the few who are
saved, because it is they who have made My esteem
prevail, and through them My Name has been
esteemed.
61 “I shall not grieve over the great number of those
who perish; for they are like mist, and are similar to a
flame and smoke - they are lit on fire and burn with
heat, and are extinguished.”
1384

2 ESDRAS

And I replied and said, “O earth, what have you
brought forth, if the mind is made out of dust like the
other creations?
63 “For it would have been better if the dust itself had
not been brought forth, so that the mind might not have
been made from it.
64 “But now the mind grows with us, and therefore we
are tortured, because we perish and we know it.
65 “Let mankind lament, but let the beasts of the field
be glad; let all who have been born lament, but let the
cattle and flocks rejoice.
66 “It is much better for them than for us; for they do
not look to a judgment, and they do not know of any
torture or deliverance promised to them after death.
67 “What does it profit us if our life is preserved but we
are cruelly tortured?
68 “For all who are born are entangled in wickedness,
and are full of sins and burdened with transgressions.
69 “And if we are not to come into judgement after
death, perhaps it would have been better for us.”
70 And he answered me and said, “When the Most
High made the world and Aḏam and all who have come
from him, He first prepared the judgment and that
which pertains to the judgment.
71 “But now, know from your own words, for you have
said that the mind grows with us.
72 “For this reason, therefore, those who live on earth
shall be tortured, for though they had knowledge, they
committed wickedness; and although they received
the Commandments, they did not guard them; and
though they obtained the Law, they dealt
untrustworthily with what they had received.
73 “What then shall they have to say in the judgment,
or how shall they answer in the last days?
74 “How long the Most High has been patient with the
inhabitants of the world! And not for their sakes, but
because of the days that He has ordained.”
75 And I answered and said, “If I have found favour in
your eyes, O hWhY, show this also to your servant:
62

1385

2 EZRA

whether after death, as soon as every one of us
breathes their last, we shall be kept in rest until those
days come when You shall renew the creation, or
whether we shall be tortured immediately?
76 And he answered me and said, “I shall show you
this also, but do not include yourself with those who
have mocked, or number yourself among those who
are tortured.
77 “For you have a treasure of work stored up with the
Most High, but it shall not be shown to you till the last
days.
78 “And concerning death, the teaching is: when the
decisive decree goes forth from the Most High, that
one shall die, as the spirit leaves the body to return to
Him again who gave it, first of all it adores the esteem
of the Most High.
79 “If it is one of those who has mocked and has not
guarded the Way of the Most High, who has despised
His Law and hated those who revere Elohim;
80 such spirits do not enter into dwellings, but shall
immediately wander in torture, forever in grief and
sorrow in seven ways.
81 “The first way, because they have mocked the Law
of the Most High.
82 “The second way, because they cannot make a
good repentance so that they now may live.
83 “The third way, they shall see the reward laid up for
those who have trusted the Covenants of the Most
High.
84 “The fourth way, they shall consider the torture laid
up for themselves in the last days.
85 “The fifth way, they shall see how the dwellings of
the others are guarded by messengers in deep rest.
86 “The sixth way, they shall see how some of them
pass over into torture.
87 “The seventh way, which is greater than all the
ways that have been spoken, because they shall
utterly waste away in confusion and be consumed with
shame, and shall wither with fear at seeing the esteem
1386

2 ESDRAS

of the Most High in whose presence they sinned while
they were alive, and in whose presence they are to be
judged in the last days.
88 “And this is the order for those who have guarded
the Ways of the Most High, when they are separated
from their mortal body:
89 “During the time that they lived in it, they laboured
to serve the Most High, and withstood danger every
hour so they might guard the Law of the Lawgiver
perfectly.
90 “Therefore this is the teaching concerning them:
91 “Firstly, they shall see with great joy the esteem of
He who receives him, for they shall have rest in seven
orders.
92 “The first order, because they strove with great
effort to overcome the wicked thought that was formed
with them, so that it might not lead them astray from
ḥai unto death.
93 “The second order, because they see the confusion
in which the beings of the unrighteous wander and the
punishment that awaits them.
94 “The third order, they see the witness that He who
formed them bears concerning them, that throughout
their life they guarded the Law with which they were
entrusted.
95 “The fourth order, they know the rest that they now
enjoy, being gathered into their rooms and guarded by
messengers in deep rest, and the esteem waiting for
them in the last days.
96 “The fifth order, they rejoice that they have now
escaped what is corruptible and shall inherit what is to
come; and they also see the difficulty and toil from
which they have been delivered, and the spacious
freedom that they are to receive and enjoy in
immortality.
97 “The sixth order, when it is shown them how their
face is to shine like the sun, and how they are to be
made like the light of the stars, being incorruptible from
then on.
1387

2 EZRA

“The seventh order, which is greater than all that
have been spoken, for they shall rejoice with boldness,
and shall be confident without confusion, and shall be
glad without fear, for they press forward to see the face
of He whom they served in life and from whom they
are to receive their reward when esteemed.
99 “This is the order of the beings of the righteous,
which from now on is announced; and the previously
spoken are the ways of torture that those who would
not pay heed shall suffer from now on.”
100 Then I answered and said, “Shall there be time
given to the beings after they have been separated
from the bodies, to see what you have described to
me?”
101 And he said to me, “They shall have freedom for
seven days, so that during these seven days they may
see that of which you have been told, and afterwards
they shall be gathered into their dwellings.”
102 And I answered and said, “If I have found favour in
your eyes, show further to me, your servant, whether
on the day of judgment the righteous shall be able to
intercede for the unrighteous or to entreat the Most
High for them 103 fathers for sons or sons for parents, brothers for
brothers, relatives for their relatives or friends for those
who are most dear.”
104 And he answered me and said, “Since you have
found favour in my eyes, I will show you this also. The
day of judgment is certain and displays to all the sign
of truth. Just as now a father does not send his son, or
a son his father, or a master his servant, or a friend his
dearest friend, to be sick or sleep or eat or be healed
in his place,
105 so no one shall ever pray for another on that day,
neither shall anyone lay a burden on another, for then
all shall bear their own righteousness and
unrighteousness.”
98

1388

2 ESDRAS
106 Then

I said, “Aḇraham prayed first for the
Seḏomites, and Mosheh for the fathers that sinned in
the wilderness;
107 and Yahoshua after him for Yisra’ĕl in the time of
Aḵan;
108 and Shemu’ĕl and Dawiḏ for the destruction; and
Shelomoh for those who would come to the Miqdash;
109 and Ĕliyahu for those who received rain; and for the
dead, that he might live;
110 and Ḥizqiyahu for the people in the time of
Sanḥĕriḇ; and many for many.
111 “Even so now, seeing corruption has grown, and
wickedness increased, and the righteous have prayed
for the wicked; why shall it also not be so now?”
112 He answered me, and said, “This present life is not
the end where much esteem dwells; therefore they
have prayed for the weak.
113 “But the day of judgment shall be the end of this
age, and the beginning of the immortality to come, in
which corruption is past.
114 “Lack of self control is at an end, whoring is cut off,
righteousness growns, and truth springs forth.
115 “Then no man shall be able to save he who is
destroyed, nor to oppress he who has overcome.”
116 Then I answered and said, “This is my first and last
saying: that it would have been better to not have given
the earth to Aḏam; or else, when it was given him, to
have restrained him from sinning.
117 “For what profit is there for men here in this present
time to live in heaviness, and to look for punishment
after death?
118 “O you Aḏam, what have you done? For though it
was you that sinned, you have not fallen alone, but all
of us who come from you.
119 “For what does it profit us, if there is promised us
an immortal time, whereas we have done the works
that bring death?

1389

2 EZRA
120 “Or

that there is an everlasting expectancy
promised to us, whereas we being most wicked are
made worthless?
121 “Or that there are dwellings of healing and safety
laid up for us, whereas we have lived wickedly?
122 “And that the esteem of the Most High is kept to
defend those who have led a watchful life, whereas we
have walked in the most wicked ways of all?
123 “And that there should be shown a paradise, whose
fruit endures forever, where there is safety and
healing, since we shall not enter into it,
124 for we have walked in crooked places?
125 “Or that the faces of those who have practiced selfcontrol shall shine above the stars, whereas our faces
shall be blacker than darkness?
126 “For while we lived and committed wickedness, we
did not consider that we should begin to suffer for it
after death.”
127 Then he answered me, and said, “This is the
condition of the battle, that man who is born upon the
earth shall fight;
128 that, if he is overcome, he shall suffer as you have
said; but if he overcomes, he shall receive that which I
say.
129 “For this is the life of which Mosheh spoke to the
people while he lived, saying, ‘Choose life, that you
may live.’
130 “Nevertheless they did not believe him, nor even
the neḇi’im after him, nor myself who has spoken to
them,
131 that there should not be such grief in their
destruction, as shall be the joy over those who are
persuaded to salvation.”
132 Then I answered, and said, “I know, master, that
the Most High is called kind, in that He has kindness
upon those who have not yet come into the world,
133 and upon those who also turn to His Law;
134 and that He is patient, and endures those who have
sinned, as His creatures;
1390

2 ESDRAS
135 and that He is generous, for He is ready to give

where needed;
136 and that He is of great kindness, for He multiplies
more and more kindnesses to those who are present,
and are past, and also to those who are to come.
137 “For if He did not multiply His kindnesses, the world
would not continue with those who inherit therein.
138 “And He pardons; for if He did not do so of his
goodness, and those who have committed
wickednesses were forgiven them, the ten thousandth
part of mankind would not remain living.
139 “And being Judge, if He did not forgive those who
are healed by His Word, and blot out the great number
of sins,
140 there would likely be very few left in an innumerable
crowd!”

8 And he answered me, saying, “The Most High has
made this world for many, but the world to come for
few.
2 “I shall tell you a parable, Ezra; just as when you
ask the earth, it shall say to you, that it gives much clay
from which earthen vessels are made, but little dust
from which gold comes; even so is the course of this
present world.
3 “There are many created, but few shall be saved.”
4 So I answered and said, “O my being, swallow
down understanding, and devour wisdom.
5 “For you have come here against your desire, and
against it you depart; for you no longer have but a short
time to live.
6 “O hWhY, if You would allow Your servant, that we
may pray before You, and You give us a seed to our
heart, and tend to our understanding, that fruit may
come from it; for how shall each man live who is
corrupt, who bears the likeness of man?
7 “For You are alone, and we are all one
workmanship of Your hands, as You have said.
8 “For when the body is formed in the mother’s
womb, and You give it members, Your creation is
1391

2 EZRA

preserved in fire and water, and nine months Your
workmanship endures Your creation which is created
in her.
9 “But that which keeps and is kept shall both be
preserved; and when the time comes, the womb
delivers up that which grew in it.
10 “For You have commanded from the members of
the body, that is, out of the breasts, milk to be given,
which is the fruit of the breasts,
11 so that what has been formed may be nourished for
a time, till You lead it to Your kindness.
12 “You brought it up with Your righteousness, and
instructed it in Your Law, and instructed it with Your
Right-Ruling.
13 “And You shall put it to death as Your creation, and
revive it as Your work.
14 “If therefore You destroy that which was formed
with such great labour, it is easy to be appointed by
Your command, that that which was made might be
preserved.
15 “Now therefore, hWhY, I shall speak; regarding
mankind in general whom You know best; and
regarding Your people, for whose sake I am grieved;
16 and for Your inheritance, for whose cause I mourn;
and for Yisra’ĕl, for whom I am burdened; and for
Ya’aqoḇ, for whose sake I am troubled.
17 “Therefore I shall begin to pray before You for
myself and for them; for I see the fall of we who dwell
in the land,
18 and I have heard the swiftness of the judgment to
come.
19 “Therefore hear my voice, and understand my
words, and I shall speak before You.” This is the
beginning of the words of Ezra, before he was taken
up: and I said,
20 “O hWhY, You who dwells forever, who sees from
above that which is in the shamayim and in the air;

1392

2 ESDRAS

whose throne is beyond measure; whose esteem
cannot be contained; before whom the hosts of
messengers stand with trembling;
22 whose deeds are accompanied by wind and fire;
whose Word is true, and whose words are forever;
whose Command is strong, and Law reverent;
23 whose look dries up the depths, and whose wrath
makes the mountains melt away; which the truth
witnesses.
24 “O hear the prayer of Your servant, and listen to the
petition of Your creation.
25 “For while I live I shall speak, and so long as I have
understanding I shall answer.
26 “O do not look upon the sins of Your people; but on
those who serve You in truth.
27 “Do not heed the wicked devices of the gentiles, but
the desire of those who guard Your Witnesses in
afflictions.
28 “Do not think upon those who have walked falsely
before You; but remember those who have known
Your reverence according to Your desire.
29 “Let it not be Your desire to destroy those who have
lived like beasts; but to look upon those who have
clearly taught Your Law.
30 “Do not be wroth with those who are deemed worse
than beasts; but love those who always put their trust
in Your righteousness and esteem.
31 “For we and our fathers languish of such
sicknesses; but because of we sinners You shall be
called kind.
32 “For if You have a desire to show favour upon us,
You shall be called kind, namely by us, who have no
works of righteousness.
33 “For the righteous, who have many good works laid
up with You, shall receive reward for their own deeds.
34 “For what is mankind, that You should take
displeasure in him; or what is a corruptible generation,
that You should be so bitter toward it?
21

1393

2 EZRA

“For in truth there is no man among them who is
born, except he who has done wickedly; and among
the trustworthy there is none who has not done wrong.
36 “For in this, O hWhY, Your righteousness and Your
goodness shall be declared, if You are kind to those
who do not have the trust of good works.”
37 Then He answered me, and said, “Some matters
you have spoken rightly, and according to your words
it shall be.
38 “For indeed I shall not think upon the works of those
who have sinned before death, before judgment,
before destruction;
39 but I shall rejoice over the works of the righteous,
and I shall also remember their sojournings, and the
deliverance, and the reward, that they shall have.
40 “As I have spoken now, so it shall come to pass.
41 “For as the farmer sows much seed on the ground,
and plants many trees, and yet that which is well sown
in its season does not come up, neither does all that is
planted take root; even so it is as those who are sown
in the world; they shall not all be saved.”
42 I answered then and said, “If I have found favour,
let me speak.
43 “As the farmer’s seed perishes, if it does not come
up, and does not receive Your rain in due season; or if
there is too much rain, and ruins it;
44 even so, mankind also perishes, who is formed with
Your hands, and is called Your own likeness, because
he is made like You, for whose sake You have made
all, and likened him to the farmer’s seed.
45 “Do not be wroth with us but spare Your people,
and show favour upon Your own inheritance; for You
are kind to Your creation.”
46 Then He answered me, and said, “That which is
present is for the present, and that which is to come for
what is to come.
47 “For you come far short that you should be able to
love My creation more than I; but I have often drawn
near to you, and unto it, but never to the unrighteous.
35

1394

2 ESDRAS

“In this also you are praiseworthy before the Most
High;
49 in that you have humbled yourself, as is proper, and
have not judged yourself worthy to be much esteemed
among the righteous.
50 “For many great hardships shall come upon those
who dwell in the world in the latter days, because they
have walked in great pride.
51 “But understand for yourself, and seek out the
esteem of those who are like you.
52 “For to you paradise is opened, the tree of life is
planted, the time to come is prepared, abundance is
made ready, a city is built, and rest is given, even
perfect goodness and wisdom.
53 “The root of evil is sealed up from you, sickness and
the moth is hidden from you, and corruption has fled
into She’ol to be forgotten;
54 sorrows have passed, and in the end the treasure
of immortality is shown.
55 “And therefore ask no more questions concerning
the multitude of those who perish;
56 for when they had received freedom, they despised
the Most High, scorned His Law, and forsook His
Ways.
57 “And they have trodden down His righteous ones,
58 and said in their heart, ‘There is no Elohim,’ and
even knowing that they shall die.
59 “For as that which is spoken of shall receive you,
so thirst and anguish are prepared for them; for it was
not His desire that men should come to naught;
60 but those who are created have defiled the Name
of He who made them, and were thankless to He who
prepared life for them.
61 “And therefore My judgment is now at hand.
62 “I have not shown these matters to all men, but to
you, and a few like you.” Then I answered and said,
63 “See, O hWhY, now You have shown me the
multitude of the wonders, which You shall begin to do
48

1395

2 EZRA

in the last times; but You have not shown me at what
time.”

9 Then He answered me, and said, “Measure the time
diligently in itself; and when you see some of the signs
past, which I have told you before,
2 then you shall understand, that it is the very same
time, wherein the Most High shall begin to avenge the
world which He made.
3 “Therefore when there are seen earthquakes and
the people of the world in uproar;
4 then you shall understand well, that the Most High
spoke of those matters from the days that were before
you, even from the beginning.
5 “For as all that is made in the world has a beginning
and an end, and the end is manifest;
6 so also the times of the Most High have clear
beginnings in wonder and works of power, and
endings in signs and wonders.
7 “And everyone that shall be saved, and shall be
able to escape by his works, and by belief, by which
you have believed,
8 shall survive the dangers spoken of, and shall see
My deliverance in My land, and within My borders; for
I have qadosh them for Myself from the beginning.
9 “Then those who have abused My Ways shall be in
a wretched state; and those who have thrown them
away in spite shall dwell in torture.
10 “For such have received benefits in their life, but
have not known Me;
11 and those who have loathed My Law, while they still
had freedom, and when a place for repentance was
still open to them, did not understand, but despised it;
12 the same must acknowledge it in anguish after
death.
13 “And therefore do not question how the wicked
shall be punished, and when; but inquire how the
righteous shall be delivered, to whom the world
belongs, and for whom the world is created.”
14 Then I answered and said,
1396

2 ESDRAS

“I have said before, and now speak, and shall also
speak it after, that there are many more of those who
perish, than of those who shall be delivered;
16 as a wave is greater than a drop!”
17 And He answered me, saying, “As the field is, so is
the seed also; as are the flowers, such are the colours
also; as the workman is, such is the work also; and as
the farmer is himself, so is his harvest also; for it was
the time for the world.
18 “And now when I prepared the world, which was not
yet made, even for those to dwell within who now live,
no man spoke against Me.
19 “For then everyone obeyed; but now the way of
those who are created in this world that is made are a
corrupted seed forever, and rid themselves of the Law
which is unsearchable.
20 “So I considered the world, and see, there was
danger because of the schemes that were brought into
it.
21 “And I saw, and spared it greatly, and have kept for
Myself a grape of the cluster, and a plant of a great
people.
22 “Let the multitude perish then, who were brought
forth in ruin; and let My grape be kept, and My plant;
for with great labour I have made it perfect.
23 “Nevertheless, if you shall wait yet seven more
days, and you do not fast in them,
24 but go into a field of flowers, where no house is
built, and eat only the flowers of the field; taste no
meat, drink no wine, but eat flowers only.
25 “And pray to the Most High continually, then I shall
come and speak with you.”
26 So I went my way into the field which is called
Arpaḏ, as He commanded me; and I sat there among
the flowers, and ate of the plants of the field, and the
food they gave satisfied me.
27 After seven days I sat on the grass, and my heart
was tortured within me, as before;
15

1397

2 EZRA

and I opened my mouth, and began to speak before
the Most High, and said,
29 “O hWhY, You who show Yourself to us, You were
shown to our fathers in the wilderness, in a place
where no man treads, in a barren place, when they
came out of Mitsrayim.
30 “And You spoke saying, ‘Hear Me, O Yisra’ĕl; and
guard My Words, you seed of Ya’aqoḇ.
31 ‘For look, I sow My Torah in you, and it shall bear
fruit in you, and you shall be esteemed in it forever.’
32 “But our fathers, who received the Torah, did not
guard it, and did not observe Your Laws; and though
the fruit of Your Torah did not perish, nor could it, for it
was Yours;
33 yet those who received it perished, because they
did not guard that which was sown in them.
34 “And see, it is the manner, when the ground has
received seed, or the sea a ship, or any vessel food or
drink, that, that in which it was sown or thrown into is
perished,
35 that which was sown, or thrown in, or received, also
perishes, and does not remain with us; but with us it
has not come to be.
36 “For we who have received the Law perish by sin,
and our heart also which received it,
37 however the Law does not perish, but remains
enforced.”
38 And when I spoke these matters in my heart, I
looked back with my eyes, and on the right side I saw
a woman, and see, she mourned and wept with a loud
voice, and was very grieved in heart, and her garments
were torn, and she had ashes upon her head.
39 Then I dismissed my thoughts that I was in, and I
turned to her,
40 and said to her, “Why do you weep? Why are you
so grieved in your heart?”
41 And she said to me, “Master, leave me alone, that
I may bewail myself, and add to my sorrow, for I am
very troubled in my heart, and brought very low.”
28

1398

2 ESDRAS

And I said to her, “Tell me, what troubles you?”
43 She said to me, “I your servant have been barren,
and had no child, though I had a husband thirty years,
44 and those thirty years I did naught day and night,
and every hour, but make my prayer to the Most High.
45 “After thirty years Elohim heard me, your female
servant, looked upon my misery, considered my
trouble, and gave me a son; and I was very pleased
with him, as was my husband also, and all my
neighbours; and we gave great esteem to the
Almighty,
46 and I provided for him with great struggles.
47 “So when he grew up, and came to the time that he
should have a wife, I made a feast.
42

10 “And it so came to be, that when my son had
entered into his wedding room, he fell down, and died.
2 “Then we all put out the lamps, and all my
neighbours rose up to comfort me; so I remained quiet
to the evening of the second day.
3 “And it came to be, when they had all finished
comforting me, so that I might be quiet; then I rose up
by night and fled, and came here to this field, as you
see.
4 “And now I plan not to return to the city, but to stay
here, and to neither eat nor drink, but to continually
mourn and fast until I die.”
5 Then I left the thoughts in which I was, and spoke
to her in wrath, saying,
6 “You foolish woman above any other, do you not
see our mourning, and what comes upon us?
7 “For Tsiyon, our mother, is full of all grief, and
humbled greatly, mourning bitterly.
8 “And now, seeing we all mourn and are sad, for we
are all in grief, and you are grieved for one son?
9 “For ask the earth, and it shall tell you, that it is the
one which ought to mourn for the fall of so many that
grow upon it.
10 “For out of it came all in the beginning, and out of it
shall all others come, and see, almost all of them walk
1399

2 EZRA

to destruction, and a multitude of them shall be
completely uprooted.
11 “Who then should make more mourning than it,
which has lost so great a multitude; and not you, who
are grieved for but one?
12 “But if you say to me, ‘My lamentation is not like that
of the earth, because I have lost the fruit of my womb,
which I brought forth with pains, and bore with sorrows,
13 but the earth not so; for the multitude present in it
have gone as they came, according to the way of the
earth.’
14 “Then I say to you, as you have brought forth with
labour; even so the earth has also given its fruit,
namely man, ever since the beginning to He who made
it.
15 “Now therefore keep your sorrow to yourself, and
bear that which has befallen you with good courage.
16 “For if you acknowledge the judgment of Elohim to
be righteous, you shall both receive your son in time,
and shall be praised among women.
17 “Go your way then into the city to your husband.”
18 And she said to me, “That I shall not do. I shall not
go into the city, but I shall die here.”
19 So I proceeded to speak further to her, and said,
20 “Do not do so, but let me give counsel; for how
many are the adversities of Tsiyon? Be comforted in
regard to the sorrow of Yerushalayim.
21 “For you see that our Miqdash is laid waste, our
altar broken down, our Hĕyḵal destroyed;
22 our harp is laid low, our song is put to silence, our
rejoicing is at an end, the light of our lampstand is put
out, the ark of our Covenant is plundered, our qodesh
objects are defiled, and our name that we are called by
is almost profaned; our children are put to shame, our
kohenim are burned, our Lĕwites have gone into
captivity, our maidens are defiled, and our wives
ravished; our righteous men carried away, our little
ones destroyed, our young men are brought into
bondage, and our strong men have become weak;
1400

2 ESDRAS

and greatest of all, the seal of Tsiyon has now lost
its esteem; for it is delivered into the hands of those
who hate us!
24 “And therefore shake off your great sadness, and
put away the great number of sorrows, that the
Almighty may be kind to you again, and the Most High
shall give you rest and ease from your labour.”
25 And it came to be while I was talking with her, see,
her face suddenly shone exceedingly, and her face lit
up, so that I was afraid of her, and wondered what it
might be.
26 And see, suddenly she made a very great fearful
cry, so that the earth shook at the noise of the woman.
27 And I looked, and see, the woman appeared to me
no more, but there was a city built, and a large place
revealed itself from the foundations; then I was afraid,
and cried with a loud voice, and said,
28 “Where is Uri’ĕl the messenger, who came to me in
the beginning? For he has caused me to fall into many
trances, for my end is turned into corruption, and my
prayer to rebuke.”
29 And as I was speaking these words, see, he came
to me, and looked upon me.
30 And see, I lay as one dead, and my understanding
was removed; and he took me by the right hand, and
comforted me, and stood me on my feet, and said to
me,
31 “What is the matter with you? And why are you so
worried? And why is your understanding and the
thoughts of your heart troubled?
32 And I said, “Because you have forsaken me, and
yet I did according to your words, and I went into the
field, and look, I have seen, and still see that which I
am unable to express!”
33 And he said to me, “Stand up like a man, and I shall
advise you.”
34 Then I said, “Speak on, my master; only do not
forsake me, lest I die lacking my expectancy.
23

1401

2 EZRA

“For I have seen what I did not know, and heard
what I do not know.
36 “Or are my senses deceived, or is my being in a
dream?
37 “Now therefore I plead that you reveal to your
servant about this vision.”
38 Then he answered me, and said, “Listen to me, and
I shall inform you, and tell you why you are afraid; for
the Most High shall reveal many secrets to you.
39 “He has seen that your way is righteous; in that you
grieve continually for your people, and make great
lamentation for Tsiyon.
40 “This therefore is the meaning of the vision which
you recently saw:
41 “You saw a woman mourning, and you began to
comfort her;
42 but now you see the likeness of the woman no
more, but a built city appeared to you.
43 “And whereas she told you of the death of her son,
this is the interpretation:
44 “This woman, whom you saw is Tsiyon; and when
she spoke to you, even she whom you see as a built
city,
45 for when she said to you that she has been barren
thirty years; those are the thirty years in which there
was no offering made in her.
46 “But after thirty years Shelomoh built the city and
offered offerings, and then bore the barren a son.
47 “And when she told you that she nourished him with
labour; that was the dwelling in Yerushalayim.
48 “But when she said to you, ‘My son coming into his
marriage room had a fall, and died.’ This was the
destruction that came upon Yerushalayim.
49 “And, see, you saw her likeness, and because she
mourned for her son, you began to comfort her; and
these matters which have taken place are to be
opened unto you.
50 “For now the Most High sees that you are sincerely
grieved, and suffer in your whole heart for her, so He
35

1402

2 ESDRAS

has showed you the brightness of her esteem, and the
comeliness of her loveliness.
51 “And therefore I asked that you remain in the field
where no house was built;
52 for I knew that the Most High would show this to
you.
53 “Therefore I commanded you to go into the field,
where no foundation of any building was,
54 for no building of man is able to stand in the place
where the Most High begins to show His city.
55 “And therefore do not fear, nor let your heart be
afraid, but go your way in, and see the loveliness and
greatness of the building, as much as your eyes be
able to see;
56 and then you shall hear as much as your ears may
comprehend.
57 “For you are baruḵ above many others, and are
called by the Most High; for so few are.
58 “But tomorrow at night you shall remain here;
59 and the Most High shall show you visions of what
is above, which the Most High shall do for those who
dwell on the earth in the last days.” So I slept that night
and the next, as he commanded me.

11 Then I saw a dream, and see, an eagle came up
from the sea, which had twelve feathered wings and
three heads.
2 And I looked, and see, it spread its wings over all
the earth, and all the winds of the air blew on it, and
were gathered together.
3 And I looked, and out of its wings grew other
opposing wings; and they became little wings but
smaller.
4 And its heads were at rest - the head in the midst
was greater than the others, yet it rested with the
others.
5 And I looked, and see, the eagle flew with its wings,
and reigned on earth, and over those who dwelt in it.

1403

2 EZRA

And I saw that all under the shamayim were subject
to it, and no man spoke against it, no, not one creature
on earth.
7 And I looked, and see, the eagle rose up on its
talons, and spoke to its wings, saying,
8 “Do not watch all at once; every one sleep in its own
place, and watch in turn;
9 but let the heads be reserved for the last.”
10 And I looked, and see, the voice did not come out
of its heads, but from the midst of its body.
11 And I numbered its opposing wings, and, see, there
were eight of them.
12 And I looked, and see, on the right side there arose
one wing, and reigned over all the earth;
13 and so it was, that when it reigned, its end came,
and its place appeared no more; so the next following
stood up and reigned, and reigned a long time.
14 And it came to be, that when it reigned, its end also
came, as the first, so that it appeared no more.
15 Then a voice came unto it, and said,
16 “Listen, you who have ruled over the earth so long;
I say this to you, before the time you are no longer
seen:
17 “None after you shall attain to your time, neither to
the half of it.”
18 Then the third arose, and reigned as the other
before, and also appeared no more.
19 So it came to be with all the remaining, one after
another, so that each one reigned, and then appeared
no more.
20 Then I looked, and see, in the course of time the
wings that followed stood up on the right side, that they
might also reign; and some of them reigned, but in a
little while they appeared no more;
21 for some of them rose up, but did not reign.
22 After this I looked, and see, the twelve wings
appeared no more, nor the two little wings;
23 and there was no more on the eagle’s body, but
three heads that rested, and six little wings.
6

1404

2 ESDRAS

Then I also saw that two little wings separated
themselves from the six, and remained under the head
that was on the right side; for the four remained in their
place.
25 And I looked, and see, the wings that were under
the wing thought to appoint themselves and to reign.
26 And I looked, and see, there was one appointed,
but soon it appeared no more.
27 And the second went away sooner than the first.
28 And I looked, and see, the two that remained also
thought within themselves to reign;
29 and when they thought so, see, one of the heads
that was at rest awoke - that which was in the midst;
for it was greater than the two other heads.
30 And then I saw that the other two heads were joined
with it,
31 and see, the head was turned with those who were
with it, and ate up the two wings under the wing that
would have reigned.
32 But this head put the whole earth in fear, and
reigned over all those who dwelt on the earth with great
oppression; and it governed over the world more than
all the wings that had been.
33 And after this I looked, and see, the head that was
in the midst suddenly appeared no more, as the wings.
34 But the two heads remained, which in like manner
also ruled over the earth, and over those who dwelt in
it.
35 And I looked, and see, the head on the right side
devoured that which was on the left side.
36 Then I heard a voice, which said to me, “Look in
front of you, and consider that which you see.”
37 And I looked, and saw what was like a roaring lion
chased out of the forest; and I saw that it sent out the
voice of a man to the eagle, and said,
38 “Listen, I shall speak with you, and the Most High
says to you:
24

1405

2 EZRA

‘Are you not that which remains of the four beasts,
whom I made to reign in My world, that the end of their
times might come through them?
40 ‘And the fourth came, and overcame all the beasts
that were past, and had power over the world with
great fear, and over the whole circle of the earth with
much evil oppression; and it dwelt upon the earth for a
long time with deceit.
41 ‘For you have judged the earth, but not with truth.
42 ‘For you have afflicted the meek, you have hurt the
peaceable, you have loved the false, and destroyed
the dwellings of those who brought forth fruit, and have
thrown down the walls of those who did you no harm.
43 ‘Therefore your wrongdoing has come up before
the Most High, and your pride to the Almighty.
44 ‘The Most High has also looked upon the proud
times, and see, they have ended, and its abominations
are complete.
45 ‘And therefore you eagle, appear no more, nor your
horrible wings, nor your evil wings nor your wicked
heads, nor your evil claws, nor your whole worthless
body;
46 ‘That all the earth may be refreshed, and may
return, being delivered from your violence, and that it
may have expectancy for the judgment and kindness
from He who made it.’ ”
39

12 And it came to be, while the lion spoke these
words to the eagle, I looked,
2 and see, the head that remained and the four wings
appeared no more, and the two went forward and
appointed themselves to reign, and their reign was
short, but full of unrest.
3 And I looked, and see, they appeared no more, and
the whole body of the eagle was burned so that the
earth was in great fear; then I woke from great fear out
of the troubled trance of my mind, and said to my spirit,
4 “See, you have done this to me, because you
search out the ways of the Most High.
1406

2 ESDRAS

“Yet see, I am weary in my mind, and very weak in
my spirit; and there is little strength in me, for the great
fear with which I was afflicted this night.
6 “Therefore I now plead to the Most High, that He
shall comfort me to the end.”
7 And I said, “O hWhY who reigns, if I have found
favour before Your eyes, and if I am made right with
You before many others, and if my prayer indeed
comes up before Your face;
8 encourage me then, and show me, Your servant,
the interpretation and clear meaning of this fearful
vision, that You may fully comfort my being.
9 “For You have judged me worthy to show me the
last days.”
10 And He said to me, “This is the interpretation of the
vision:
11 “The eagle, which you saw come up from the sea,
is the reign which was seen in the vision of your brother
Dani’ĕl.
12 “But it was not explained to him, therefore I now
declare it to you.
13 “See, the days shall come, that a reign shall rise up
on earth, and it shall be feared above all the reigns that
were before it.
14 “And twelve sovereigns shall reign in it, one after
another;
15 of which the second shall begin to reign, and shall
have more time than any of the twelve.
16 “This is what the twelve wings signify, which you
saw.
17 “As for the voice which you heard speak, and that
you saw to not go out from the heads, but from the
midst of its body, this is the interpretation:
18 “At the time of that reign great struggles shall arise,
and it shall stand in danger of failing; nevertheless it
shall not fall then, but shall be restored again to its
beginning.
19 “And as you saw the eight small wings underneath
clinging to its wings, this is the interpretation:
5

1407

2 EZRA

“Eight sovereigns shall arise within it, whose times
shall be short, and their years swift.
21 “And two of them shall perish, the middle of its time
approaching; four shall be kept until their end begins
to approach; but two shall be kept until the end.
22 “And as you saw three heads resting, this is the
interpretation:
23 “In the last days the Most High shall raise up three
reigns, and in this shall renew many matters, and they
shall have the reign of the earth,
24 and of those who dwell in it, with much oppression,
above all those who were before them; therefore they
are called the heads of the eagle.
25 “For these are they who shall accomplish its
wickedness, and who shall complete its latter end.
26 “And when you saw that the great head appeared
no more, it signifies that one of them shall die on his
bed, but with pain.
27 “As for the two that remain, they shall be slain with
the sword.
28 “For the sword of the one shall devour the other;
but in the end it shall fall through the sword itself.
29 “And as you saw two wings under the wings
passing over the head that is on the right side;
30 this signifies that these are they, whom the Most
High has kept to the end; this is the short reign full of
trouble, as you saw.
31 “And the lion, whom you saw rising up out of the
forest roaring, and speaking to the eagle, and rebuking
it for its unrighteousness with all the words which you
have heard;
32 “This is ha’Mashiaḥ, whom the Most High has kept
for them and for their wickedness unto the end; He
shall reprove them, and shall reproach them for their
cruelty.
33 “For He shall stand them before Him alive in
judgment, and shall rebuke them, and reprove them.
34 “For He shall deliver the rest of My people with
kindness - those who have been scattered from My
20

1408

2 ESDRAS

borders, and He shall make them joyful until the
coming of the day of judgment, of which I have spoken
to you from the beginning.
35 “This is the dream that you saw, and these are the
interpretations.
36 “Only you have been approved to know this secret
of the Most High,
37 therefore write all these that you have seen in a
book, and hide them;
38 and teach them to the wise of the people, whose
hearts you know may understand and guard these
secrets.
39 “But wait here yourself yet seven days more, that it
may be shown you whatever pleases the Most High to
declare to you.” And with that he went his way.
40 And it came to be, when all the people saw that the
seven days had passed, and I had not come again into
the city, they all gathered together, from the least to
the greatest, and came to me, and said,
41 “In what have we offended you, and what evil have
we done against you, that you leave us, and sit here in
this place?
42 “Of all the neḇi’im, only you are left, as a cluster of
the vineyard and as a candle in a dark place, and as a
haven or ship preserved from the storm.
43 “Are not the evils which have come upon us
enough?
44 “If you forsake us, how much better it would have
been for us, if we had also been burned in the midst of
Tsiyon!
45 “For we are no better than those who died there;
and they wept with a loud voice.” Then I answered
them, and said,
46 “Take courage, O Yisra’ĕl; and do not be grieved,
you house of Ya’aqoḇ;
47 for the Most High has remembered you, and the
Almighty has not forgotten you in your trial.
48 “As for me, I have not forsaken you, neither have I
departed from you; but have come to this place to pray
1409

2 EZRA

for the desolation of Tsiyon, and that I might seek
kindness for the humiliation of your Miqdash.
49 “And now, everyone make your way home, and
after these days I shall come to you.”
50 So the people made their way into the city, as I
commanded them;
51 But I remained in the field seven days, as the
messenger commanded me; and ate only the flowers
of the field in those days, and my food was from the
plants.

13 And it came to be after seven days, I dreamed a
dream by night;
2 and see, a wind rose from the sea, that stirred up
all its waves.
3 And I looked, and see, the wind formed the likeness
of a Man from the heart of the sea, and the Man flew
with the clouds of the shamayim; and when He turned
his face to look, all that was seen under Him trembled.
4 And whenever the voice went out of His mouth, all
those who heard His voice burned, as the earth falls
away when it feels the fire.
5 And after this I looked, and see, a crowd of men
without number was gathered together, from the four
winds of the shamayim, to overcome the Man who
came out of the sea.
6 But I looked, and see, He had carved Himself a
great mountain, and rose up on it.
7 And I tried to see the region or place from which the
mountain was carved, and I could not.
8 And after this I looked, and see, all those who were
gathered together to overcome Him were very afraid,
and yet were bold to fight.
9 And look, as He saw the violence of the crowd that
came, He neither lifted up His hand, nor held a sword,
nor any weapon of battle;
10 but I only saw that He sent what looked like a blast
of fire out of His mouth, and a flaming breath out of His
lips, and He threw out a storm of sparks out of His
tongue.
1410

2 ESDRAS

And they were all mingled together; the blast of fire,
the flaming breath, and the great storm; which fell with
violence on the crowd that was prepared to fight, and
burned up every one of them, so that suddenly none
was seen of the innumerable crowd, but only dust and
a smell of smoke. When I saw this I was afraid.
12 Afterward I saw the same Man come down from the
mountain, and called to Himself another peaceful
crowd.
13 And many people came to Him, of whom some
were glad, some were sorrowful, and some of them
were bound, and some brought others with offerings;
then I was sick through great fear, and I woke, and
said,
14 “You have shown Your servant these wonders from
the beginning, and have counted me worthy that You
should receive my prayer;
15 now show me the interpretation of this dream also.
16 “For as I consider in my understanding, woe to
those who are left in those days and much more woe
to those who are not left behind!
17 “For those who are not left shall be grieved.
18 “Now I understand that which is laid up in the latter
days, which shall come upon them, and to those who
are left behind.
19 “Therefore they have come into great danger and
much distress, as these dreams declare.
20 “Yet it is better for he who is in danger to come to
these, than to pass out of the world as a cloud, and not
see that which shall come to be in the last days.” And
He answered me, and said,
21 “I shall show you the interpretation of the vision,
and I shall open to you that which you have asked.
22 “When you spoke of those who are left behind, this
is the interpretation:
23 “He who shall endure the danger in that time guards
himself; those who have fallen into danger are those
who have works, and belief toward the Almighty.
11

1411

2 EZRA

“Know this therefore, that those who are left behind
are more baruḵ than those who are dead.
25 “This is the meaning of the vision: When you saw a
Man coming up from the midst of the sea;
26 “He is the One whom Elohim the Most High has
kept for a long time, whom by Himself shall deliver His
creation; and He shall lead those who are left behind.
27 “And when you saw, that a blast of wind and fire
and storm came out of His mouth;
28 and that He held neither sword, nor any weapon of
battle, but that His rushing in destroyed the whole
crowd that came to overcome Him; this is the
interpretation:
29 “See, the days are coming, when the Most High
shall begin to deliver those who are on the earth.
30 “And those who dwell on the earth shall be
astonished at His coming.
31 “And one shall begin to fight against another, one
city against another, one place against another, one
people against another, and one reign against another.
32 “And the time shall be when these come to pass,
and the signs take place which I showed you before,
and then My Bĕn shall be declared, whom you saw as
a Man ascending.
33 “And when all the people hear His voice, every man
in their own land shall leave the battle they have
against one another,
34 and an innumerable crowd shall gather together, as
you saw them, coming with desire to overcome Him in
battle.
35 “But He shall stand on the top of Mount Tsiyon,
36 and Tsiyon shall come, and shall be shown to all
men, being prepared and built, as you saw the
mountain carved without hands.
37 “And He, My Bĕn shall rebuke the wicked deeds of
those nations, who have fallen into the storm for their
wicked life;
38 “And shall lay their evil thoughts before them, and
the torture with which they shall begin to be tortured,
24

1412

2 ESDRAS

which are like flames; and He shall destroy those
without works by the Law which is comparable to Me.
39 “And when you saw that He gathered another
peaceful multitude to Himself;
40 those are the ten tribes, which were carried away
captive out of their own land in the time of Hoshĕa the
sovereign, whom Shalmaneser the sovereign of
Ashshur led away captive, and he carried them over
the waters, and so they came to another land.
41 “But they took this counsel among themselves, that
they would leave the multitude of the gentiles, and go
out to a distant land, where mankind had not dwelt,
42 that there they might guard their Laws, which they
had not kept in their own land.
43 “And they entered into Perath by the narrow places
of the River,
44 for at that time the Most High showed signs for
them, and held the flood, till they had passed over.
45 “For there was a great way to go through that land,
of a year and a half; and that region is called
Ḥarosheth.
46 “Then they dwelt there until the last days; and when
they begin to come,
47 the Most High shall hold the springs of the River
again, that they may go through; therefore you saw the
multitude at peace.
48 “But those who are left behind of your people are
those who are found within My borders.
49 “Now when He destroys the multitude of the nations
that are gathered together, He shall defend His people
that remain.
50 “And then He shall show them great wonders.”
51 Then I said, “O hWhY who reigns, show me this:
Why have I seen the Man coming up from the midst of
the sea?”
52 And He said to me, “As you could neither seek out
nor know that which is in the depths of the sea; even
so no man on earth shall see My Bĕn, or those who
are with Him, but in His time of day.
1413

2 EZRA

“This is the interpretation of the dream which you
saw, and why you alone are enlightened,
54 for you have forsaken your own way, and applied
your diligence to My Law, and sought it.
55 “You have ordered your life in wisdom, and have
called understanding your mother.
56 “And therefore I have showed you the treasures of
the Most High; after another three days I shall speak
further to you, and declare to you mighty and wondrous
matters.”
57 Then I went out into the field, giving great praise
and thanks to the Most High because of His wonders
which He does in due time;
58 And because he governs the times, and these fall
in their seasons. And I sat there three days.
53

14 And it came to be on the third day, I sat under a
terebinth, and see, a voice came out of a bush
opposite me, and said, “Ezra, Ezra.”
2 And I said, “Here I am, Aḏonai.” And I stood up on
my feet.
3 Then He said to me, “I clearly revealed Myself to
Mosheh in the bush, and talked with him, when My
people were slaves in Mitsrayim;
4 and I sent him and led My people out of Mitsrayim,
and brought him up to the mount of where I held him
with Me many days,
5 and told him great wonders, and showed him the
secrets of the times, and the end; and commanded
him, saying,
6 ‘These words you shall declare, and these you shall
hide.’
7 “And now I say to you:
8 “Lay up in your heart the signs that I have shown,
and the dreams that you have seen, and the
interpretations which you have heard;
9 for you shall be taken away from all, and from now
on you shall remain with My Bĕn, and with those who
are like you, until the times are ended.
1414

2 ESDRAS

“For the world has lost its youth, and the times
begin to grow old.
11 “For the world is divided into twelve parts, and the
ten parts of it have gone already, and half of a tenth
part;
12 and there remains that which is after the half of the
tenth part.
13 “Now therefore put your house in order, and
reprove your people; comfort those who are in
distress, and now renounce that which is corrupt.
14 “Let go of your mortal thoughts, throw away the
burdens of man, put off now the weak nature,
15 and lay aside the thoughts that are most grievous
to you, and hasten to flee from these times.
16 “For even greater evils than those which you have
seen shall come to be after this.
17 “For see how much the world weakens through
age; therefore evil increases much more upon those
who dwell in it.
18 “For truth has fled far away, and falsehood is close
at hand; for the vision which you seen now hastens to
come.”
19 Then I answered, and said,
20 “See, Aḏonai, I shall go as You have commanded
me, and reprove the people who are present; but those
who are born after, who shall admonish them? Thus
the world lays in darkness, and those who dwell in it
are without light.
21 “For Your Law has been burned, therefore no one
knows that which is done by You, or the work that shall
begin.
22 “But if I have found favour before You, send the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh into me, and I shall write all that has
been done in the world since the beginning, which was
written in Your Law, that men may find Your Way, and
that those who live in the latter days may live.”
23 And He answered me, saying, “Go your way,
gather the people together, and say to them, not to
seek you for forty days.
10

1415

2 EZRA

“But see, prepare for yourself many writing tablets,
and take with you Serayah, Daḇriyah, Shelemyah,
Ĕthan, and Asi’ĕl, these five who are able to write
swiftly;
25 and come here, and I shall light a lamp of
understanding in your heart, which shall not be put out,
till that which you shall begin to write is complete.
26 “And when you are done, you shall publish some,
and some you shall show secretly to the wise;
tomorrow at this hour you shall begin to write.”
27 Then I went out as He commanded, and gathered
all the people together, and said,
28 “Hear these words, O Yisra’ĕl.
29 “At the beginning our fathers were sojourners in
Mitsrayim, from where they were delivered;
30 and received the Law of Ḥai, which they did not
guard, which you have also transgressed after them.
31 “Then the land, even the land of Tsiyon, was
divided among you by lot; but your fathers, and you
have done unrighteousness, and have not guarded the
Ways which the Most High Commanded you.
32 “And because He is a righteous Judge, in due time,
He took from you that which He had given you,
33 and now you are here, and your brothers are
among you.
34 “Therefore if you humble your own understanding,
and transform your hearts, you shall be kept alive and
after death you shall obtain kindness.
35 “For after death the judgment shall come, when we
shall live again; and then the names of the righteous
shall be revealed, and the works of the wicked shall be
declared.
36 “Therefore let no man come to me now, nor seek
me for forty days.”
37 So I took the five men, as He commanded me, and
we went to the field, and remained there.
38 And the next day, see, a voice called to me saying,
“Ezra, open your mouth and drink what I give you to
drink.”
24

1416

2 ESDRAS

Then I opened my mouth, and see, he brought me
a cup, which was full of water, but the colour of it was
like fire.
40 And I took it, and drank; and when I had drunk from
it, my heart spoke with understanding, and wisdom
grew in my breast, for the remembrance in my spirit
was strengthened;
41 and my mouth was opened, and no longer closed.
42 And the Most High gave understanding to the five
men, and they wrote the extraordinary night visions
that were related, which they did not know; and they
sat forty days, and wrote in the day, and ate their bread
at night.
43 As for me; I spoke during the day, and did not keep
silent by night.
44 In forty days they wrote two hundred and four
books.
45 And it came to be, when the forty days were
complete, that the Most High spoke, saying, “The first
that you have written publish openly, that the worthy
and unworthy may read it;
46 but guard the seventy last, that you may deliver
them only to those who are wise among the people;
47 for in them is the spring of understanding, the
fountain of wisdom, and the river of knowledge.”
48 And I did so.
39

15 “See, speak in the ears of My people the words of
neḇuah, which I shall put in your mouth,” says HWHY.
2 “And cause them to be written on paper; for they
are trustworthy and true.
3 “Do not fear the schemes against you, do not let the
unbelief of those who speak against you trouble you.
4 “For all the unbelieving shall die in their unbelief.
5 “Look,” says hWhY, “I shall bring plagues upon the
world; the sword, scarcity of food, death and
destruction.
6 “For wickedness has polluted the whole earth
exceedingly, and their evil works are complete.
7 “Therefore,” says HWHY,
1417

2 EZRA

“I shall hold My tongue no more in regard to their
wickedness, which they do evilly, neither shall I
tolerate them in that which they wickedly engage
themselves; see, the blood of the innocent and
righteous cries out to Me, and the beings of the
righteous protest continually.
9 “And therefore,” says hWhY, “I shall surely avenge
them, and receive all the innocent blood from among
them to Me.
10 “See, My people are led as a flock to the slaughter.
I shall not allow them to now dwell in the land of
Mitsrayim;
11 but I shall bring them with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm, and smite Mitsrayim with plagues,
as before, and shall destroy all its land.
12 “Mitsrayim shall mourn, and its foundation shall be
smitten with the plague and punishment that Elohim
brings upon it.
13 “Those who till the ground shall mourn, for their
seed shall fail through the blight and hail, and from a
frightening storm.
14 “Woe to the world and those who dwell in it!
15 “For the sword and their destruction draws near,
and one people shall stand up and fight against
another, with swords in their hands.
16 “For there shall be uproar among men, and they
shall invade one another with no regard for their
sovereigns nor princes, and the course of their actions
shall stand in their strength.
17 “A man shall desire to go into a city, and not be
able;
18 for because of their pride the cities shall be
troubled, the houses shall be destroyed, and men shall
be afraid.
19 “Man shall have no compassion for his neighbour,
but shall destroy their houses with the sword, and
plunder their goods, because of the lack of bread, and
of great distress.
8

1418

2 ESDRAS

“See,” says Elohim, “I shall call together all the
sovereigns of the earth to revere Me, who are from the
rising of the sun - from the south, from the east and
Leḇanon - to turn themselves one against another, and
repay what they have done to them.
21 “As they still do today to My chosen, so I shall also
do, and repay into their bosom.” Thus says HWHY
Elohim;
22 “My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and My
sword shall not cease over those who shed innocent
blood on the earth.”
23 The fire of His wrath has gone forth and consumed
the foundations of the earth, and the sinners, like straw
that is kindled.
24 “Woe to those who sin, and do not guard My
Commands!” says hWhY.
25 “I shall not spare them. Go your way, you
unbelieving children, do not defile My Miqdash!”
26 For hWhY knows all those who sin against Him,
therefore He gives them over to death and destruction.
27 For now the plagues have come upon the whole
earth and you shall remain in them; for Elohim shall not
deliver you, because you have sinned against Him.
28 Look, a horrible vision, and its appearance from the
east:
29 Where the nations of the dragons of Araḇia shall
come out with many chariots, and the multitude of
them shall be carried as the wind upon the earth, that
all those who hear them fear and tremble.
30 Also the Parasians raging in wrath shall go forth as
the wild boars of the forest, and they shall come in
great strength, and engage in battle with them, and
shall destroy a portion of the land of Ashshur.
31 And then the dragons, remembering their nature,
shall have the upper hand; and if they ally together,
turning themselves in great strength to pursue them,
32 then these shall be troubled, and silenced by their
strength, and shall flee.
20

1419

2 EZRA

And the enemy shall besiege them from the land of
Ashshur, and consume some of them, and within their
army shall be fear and dread, and strife among their
sovereigns.
34 Look! Clouds from the east and from the north to
the south, and they are very horrible to look upon, full
of wrath and storm.
35 They shall clash against one another, and they
shall bring down a great number of storms on the
earth, even their own storm; and from the sword there
shall be blood to the waist,
36 and dung of man to the camel’s hock.
37 And there shall be great fear and trembling on the
earth; and those who see the wrath shall be afraid, and
trembling shall come upon them.
38 And then great storms shall come from the south
and from the north and another part from the west,
39 and strong winds shall rise from the east, and shall
prevail; and the cloud which He raised up in wrath, and
the storm stirred up causing fear toward the east and
west wind, shall be destroyed.
40 The great and mighty clouds shall billow full of
wrath, and the storm, with which they make all the
earth afraid, and those who dwell in it; and they shall
pour out a horrible storm over every high and lofty
place:
41 fire, and hail, and flying swords, and many waters,
so that all fields and all rivers, shall overflow with the
exceedingly great amount of waters.
42 And they shall break down the cities and walls,
mountains and hills, trees of the forest and grass of the
field, and its grain.
43 And they shall move steadily onto Baḇel, and cause
her fear.
44 They shall come to her, and besiege her, pouring
out the storm and all wrath upon her; then the dust and
smoke shall go up to the shamayim, and all those who
are around her shall bewail her.
33

1420

2 ESDRAS

And those who remain under her shall do service to
those who have put her in fear.
46 And you, Asia, who shares in the expectancy of
Baḇel, and are the esteem of her person 47 woe to you, you wretch, because you have made
yourself like her, and have adorned your daughters
with whoring, that they might please and boast in your
lovers, who have always desired to commit whoring
with you.
48 You have followed she who is hated in all her works
and devices; “Therefore,” says Elohim,
49 “I shall send plagues upon you: widowhood,
poverty, scarcity of food, sword and pestilence, to
waste your dwellings with destruction and death.
50 “And the esteem of your strength shall be dried up
as a flower, the burning that is sent upon you shall rise.
51 “You shall be weakened as a poor woman with
stripes, and like one flogged with wounds, so you shall
not be received by your mighty lovers!
52 “Would I have proceeded against you so fervently,”
says hWhY.
53 “If you had not always slain My chosen, exulting
and clapping your hands, and speaking over their
dead, when you were drunk?
54 “Present your lovely face.
55 “The reward of your whoring shall be in your
bosom, therefore you shall be repaid.
56 “As you have done to My chosen,” says hWhY,
“even so shall Elohim do to you, and shall hand you
over to evil.
57 “Your children shall die of hunger, and you shall fall
by the sword. Your cities shall be broken down, and all
those in the field shall perish by the sword.
58 “Those who are in the mountains shall die of
hunger, and eat their own flesh, and drink their own
blood, from hunger of bread, and thirst of water.
59 “Grieving, you shall pass through the sea, and
receive plagues again,
45

1421

2 EZRA

and as they pass they shall rush on the treacherous
city, and shall destroy some portion of your land, and
consume part of your esteem, and shall return to
Baḇel, which was destroyed.
61 “And you shall be thrown down by them as stubble,
and they shall be as fire to you;
62 and shall consume you and your cities, your land
and your mountains and all your woods; and they shall
burn up your fruitful trees with fire.
63 “They shall carry your children away captive, and
see, what you have, they shall plunder it, and destroy
the loveliness of your face.”
60

16 Woe to you, Baḇel, and Asia! Woe to you,
Mitsrayim and Aram!
2 Gird up yourselves with sackcloth and hair; bewail
your children, and mourn, for your destruction is at
hand.
3 A sword is sent upon you, and who shall turn it
back?
4 A fire is sent among you, and who shall quench it?
5 Plagues are sent upon you, and who is he who
would drive them away?
6 Shall any man drive away a hungry lion in the
forest? Or shall anyone quench the fire in stubble,
when it has begun to burn?
7 Would one turn again the arrow that is shot from a
strong archer?
8 The Almighty Aḏon sends the plagues, and who is
he who drives them away?
9 A fire shall go forth from His wrath, and who is he
who would quench it?
10 He shall throw lightnings, and who would not fear?
He shall thunder, and who would not be afraid?
11 hWhY threatens, and who would not be utterly
beaten to dust at His presence?
12 The earth and its foundations quake, the sea rises
up with waves from the deep, and its waves are
troubled, and also the fish in it, before hWhY, and
before the esteem of His power;
1422

2 ESDRAS

for His right hand is strong that bends the bow, His
arrows that He shoots are sharp, and do not miss,
when they begin to be shot into the ends of the world.
14 See, the plagues are sent, and shall not return
again, until they come upon the earth.
15 The fire is kindled, and shall not be put out, till it
consumes the foundation of the earth.
16 As an arrow which is shot by a mighty archer does
not return, even so the plagues that are sent upon the
earth shall not return again.
17 Woe is me! Woe is me! Who shall deliver me in
those days?
18 The beginning of sorrows and great mourning; the
beginning of scarcity of food and great death; the
beginning of fighting, and the powers shall stand in
fear; the beginning of evils! What shall I do when these
evils come?
19 See, scarcity of food and plague, distress and
anguish are sent as scourges for correction;
20 but for all these they shall not turn from their
wickedness, nor ever remember the scourges.
21 See, food shall cost so little on earth, that they shall
think themselves to be well at ease, and then evil shall
grow on earth: the sword, scarcity of food and great
confusion.
22 For many of those who dwell on earth shall perish
from scarcity of food; and the others who escape the
hunger, the sword shall destroy.
23 And the dead shall be thrown out as dung, and
there shall be no one to comfort them; for the earth
shall be a waste, and the cities shall be thrown down.
24 There shall be no one left to till the earth, and to
sow it;
25 the trees shall give fruit, but who shall gather them?
26 The grapes shall ripen, and who shall tread them?
For all places shall be barren of mankind,
27 so that one shall desire to see another, and to hear
his voice.
13

1423

2 EZRA

For there shall be ten left of a city, and two of the
field, who shall hide themselves in the thick forests,
and in the caves of the rocks;
29 as in an orchard of olives there are three or four
olives left on every tree;
30 or as there are left some clusters when a vineyard
is gathered, by those who diligently seek through the
vineyard.
31 Even so there shall be three or four left by those
who search their houses with the sword in those days.
32 And the earth shall be laid waste, and its fields shall
grow old, and its roads and all its paths shall grow full
of thorns, because no one travels through there.
33 The maidens shall mourn, having no bridegrooms;
the women shall mourn, having no husbands; their
daughters shall mourn, having no helpers.
34 Their bridegrooms shall be destroyed in the
fighting, and their husbands shall perish for scarcity of
food.
35 Hear now these and understand them, you
servants of hWhY.
36 This is the Word of hWhY, receive it; do not believe
the mighty ones of whom hWhY spoke.
37 See, the plagues draw near, and do not delay.
38 As when a woman with child in the ninth month
brings forth her son, within two or three hours of her
birth, great pains encompass her womb - such pains,
when the child is coming forth that do not ease for a
moment 39 even so the plagues to come upon the earth shall
not be eased, and the world shall mourn, and sorrows
shall come upon it from every side.
40 Hear my words, O my people; prepare for battle,
and in those evils be as sojourners on the earth.
41 He who sells, let him be as he who flees; and he
who buys, as one who loses;
42 he who deals in merchandise, as he who has no
profit from it; and he who builds, as he who shall not
dwell in it;
28

1424

2 ESDRAS

he who sows, as if he shall not reap; so also he who
plants the vineyard, as he who shall not gather the
grapes;
44 those who marry, as those who shall bear no
children; and those who do not marry, as the widowers.
45 And therefore those who labour labour in vain;
46 for foreigners shall reap their fruits and plunder
their goods, overthrow their houses and take their
children captive, for they shall bring forth children into
captivity and scarcity of food.
47 “And those who obtain their merchandise by
robbery, the more they adorn their cities, their houses,
their possessions and their own person;
48 the more shall I be wroth with them for their sin.”
says hWhY.
49 As a whore envies an upright honest and virtuous
woman;
50 so righteousness hates wickedness, when she
adorns herself, and accuses her to her face, when He
comes who shall defend the one who diligently
searches out every sin on the earth.
51 And therefore do not be like her, nor her works.
52 For yet a little, and wickedness shall be taken away
from the earth, and righteousness shall reign among
you.
53 Let not the sinner say that he has not sinned; for
Elohim shall burn coals of fire upon his head, who says
before hWhY Elohim and his esteem, “I have not
sinned!”
54 See, hWhY knows all the works of man, their
schemes, their thoughts, and their hearts;
55 who spoke but the word, “Let the earth be made.”
and it was made; “Let the shamayim be made,” and it
was created.
56 By His word the stars were made, and He knows
the number of them.
57 He searches the deep, and its treasures; He has
measured the sea, and what it contains.
43

1425

2 EZRA

He has shut the sea in the midst of the waters, and
with His word He has suspended the earth upon the
waters.
59 He spreads out the shamayim like a span; He has
founded it upon the waters.
60 He has made springs of water in the desert, and
pools upon the tops of the mountains, that the floods
might pour down from the high rocks to water the earth.
61 He made man, and put his heart in the midst of the
body, and gave him breath, life, and understanding,
62 and indeed the Ruaḥ of Ĕl Shaddai; who made all
and searches out all that is hidden in the secret places
of the earth.
63 Surely He knows your plans, and the thoughts of
your hearts, even those who sin, and want to hide their
sin.
64 Therefore hWhY searches out all your works
exactly, and he shall put you all to shame.
65 And when your sins are produced, you shall be
ashamed before all, and your own sins shall be your
accusers in that Day.
66 What shall you do, or how shall you hide your sins
before Elohim and His messengers?
67 See, Elohim Himself is the Judge; revere Him!
Cease from your sins, and forget your wickednesses,
to no longer I strive in them forever; so Elohim shall
lead you out, and deliver you from all trouble.
68 For see, the burning wrath of a great multitude is
kindled over you, and they shall take some of you
away, and feed the idle, with that which is offered to
idols.
69 And those who consent to them shall be mocked
and reproached, and trampled under foot.
70 For in every place and in the neighbouring cities,
there shall be a great uprising against those who
revere hWhY.
71 They shall be like madmen, sparing none, but
continue ravaging and destroying those who revere
hWhY.
58

1426

2 ESDRAS

For they shall lay waste and take away their goods,
and throw them out of their houses.
73 Then those who are My chosen shall be known;
and they shall be tried as gold in the fire.
74 “Hear, O you My beloved,” says hWhY, “See, the
days of trouble are at hand, but I shall deliver you from
them.
75 “Do not be afraid, neither doubt; for Elohim is your
guide,
76 and the guide of those who guard My Commands
and Orders,” says hWhY Elohim, “do not let your sins
weigh you down, and do not let your wickednesses rise
up.
77 “Woe to those who are bound up in their sins and
covered with their wickedness like a field overgrown
with bushes, and its path covered with thorns, so that
no man may travel through!
78 “It is left naked, and is thrown into the fire to be
consumed by it.”
72

1427

MAQQAḆIM 1

MAQQAḆIM 1
‫ מכבים א‬A mYBKm

1 And it came to be, after Alexandros son of Philippos,
the Makedonian, who came out of the land of Kittim,
had smitten Dareyawesh sovereign of Paras and
Maḏai, that he reigned in his place, the first over
Yawan.
2 And he fought many battles, and won many
strongholds, and slew the sovereigns of the earth.
3 And he went through to the ends of the earth, and
took spoils from many nations, so that the earth was at
rest before him; therefore he was exalted and his heart
was lifted up.
4 And he gathered a very mighty army and ruled over
countries, and nations, and sovereigns, who became
tributary to him.
5 And after these events he fell sick, and perceived
that he would die.
6 So he called his servants, who were honourable,
and had been brought up with him from his youth, and
divided his reign among them, while he was still alive.
7 So Alexandros reigned twelve years, and then he
died.
8 And his servants ruled, each one in his place.
9 And after his death they all put crowns upon
themselves, as did their sons after them many years,
and evils were multiplied in the earth.
10 And a wicked root came out from them: Antioḵos
also called Epiphanĕs, son of Antioḵos the sovereign,
who had been a hostage at Rome, and he reigned in
the hundred and thirty-seventh year of the reign of the
Yawanites.
11 In those days wicked men went out of Yisra’ĕl, who
persuaded many saying, “Let us go and make a
covenant with the gentiles that are round about us, for
1428

1 MACCABEES

since we departed from them we have had much
sorrow.”
12 So this plan was well-pleasing to them.
13 Then some of the people were so bold in this, that
they went to the sovereign, who gave them authority
to do according to the laws of the gentiles.
14 So they built a place of training at Yerushalayim
according to the customs of the gentiles;
15 and made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook
qodesh Covenant, and joined themselves to the
gentiles, and were sold to do evil.
16 Now when the reign was established before
Antioḵos, he thought to reign over Mitsrayim that he
might have the rule of two reigns.
17 Therefore he entered into Mitsrayim with a great
multitude; with chariots, and elephants, and horsemen,
and a great fleet,
18 and fought against Ptolemaeus, sovereign of
Mitsrayim. But Ptolemaeus was afraid of him, and fled,
and many were wounded and slain.
19 Therefore they took the fortified cities in the land of
Mitsrayim and he took the spoils from there.
20 And after Antioḵos had smitten Mitsrayim, he
returned again in the hundred and forty-third year, and
went up against Yisra’ĕl and Yerushalayim with a great
multitude.
21 And he entered proudly into the Miqdash, and took
away the golden altar, and the lampstand of light, and
all its utensils,
22 and the table of the showbread, and the bowls for
pouring, and the vessels, and the gold fire holders, and
the veil, and the crown, and the golden ornaments that
were before Hĕyḵal, all which he pulled off.
23 He also took the silver and the gold, and the
precious vessels. He also took the hidden treasures
which he found.
1429

MAQQAḆIM 1

And when he had taken all away, he went to his
own land, having made a great slaughter, and spoken
very proudly.
25 Therefore there was a great mourning in Yisra’ĕl, in
every place where they were,
26 so that the rulers and elders mourned, the maidens
and young men were weakened, and the pleasantness
of women was changed.
27 Every bridegroom lamented, and she that sat in the
bridal chamber was in grief.
28 The land also was moved for the inhabitants, and
all the house of Ya’aqoḇ was covered with shame.
29 And after a full two years passed, the sovereign
sent his chief tax collector to the cities of Yahuḏah,
who came to Yerushalayim with a great multitude,
30 and spoke peaceable words to them. But all was
deceit, for when they had accepted him, he fell
suddenly upon the city, and smote it greatly, and
destroyed many people of Yisra’ĕl.
31 And when he had taken the spoils of the city, he lit
it on fire, and pulled down the houses and its walls all
around.
32 But they took the women and children captive, and
took possession of the cattle.
33 Then they built the city of Dawiḏ with a great and
strong wall, and with mighty towers, and made it a
stronghold for themselves.
34 And they put a sinful nation in it - wicked men - and
strengthened themselves within.
35 They also stored it with weapons and food, and
when they had gathered together the spoils of
Yerushalayim, they laid them up there. And so they
became a great snare,
36 for it was a place to lie in wait against the Miqdash,
and an evil adversary to Yisra’ĕl.
37 Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of the
Miqdash, and defiled it,
24

1430

1 MACCABEES

so that the inhabitants of Yerushalayim fled
because of them. Therefore the city was made a
dwelling of foreigners, and became foreign to those
that were born in her; and her own children left her.
39 Her Miqdash was laid waste like a wilderness; her
Feasts were turned into mourning; her Shabbathoth
into reproach; her honour into contempt.
40 As had been her esteem, so was her dishonour
increased, and her excellency was turned into
mourning.
41 And sovereign Antioḵos wrote to his whole reign,
that all should be one people,
42 and everyone should leave his laws. So all the
gentiles agreed according to the command of the
sovereign.
43 Even many of the Yisra’ĕlites also agreed to his
belief, and slaughtered to idols, and profaned the
Shabbath.
44 For the sovereign had sent letters by messengers
to Yerushalayim and the cities of Yahuḏah that they
should follow the foreign laws of the land,
45 and forbid burnt offerings, and slaughtering, and
drink offerings, in the Hĕyḵal; and that they should
profane the Shabbathoth and Festival days,
46 and pollute the Miqdash and qodesh people,
47 put up altars, and Ashĕrim, and temples of idols,
and offer pig’s flesh, and unclean beasts.
48 That they should also leave their children
uncircumcised, and make their beings abominable
with all manner of uncleanness and abomination,
49 so that they might forget the Torah, and change all
the Laws.
50 And whoever would not do according to the
command of the sovereign, he said, “He should die.”
51 He wrote to his whole reign in the same way, and
appointed overseers over all the people, commanding
the cities of Yahuḏah to offer, city by city.
38

1431

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then many of the people were gathered to them,
that is, every one that forsook the Law; and so they
committed evils in the land,
53 and drove the Yisra’ĕlites into hiding places, even
wherever they could flee for safety.
54 Now on the fifteenth day of the month Kislĕw, in the
hundred and forty-fifth year, they put up the
abomination of desolation upon the altar, and built idol
altars throughout the cities of Yahuḏah on every side,
55 and burned incense at the doors of their houses,
and in the streets.
56 And when they had torn in pieces the Books of the
Law which they found, they burned them with fire.
57 And whoever was found with any of the Book of the
Covenant, or if any adhered to the Law, the
sovereign’s command was that they should put him to
death.
58 Thus they did by their authority to the Yisra’ĕlites
every month, to as many as were found in the cities.
59 Now on the twenty-fifth day of the month they
slaughtered on the idol altar, which was upon the altar
of Elohim,
60 at which time, according to the command they put
to death some women that had allowed their children
to be circumcised.
61 And they hanged the infants by their necks, and
ransacked their houses, and slew those that had
circumcised them.
62 However, many in Yisra’ĕl were fully resolved and
confirmed in themselves not to eat any unclean matter.
63 Therefore rather to die, that they might not be
defiled with food, and that they might not profane the
qodesh Covenant; so then they died.
64 And very great wrath came to be upon Yisra’ĕl.
52

1432

1 MACCABEES

2 In those days Mattithyahu the son of Yoḥanan, the
son of Shim’on, a kohĕn of the sons of Yoyariḇ, came
from Yerushalayim, and dwelt in Modi’im.
2 And he had five sons: Yoḥanan, called Gaddi;
3 Shim’on; called Thassi;
4 Yahuḏah, who was called Maqqaḇah;
5 Eli’ezer, called Aḇaran; and Yahonathan, who was
also called Apphus.
6 And when he saw the blasphemies that were
committed in Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim,
7 he said, “Woe is me! Why was I born to see this
misery of my people, and of the qodesh city, and to
dwell there, when it was delivered into the hand of the
enemy, and the Miqdash into the hand of foreigners?
8 “Her Hĕyḵal has become as a man without esteem.
9 “Her splendid utensils are carried away into
captivity, her infants are slain in the streets, her young
men - with the sword of the enemy.
10 “What nation has not had a part in her reign and
received of her spoils?
11 “All her adornments are taken away; from a free
woman she has become a slave!
12 “And, see, our Miqdash, even our splendour and
our esteem, is laid waste, and the gentiles have
profaned it.
13 “Why therefore shall we live any longer?”
14 Then Mattithyahu and his sons tore their garments,
and put on sackcloth, and mourned greatly.
15 In the meantime, the sovereign’s officers, who
compelled the people to revolt, came into the city of
Modi’im, to make them offer.
16 And when many of Yisra’ĕl came to them,
Mattithyahu and his sons also came together.
17 Then the sovereign’s officers answered and spoke
to Mattithyahu in this way: “You are a ruler, and an
1433

MAQQAḆIM 1

honourable and great man in this city, and
strengthened with sons and brothers.
18 “Now therefore, you come first and complete the
sovereign’s command, as all the gentiles have done,
and also the men of Yahuḏah, and those who remain
at Yerushalayim, so you and your house shall be in the
number of the sovereign’s friends, and you and your
children shall be honoured with silver and gold, and
many rewards.”
19 Then Mattithyahu answered and spoke with a loud
voice, “Though all the nations that are under the
sovereign’s reign obey him, and every one falls away
from the belief of their fathers, and gives consent to his
commands,
20 still my sons and my brothers and I will walk in the
Covenant of our fathers.
21 “Elohim forbid that we should forsake the Torah
and the Laws!
22 “We will not listen to the sovereign’s words, to go
from our belief, either to the right hand, or the left.”
23 Now when he had finished speaking these words,
one of the Yahuḏim came in the sight of all to offer on
the altar which was at Modi’im, according to the
sovereign’s command.
24 When Mattithyahu saw this matter, he burned with
ardour, and he trembled within, neither could he refrain
to show his wrath according to righteousness.
Therefore he ran, and slew him upon the altar.
25 At that time, he also killed the sovereign’s
commissioner, who compelled men to offer, and he
pulled down the altar.
26 Thus he dealt with ardour for the Law of Elohim as
Pineḥas did toward Zimri the son of Sallu.
27 And Mattithyahu cried throughout the city with a
loud voice, saying, “Whoever is ardent for the Torah,
and continues in the Covenant, let him follow me!”
1434

1 MACCABEES

So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and left
all that they had in the city.
29 Then many that sought after right-ruling and
judgment went down into the wilderness, to dwell
there,
30 both they and their children, and their wives, and
their cattle, because afflictions increased greatly upon
them.
31 Now when it was told to the sovereign’s servants,
and the army that was at Yerushalayim, in the city of
Dawiḏ, that some men who had broken the sovereign’s
command had gone down into the hiding places in the
wilderness,
32 they pursued after them in great number, and
having overtaken them, they encamped against them,
and fought against them on the Shabbath day.
33 And they said to them, “Let that which you have
done until now be enough! Come out, and do
according to the command of the sovereign, and you
shall live.”
34 But they said, “We do not come out, neither shall
we do the sovereign’s command, to profane the
Shabbath day!”
35 So then they fought them in haste.
36 However they did not answer them, neither threw a
stone at them, nor disclosed the places where they lay
hid,
37 but said, “Let us die all in our innocence. The
shamayim and earth will witness for us, that you put us
to death wrongfully.”
38 So they rose up against them in battle on the
Shabbath, and they slew them, with their wives and
children and their cattle, to the number of one
thousand people.
39 Now when Mattithyahu and his friends heard of
this, they mourned for them greatly.
28

1435

MAQQAḆIM 1

And one of them said to another, “If we all do as our
brothers have done, and do not fight for our lives and
Laws against the gentiles, they will now quickly destroy
us from the earth.”
41 At that time therefore they agreed, saying,
“Whoever shall come to fight with us on the Shabbath
day, we will fight against him; neither will we all die as
our brothers that were murdered in the hiding places.”
42 Then an army of Ḥasiḏim came to him, who were
mighty men of Yisra’ĕl, even all those who were
voluntarily dedicated to the Law.
43 Also all those that fled from persecution joined
themselves them, and were a support to them.
44 So they joined their forces, and smote sinful men in
their wrath, and wicked men in their wrath; but the rest
fled to the gentiles for support.
45 Then Mattithyahu and his friends went round about,
and pulled down the altars.
46 And whatever uncircumcised children they found
within the borders of Yisra’ĕl, those they courageously
circumcised.
47 They also pursued after the proud men, and the
work prospered in their hand.
48 So they retained the Torah from the hand of the
gentiles, and out of the hand of sovereigns, neither did
they allow the sinner to overcome.
49 Now when the time drew near that Mattithyahu
would die, he said to his sons, “Excellence and rebuke
has now gained strength, and the time of destruction,
and the wrath of displeasure.
50 “Now therefore my sons, be ardent for the Torah,
and give your lives for the Covenant of your fathers.
51 “Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did in
their time; so shall you receive great honour and an
everlasting name.
52 “Was not Aḇraham found trustworthy in temptation,
and it was reckoned to him for righteousness?
40

1436

1 MACCABEES

“Yosĕph in the time of his distress kept the
Command and was made master of Mitsrayim.
54 “Pineḥas our father in being ardent and fervent
obtained the Covenant of an everlasting kehunnah.
55 “Yahoshua for filling the Word was made a judge in
Yisra’ĕl.
56 “Kalĕḇ for bearing witness before the assembly
received the inheritance of the land.
57 “Dawiḏ for being kind possessed the throne of an
everlasting reign.
58 “Ĕliyahu for being ardent and fervent for the Torah
was taken up into the shamayim.
59 “Ḥananyah, Azaryah, and Misha’ĕl were saved out
of the fire by belief.
60 “Dani’ĕl for his innocence was delivered from the
mouth of lions.
61 “And so consider throughout all the ages, that none
that put their trust in Him shall be overcome.
62 “Do not fear then the words of a sinful man; for his
esteem shall be dung and worms.
63 “Today he may be lifted up, but tomorrow he shall
not be found, because he has returned to his dust, and
his plans have come to naught.
64 “Therefore, you my sons, be brave and show
yourselves men on behalf of the Torah; for by It you
shall obtain esteem.
65 “And see, I know that your brother Shim’on is a man
of counsel, listen to him always. He shall be a father to
you.
66 “As for Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah, he has been mighty
and strong, even from his youth. Let him be your
captain, and fight the battle of the people.
67 “Also receive all those that observe the Law, and
avenge the wrong of your people.
68 “Repay the gentiles completely, and guard the
Commands of the Torah.”
69 So he baraḵ them, and was gathered to his fathers.
53

1437

MAQQAḆIM 1

And he died in the hundred and forty-sixth year, and
his sons buried him in the tomb of his fathers at
Modi’im, and all Yisra’ĕl made a great lamentation for
him.
70

3 Then his son Yahuḏah, called Maqqaḇah, rose up
in his place.
2 And all his brothers aided him, and so did all they
that stood with his father, and they fought the battle for
Yisra’ĕl with eagerness.
3 So he gave his people great honour, and put on a
breastplate as a giant, and girded his armour about
him, and he fought, protecting the army with his sword.
4 In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion’s cub
roaring for his prey.
5 For He pursued the wicked, and sought them out,
and burned up those that oppressed his people.
6 Therefore the wicked shrunk for fear of him, and all
the workers of wickedness were troubled, because
deliverance prospered in his hand.
7 He also grieved many sovereigns, and made
Ya’aqoḇ glad with his deeds, and his remembrance is
baruḵ forever.
8 And he went through the cities of Yahuḏah,
destroying the wicked out of them, and turning away
wrath from Yisra’ĕl,
9 so that he was renowned to the utmost ends of the
earth, and he received to himself those who were
ready to perish.
10 Then Apollonios gathered the gentiles together,
and a great army out of Shomeron to fight against
Yisra’ĕl.
11 When Yahuḏah knew of this, he went out to meet
him, and so he smote him, and slew him. Many also
fell down slain, but the rest fled.

1438

1 MACCABEES

Therefore Yahuḏah took their spoils, and also the
sword of Apollonios, and he fought with it all his
lifetime.
13 Now when Seron, a prince of the army of Suria,
heard that Yahuḏah had gathered a multitude to
himself and an army of the trustworthy to go out with
him to battle;
14 he said, “I will make myself a name and reign in
honour; for I will go fight with Yahuḏah and those that
are with him, who despise the sovereign’s command.”
15 So he prepared to go up, and a mighty army of the
wicked went with him to help him, and to be avenged
on the children of Yisra’ĕl.
16 And when he came near to the ascent of Bĕyth
Ḥoron, Yahuḏah went out to meet him with a small
army,
17 who, when they saw the army coming to meet
them, said to Yahuḏah, “How shall we be able, being
so few, to fight against so great a multitude and so
strong, seeing we are ready to faint from fasting all this
day?”
18 Yahuḏah answered them, “It is no hard matter for
many to be shut up in the hands of a few; and with the
Elohim of the shamayim it is all the same - to deliver
with a great multitude, or a small company,
19 for the overcoming of battle stands not in the
multitude of an army; but strength comes from the
shamayim.
20 “They come against us in great pride and
wickedness to destroy us with our wives and children,
and to plunder us,
21 but we fight for our lives and our Laws.
22 “Therefore HWHY Himself will overthrow them
before our face. And as for you, do not be afraid of
them.”
12

1439

MAQQAḆIM 1

Now as soon as he had ended speaking, he rushed
upon them suddenly, and so Seron and his army was
overthrown before him.
24 And they pursued them from the descent of Bĕyth
Ḥoron to the plain, where about eight hundred men of
them were slain; and the remainder fled into the land
of the Pelishtites.
25 Then the fear of Yahuḏah and his brothers began,
and an exceedingly great dread, fell upon the nations
round about them,
26 so that the report of him came to the sovereign, and
all nations spoke of the battles of Yahuḏah.
27 Now when sovereign Antioḵos heard these
matters, he was full of wrath, therefore he sent and
gathered together all the armies of his reign, even a
very strong army.
28 He also opened his treasury, and gave his soldiers
wages for a year, commanding them to be ready
whenever he needed them.
29 Nevertheless, when he saw that the silver of his
treasures was spent and that the taxes in the country
were small, because of the uprising and plague, which
he had brought upon the land in taking away the Laws
which had been of old;
30 he feared that he would not be able to bear the
expenses any longer, nor to have such gifts to give so
liberally as he did before, for he had exceeded the
sovereigns that were before him.
31 Therefore, being greatly perplexed in his mind, he
determined to go to Paras, to take the taxes from the
lands, and to gather much silver.
32 So he left Lusias, a nobleman, and one of royal
blood, to oversee the affairs of the sovereign from the
River Perath to the borders of Mitsrayim,
33 and to raise his son Antioḵos, until he came again.
34 And he delivered to him half of his armies and the
elephants, and gave him charge of all matters that he
23

1440

1 MACCABEES

would have done, and also concerning those that dwelt
in Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim,
35 that is, that he should send an army against them
to destroy and uproot the strength of Yisra’ĕl, and the
remnant of Yerushalayim, and to remove their
remembrance from that place,
36 and that he should place foreigners in all their
places, and divide their land by lot.
37 So the sovereign took the half of the armies that
remained, and departed from Antioḵeia, his royal city
in the hundred and forty-seventh year; and having
passed over the River Perath, he went through the
high countries.
38 Then Lusias chose Ptolemaeus the son of
Dorumĕnĕs, Nikanor, and Gorgias, mighty men of the
sovereign’s friends,
39 and he sent forty thousand footmen with them, and
seven thousand horsemen, to go into the land of
Yahuḏah, and destroy it, as the sovereign
commanded.
40 So they went out with all their strength, and came
and encamped by Amma’us in the plains country.
41 And the merchants of the country, hearing the
report of them, took very much silver and gold, with
servants, and came to the camp to buy the children of
Yisra’ĕl as slaves. A strength from Suria and of the
land of the Pelishtites also joined themselves to them.
42 Now when Yahuḏah and his brothers saw that
hardships were multiplied, and that the armies
encamped themselves on their borders, for they knew
how the sovereign had given command to destroy the
people, and utterly annihilate them,
43 they said one to another, “Let us restore the fallen
state of our people, and let us fight for our people and
the Miqdash.”

1441

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then there was an assembly gathered together,
that they might be ready for battle, and that they might
pray, and ask for favour and compassion.
45 Now Yerushalayim lay as empty as a wilderness;
there was none of her children that went in or out. The
Miqdash was also trodden down, and foreigners
guarded the stronghold; the gentiles had their dwelling
in that place and joy was taken from Ya’aqoḇ, and the
flute with the harp had ceased.
46 Therefore the Yisra’ĕlites assembled themselves
together, and came to Mitspah, opposite
Yerushalayim; for in Mitspah was the place where they
previously prayed in Yisra’ĕl.
47 Then they fasted that day, and put on sackcloth,
and threw ashes on their heads, and tore their
garments,
48 and laid open the Book of the Torah, wherein the
gentiles had sought to paint the likeness of their
images.
49 They also brought the garments of the kohenim,
and the first-fruits, and the tithes, and they brought up
the Nazirites, who had completed their days.
50 Then they cried with a loud voice toward the
shamayim saying, “What shall we do with these, and
to where shall we carry them away?
51 “For Your Miqdash is trodden down and profaned,
and Your kohenim are in despair, and brought low.
52 “And see, the gentiles have assembled together
against us to destroy us! What they devise against us,
You know.
53 “How shall we be able to stand against them,
unless You, O Elohim, are our Help?”
54 Then they sounded with trumpets, and cried with a
loud voice.
55 And after this Yahuḏah appointed commanders
over the people, even commanders over thousands,
and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens.
44

1442

1 MACCABEES

But as for those that were building houses, or were
engaged to wives, or were planting vineyards, or were
fearful, those he commanded that they should return,
every man to his own house, according to the Torah.
57 So the camp moved, and encamped on the south
side of Amma’us.
58 And Yahuḏah said, “Arm yourselves, and be brave
men, and see that you are ready before the morning to
fight with these nations that are assembled together
against us to destroy us and our Miqdash.
59 “For it is better for us to die in battle, than to see the
destruction of our people and our Miqdash.
60 “Nevertheless, according to the desire of Elohim in
the shamayim, so let Him do.
56

4 Then Gorgias took five thousand footmen, and one
thousand of the best horsemen, and moved out of the
camp by night,
2 so that he might charge in upon the camp of the
Yahuḏim, and smite them suddenly; and the men of
the fortress were his guides.
3 Now when Yahuḏah heard of this, he relocated
himself, and the brave men with him, that he might
smite the sovereign’s army which was at Amma’us,
4 while as yet, the armies were dispersed from the
camp.
5 In the meantime Gorgias came into the camp of
Yahuḏah by night, and when he found no one there,
he sought them in the mountains, for he said, “These
men flee from us!”
6 But as soon as it was day, Yahuḏah showed
himself in the plain with three thousand men, who
however had neither armour nor swords at hand.
7 And they saw the camp of the gentiles, that it was
strong and well armed, and surrounded with
horsemen; and these were arranged for battle.
1443

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then Yahuḏah said to the men that were with him,
“Do not fear their multitude, neither be afraid of their
attack.
9 “Remember how our fathers were delivered in the
Sea of Reeds, when Pharaoh pursued them with an
army.
10 “Now therefore, let us cry unto the shamayim. It
might be that HWHY shows favour upon us, and
remembers the Covenant of our fathers, and destroy
this army before our face this day,
11 so that all the gentiles may know that there is One
who delivers and saves Yisra’ĕl.”
12 Then the foreigners lifted up their eyes, and saw
them coming over against them,
13 therefore they went out of the camp to battle; and
those that were with Yahuḏah sounded their trumpets.
14 So they joined in battle, and the gentiles, being
defeated, fled into the plain.
15 However all those in the rear were slain with the
sword, for they pursued them to Gezer, and to the
plains of Eḏom, and Ashdoḏ, and Yaḇneh, so that
around three thousand men of them were slain.
16 This done, Yahuḏah returned again with his army
from pursuing them,
17 and said to the people, “Do not be greedy for the
spoil, because there is a battle before us,
18 and Gorgias and his army are here by us in the
mountain. But stand now against our enemies, and
overcome them, and after this you may boldly take the
spoils.”
19 As Yahuḏah was still speaking these words, there
appeared a group of them looking out from the
mountain;
20 who saw that the Yahuḏim had put their army to
flight and were burning the tents, for the smoke that
was seen revealed what was done.
8

1444

1 MACCABEES

Therefore when they saw these matters, they were
very afraid, and also seeing the army of Yahuḏah in
the plain ready to fight,
22 they fled, every one into the land of foreigners.
23 Then Yahuḏah returned to plunder the tents, where
they took much gold, and silver, and blue silk, and
purple of the sea, and great riches.
24 After this they went home, and sung a song of
thanksgiving, and praised HWHY in the shamayim,
because He is good, because His kindness endures
forever.
25 Therefore Yisra’ĕl had a great deliverance that day.
26 Now all the foreigners that had escaped came and
told Lusias what had come to be,
27 who, when he heard of it, was ashamed and
discouraged, because matters that he would not have
done were done to Yisra’ĕl, nor such matters as the
sovereign commanded him had come to pass.
28 Therefore the next year following, Lusias gathered
together sixty thousand chosen footmen, and five
thousand horsemen, that he might subdue them.
29 So they came to Eḏom, and pitched their tents at
Bĕyth Tsur; and Yahuḏah met them with ten thousand
men.
30 And when he saw that mighty army, he prayed and
said, “Baruḵ are you, O Saviour of Yisra’ĕl, who
calmed the violence of the mighty by the hand of your
servant Dawiḏ, and gave the army of foreigners into
the hands of Yahonathan the son of Sha’ul, and his
armour bearer.
31 “Deliver this army into the hand of your people
Yisra’ĕl, and let them be put to shame in their strength
and horsemen.
32 “Cause them to be weakened, and make the
boldness of their strength fall away, and let them quake
at their destruction.
21

1445

MAQQAḆIM 1

“Throw them down with the sword of those that love
You, and let all those that know Your Name praise You
with thanksgiving!”
34 So they joined in battle, and there were about five
thousand men of the army of Lusias slain; so they were
slain before them.
35 Now when Lusias saw his army put to flight, and
the bravery of Yahuḏah’s soldiers, and how they were
ready either to live or die bravely, he went to Antioḵeia,
and gathered together an army of foreigners. And
having made his army greater than it was, he prepared
to come again to Yahuḏah.
36 Then Yahuḏah and his brothers said, “See, our
enemies are defeated, let us go up to cleanse and
dedicate the Miqdash.”
37 After this, all the army assembled themselves
together and went up to Mount Tsiyon.
38 And when they saw the Miqdash desolate, and the
altar profaned, and the gates burned, and shrubs
growing in the courts as in a forest, or in one of the
mountains, and also the rooms of the kohenim pulled
down,
39 they tore their garments, and made a great
lamentation, and threw ashes on their heads,
40 and fell down flat to the ground on their faces, and
blew an alarm with the trumpets, and cried toward the
shamayim.
41 Then Yahuḏah appointed some men to fight
against those that were in the fortress, until he had
cleansed the Miqdash.
42 So he chose kohenim of qodesh behaviour, who
took delight in the Torah;
43 who cleansed the Miqdash, and carried out the
defiled stones to an unclean place.
44 And when they consulted what to do with the altar
of burnt offerings, which was profaned;
33

1446

1 MACCABEES

they thought it best to pull it down, lest it should be
a reproach to them, because the gentiles had defiled
it. Therefore they pulled it down,
46 and laid up the stones in the mountain of the Hĕyḵal
in a suitable place, until there should come a naḇi to
show what should be done with them.
47 Then they took whole stones according to the
Torah, and built a new altar according to the former,
48 and built up the Miqdash, and that which was within
the Hĕyḵal, and qadosh the courts.
49 They also made new qodesh vessels, and they
brought the lampstand into the Hĕyḵal, and the altar of
burnt offerings, and of incense, and the table.
50 And they burned incense upon the altar, and they
lit the lamps that were on the lampstand, that they
might give light in the Hĕyḵal.
51 Furthermore they put the loaves on the table, and
spread out the veils, and finished all the works which
they had begun to do.
52 Now on the twenty-fifth day of the ninth month,
which is called the month Kislĕw, in the hundred and
forty-eighth year, they rose up early in the morning,
53 and offered an offering according to the Torah upon
the new altar of burnt offerings, which they had made.
54 Even, at the time and the day the gentiles had
profaned it, even in that it was dedicated with songs,
and stringed instruments, and harps, and cymbals.
55 Then all the people fell on their faces, worshipping
and praising the Elohim of the shamayim, who had
given them good success.
56 And so they guarded the dedication of the altar
eight days and offered burnt offerings with gladness,
and slaughtered the offering of deliverance and praise.
57 They also adorned the front of the Hĕyḵal with
crowns of gold, and with shields; and they renewed the
gates and the rooms, and hung doors upon them.
45

1447

MAQQAḆIM 1

Therefore there was very great joy among the
people, because the reproach of the gentiles was
removed.
59 And Yahuḏah and his brothers with the whole
assembly of Yisra’ĕl ordained that the days of the
dedication of the altar should be kept in their season
from year to year over eight days, from the twenty-fifth
day of the month Kislĕw, with joy and gladness.
60 At that time they also built up Mount Tsiyon with
high walls and strong towers round about, lest the
gentiles should come and trample it down as they had
done before.
61 And they appointed a garrison there to guard it, and
fortified Bĕyth Tsur to guard it; that the people might
have a defence against Eḏom.
58

5 Now when the nations round about heard that the
altar was built and the Miqdash renewed as before, it
displeased them very much.
2 Therefore they thought to destroy the generation of
Ya’aqoḇ that was among them, and so they began to
slay and destroy the people.
3 Then Yahuḏah fought against the children of Ĕsaw
in Eḏom at Aqrabbim, because they besieged Ga’al.
And he gave them a great overthrow, and weakened
their resolve, and took their spoil.
4 He also remembered the wrong of the children of
Be’an, who had been a snare and an offense to the
people, in that they lay in wait for them in the ways.
5 Therefore He enclosed them in the towers, and
encamped against them, and destroyed them utterly,
and burned the towers of that place with fire, and all
that were in them.
6 Afterward, he passed over to the children of
Ammon, where he found many people of great
strength, with Timotheos their captain.
1448

1 MACCABEES

So he fought many battles with them, till at length
they were defeated before him; and he smote them.
8 And when he had taken Ya’zĕr, with the towns
belonging to it, he returned to Yahuḏah.
9 Then the gentiles that were at Gil’aḏ assembled
themselves together against the Yisra’ĕlites that were
in their borders, to destroy them. But they fled to the
fortress of Dathema,
10 and sent letters to Yahuḏah and his brothers: “The
gentiles that are round about us are assembled
together against us to destroy us,
11 and they are preparing to come and take the
fortress where we have fled, Timotheos being captain
of their army.
12 “Come now therefore, and deliver us from their
hands, for many of us are slain.
13 “Even all our brothers that were in the places of Toḇ
are put to death. They have also taken their wives and
their children captive, and carried away their goods,
and they have destroyed about one thousand men
there.”
14 While these letters were still being read, see, other
messengers came from Galil with their garments torn,
who reported on this way,
15 and said, “They of Ptolemais, and of Tsor, and
Tsiḏon, and all Galil of the gentiles, are assembled
together against us to destroy us!”
16 Now when Yahuḏah and the people heard these
words, there assembled a great assembly together, to
consult what they should do for their brothers who
were in trouble, and under attack.
17 Then Yahuḏah said to Shim’on his brother,
“Choose men, and go and deliver your brothers that
are in Galil, for I and Yahonathan my brother will go
into the country of Gil’aḏ.”
7

1449

MAQQAḆIM 1

So he left Yosĕph the son of Zeḵaryah, and
Azaryah, captains of the people, with the remainder of
the army in Yahuḏah to guard it;
19 to whom he gave command, saying, “Take charge
of this people, and see that you do not fight against the
gentiles until the time that we return.”
20 Now to Shim’on were given three thousand men to
go to Galil, and to Yahuḏah, eight thousand men for
the country of Gil’aḏ.
21 Then Shim’on went to Galil, where he fought many
battles with the gentiles, so that the gentiles were
defeated by him.
22 And he pursued them to the gate of Ptolemais, and
about three thousand men of the gentiles were slain,
whose spoil he took.
23 And those that were in Galil and in Araḇoth with
their wives and their children and all that they had, he
took away with him, and brought them to Yahuḏah with
great joy.
24 Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah and his brother Yahonathan
also went over the Yardĕn, and traveled three days’
journey in the wilderness,
25 where they met with the Naḇothites who came to
them in a peaceable manner, and told them all that had
befallen their brothers in the land of Gil’aḏ,
26 and how many of them were shut up in Botsrah,
and Besor, and Almon, Kaphtor, Maqqĕḏah, and
Qarnayim - all these cities, strong and great 27 and that they were shut up in the rest of the cities
of the country of Gil’aḏ, and that the next day they had
appointed to bring their army against the forts, and to
take them, and to destroy them all in one day.
28 So Yahuḏah and his army turned suddenly by the
way of the wilderness to Botsrah; and when he had
won the city, he slew all the males with the edge of the
sword and took all their spoil, and burned the city with
fire.
18

1450

1 MACCABEES

From there he moved by night, and went till he
came to the fortress.
30 And early in the morning they looked up, and see,
there was an innumerable multitude carrying ladders
and other engines of battle, to take the fortress, for
they assaulted them.
31 Therefore when Yahuḏah saw that the battle had
begun, and that the cry of the city went up to the
shamayim, with trumpets, and a great noise,
32 he said to his army, “Fight this day for your
brothers!”
33 So he went out behind them in three companies,
who sounded their trumpets, and cried with prayer.
34 Then the army of Timotheos, knowing that it was
Maqqaḇah, fled from him. Therefore he smote them
with a great slaughter, so that about eight thousand
men of them were killed that day.
35 This done, Yahuḏah turned aside to Mitspah; and
after he had attacked it, he took and slew all the males
there, and took the spoil from there and burned it with
fire.
36 From there, he went and took Kasphor, Meḡiddo,
Besor, and the other cities of the country of Gil’aḏ.
37 After these events, Timotheos gathered another
army and encamped against Raphah beyond the wadi.
38 So Yahuḏah sent men to spy out the army, who
brought him word saying, “All the gentiles that are
round about us are assembled to them, even a very
great army.
39 “He has also hired the Araḇians to help them and
they have pitched their tents beyond the wadi, ready
to come and fight against you.” Hearing this Yahuḏah
went to meet them.
40 Then Timotheos said to the captains of his army,
“When Yahuḏah and his army come near the wadi, if
he passes over to us first, we shall not be able to
withstand him; for he will mightily overcome us.
29

1451

MAQQAḆIM 1

“But if he is afraid, and encamps beyond the river,
we shall go over to him, and overcome him.”
42 Now when Yahuḏah came near the wadi, he made
the scribes of the people remain by the wadi, to whom
he gave command saying, “Allow no man to remain in
the camp, but let all come to the battle.”
43 So he went over to them first, and all the people
after him. Then all the gentiles being defeated before
him, threw away their weapons and fled to the temple
that was at Qarnayim.
44 But they took the city and burned the temple with
all that were in it. Thus Qarnayim was subdued, neither
could they stand any longer before Yahuḏah.
45 Then Yahuḏah gathered together all the Yisra’ĕlites
that were in the country of Gil’aḏ, from the least to the
greatest, even their wives and their children and their
goods - a very great company - so that they might
come to the land of Yahuḏah.
46 Now when they came to Ephron, - this was a great
city in the way they were going; very well fortified - they
could not turn from it, either to the right hand or the left,
but had to pass through the midst of it.
47 Then those of the city shut them out, and stopped
up the gates with stones.
48 So Yahuḏah sent to them in a peaceable manner
saying, “Let us pass through your land to go to our own
country and none shall do you any harm. We will only
pass through on foot.” However, they would not open
to him.
49 Therefore Yahuḏah called a command to be made
throughout the army, that every man should pitch his
tent in the place where he was.
50 So the soldiers encamped, and attacked the city all
that day and all that night, till in the end the city was
delivered into his hands;
51 who then slew all the males with the edge of the
sword and tore down the city and took the spoil from
41

1452

1 MACCABEES

there, and passed through the city over those that were
slain.
52 After this, went they over the Yardĕn into the great
plain before Bĕyth She’an.
53 And Yahuḏah gathered together those that came
behind and encouraged the people all the way through
till they came to the land of Yahuḏah.
54 So they went up to Mount Tsiyon with joy and
gladness, where they offered burnt offerings - because
not one of them were slain - until they had returned in
peace.
55 Now during the time Yahuḏah and Yahonathan
were in the land of Gil’aḏ and Shim’on his brother in
Galil before Ptolemais,
56 Yosĕph the son of Zeḵaryah and Azaryah, captains
of the garrisons, heard of the brave acts and mighty
deeds which they had done.
57 So they said, “Let us also get ourselves a name,
and go fight against the gentiles that are round about
us.”
58 So when they had given charge to the garrison that
was with them, they went toward Yaḇneh.
59 Then Gorgias and his men came out of the city to
fight against them.
60 And so it was, that Yosĕph and Azaryah were put
to flight, and pursued to the borders of Yahuḏah, and
about two thousand men of the people of Yisra’ĕl were
slain that day.
61 So there was a great overthrow among the children
of Yisra’ĕl, because they were not obedient to
Yahuḏah and his brothers, but thought to do some
mighty deed.
62 But these men did not come from the seed of those
by whose hand deliverance was given to Yisra’ĕl.
63 However, the man Yahuḏah and his brothers were
greatly renowned in the sight of all Yisra’ĕl and of all
the gentiles wherever their name was heard of;
1453

MAQQAḆIM 1

so that the people assembled to them with joyful
cheers.
65 Afterward Yahuḏah went out with his brothers and
fought against the children of Ĕsaw in the land toward
the south, where he smote Ḥeḇron and its towns and
pulled down its fortress and burned the towers round
about.
66 From there he moved to go to the land of the
Pelishtites and passed through Shomeron.
67 At that time some kohenim, wanting to show their
courage, were slain in battle, for they went out to fight
recklessly.
68 So Yahuḏah turned to Ashdoḏ in the land of the
Pelishtites, and when he had pulled down their altars
and burned their carved images with fire and
plundered their cities, he returned to the land of
Yahuḏah.
64

6 About that time sovereign Antioḵos travelling
through the high countries heard it said that Elumais in
the country of Paras was a city greatly renowned for
riches, silver and gold;
2 and that there was a very rich temple in it in which
were coverings of gold and breastplates and shields
which Alexandros, son of Philippos the Makedonian
sovereign, who reigned first among the Yawanites,
had left there.
3 Therefore he came and sought to take the city, and
to plunder it; but he was not able, because those of the
city having had warning,
4 rose up against him in battle. So he fled and
departed from there in great distress, and returned to
Baḇel.
5 And there came one who brought him news of
Paras, that the armies, which went against the land of
Yahuḏah, were put to flight,
1454

1 MACCABEES

and that Lusias, who went out first with great
strength was driven away by the Yahuḏim; and that
they were strengthened by the armour and strength
and store of plunder, which they had taken from the
armies whom they had destroyed.
7 Also, that they had pulled down the abomination,
which he had placed upon the altar in Yerushalayim,
and that they had surrounded the Miqdash with high
walls as before, and its city Bĕyth Tsur.
8 Now when the sovereign heard these words, he
was astonished and distressed, so he laid himself
down on his bed, and fell sick for grief, because it had
not resulted as he planned.
9 And there he stayed many days, for his grief
increased further, and he thought that he would die.
10 So he called for all his friends, and said to them,
“The sleep is gone from my eyes, and my heart fails
for every concern.
11 “And I thought within myself, ‘Into what tribulation
have I come, and how great a flood of misery it is, in
which I now am!’ for I was respectable and well loved
in my power.
12 “But now I remember the evils that I did at
Yerushalayim, and that I took all the vessels of gold
and silver that were there, and sent to destroy the
inhabitants of Yahuḏah without reason.
13 “I perceive therefore, that for this reason these
troubles have come upon me, and, see, I perish
through great grief in a strange land.”
14 Then he called for Philippos, one of his friends, who
he made ruler over all his reign,
15 and gave him the crown, and his robe, and his seal,
so that he should bring up his son Antioḵos, and raise
him up for the reign.
16 So sovereign Antioḵos died there in the hundred
and forty-ninth year.
6

1455

MAQQAḆIM 1

Now when Lusias knew that the sovereign was
dead, he appointed Antioḵos his son, whom he had
brought up from youth to reign in his place, and his
name he called Eupator.
18 About this time those that were in the fortress
enclosed the Yisra’ĕlites round about the Miqdash,
and continually sought their evil, and the strengthening
of the gentiles.
19 Therefore Yahuḏah, intending to destroy them,
called all the people together to besiege them.
20 So they came together, and besieged them in the
hundred and fiftieth year, and he made mounts for shot
against them, and other engines.
21 However some of those that were besieged
escaped, to whom some wicked men of Yisra’ĕl joined
themselves.
22 And they went to the sovereign, and said, “How
long will it be till you execute judgment, and avenge
our brothers?
23 “We have been willing to serve your father, and do
as he would have us, and to obey his commands.
24 “For this reason those of our nation besiege the
fortress, and are alienated from us! And as many of us
as they could fall upon, they slew, and plundered our
inheritance.
25 “Neither have they stretched out their hand against
us alone, but also against their borders.
26 “And, see, this day they are besieging the fortress
at Yerushalayim, to take it; the Miqdash also, and they
have fortified Bĕyth Tsur.
27 “Therefore if you do not prevent them quickly, they
will do greater matters than these, neither shall you be
able to rule them.”
28 Now when the sovereign heard this, he was wroth,
and gathered together all his associates and the
captains of his army, and those that had charge of the
horses.
17

1456

1 MACCABEES

There also came to him bands of hired soldiers
from other reigns, and from islands of the sea,
30 so that the number of his army was a hundred
thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen,
and thirty-two elephants trained for battle.
31 These went through Eḏom, and encamped against
Bĕyth Tsur, which they assaulted many days, making
engines of battle. But those of Bĕyth Tsur came out,
and burned them with fire, and fought bravely.
32 After this, Yahuḏah moved from the fortress, and
encamped in Bĕyth Zeḵaryah, opposite the
sovereign’s camp.
33 Then the sovereign rising very early, marched
fiercely with his army toward Bĕyth Zeḵaryah, where
his armies prepared for battle, and sounded the
trumpets.
34 And so, that they might provoke the elephants to
fight, they showed them the blood of grapes and
mulberries.
35 And they divided the beasts among the armies, and
for every elephant they appointed one thousand men,
armed with coats of mail, and with bronze helmets on
their heads. And besides this, for every beast were
assigned five hundred of the best horsemen.
36 These were ready at every occasion. Wherever the
beast was, and wherever the beast went, they went
also, neither did they depart from it.
37 And upon the beasts there were strong wooden
towers, which covered every one of them, and were
girded tightly to them with devices. There were also,
thirty-two strong men on every one that fought upon
them, besides the Hodite that directed it.
38 As for the remainder of the horsemen, they
positioned them on this side and that side of the two
divisions of the army giving them signals what to do,
and being armed all over among the ranks.
29

1457

MAQQAḆIM 1

Now when the sun shone upon the shields of gold
and bronze, the mountains glistened, and shone like
lamps of fire.
40 So part of the sovereign’s army being spread over
the high mountains, and part on the valleys below,
marched on boldly and in formation.
41 Therefore all that heard the noise of their multitude,
and the marching of the army, and the rattling of the
armour, were moved; for the army was very great and
mighty.
42 Then Yahuḏah and his army drew near, and joined
in battle, and six hundred men of the sovereign’s army
were slain.
43 Eli’ezer, also named Savaran, perceiving that one
of the beasts armed with royal armour, was higher than
all the rest, and supposing that the sovereign was
upon him,
44 put himself in danger, so that he might deliver his
people, and obtain a lasting name for himself.
45 Therefore he ran upon him courageously through
the midst of the battle, slaying on the right hand and
on the left, so that they were divided from him on both
sides.
46 Having done so, he crept under the elephant, and
thrust it underneath, and slew it, so the elephant fell
down upon him, and he died there.
47 However the rest of the Yahuḏim, seeing the
strength of the sovereign, and the violence of his
forces, turned away from them.
48 Then
the sovereign’s army went up to
Yerushalayim to meet them, and the sovereign pitched
his tents against Yahuḏah, and against Mount Tsiyon.
49 But he made peace with those that were in Bĕyth
Tsur; for they came out of the city, because they had
no food there to endure the siege, being a year of rest
for the land.
39

1458

1 MACCABEES

So the sovereign took Bĕyth Tsur, and appointed a
garrison there to guard it.
51 As for the Miqdash, he besieged it many days, and
appointed siege engines there with weapons and
instruments to throw fire and stones, and catapults and
weapons to shoot arrows.
52 So they also made engines against their engines,
and withheld them in battle a long time.
53 Yet in the end, their containers being without food for it was the seventh year, and those in Yahuḏah that
were delivered from the gentiles had eaten up the
remains of the store.
54 So there were only a few left in the Miqdash, and
because the scarcity of food prevailed against them,
they were compelled to disperse themselves, every
man to his own place.
55 At that time Lusias heard it said, that Philippos whom Antioḵos the sovereign, while he lived - had
appointed to bring up his son Antioḵos to be sovereign;
56 had returned from Paras and Maḏai, and the
sovereign’s army that also went with him, and that he
planned to seize the control of affairs for himself.
57 Therefore he went in haste, and said to the
sovereign and the captains of the army and the
company, “We diminish daily, and our food runs short,
and the place we lay siege to is strong, and the affairs
of the reign lie upon us.
58 “Now therefore let us be friends with these men,
and make peace with them, and with all their nation;
59 and make a covenant with them, that they shall live
after their Laws, as they did before. For they are
displeased because we abolished their Laws, and
therefore, have done all these matters.”
60 So the sovereign and the princes were pleased;
therefore he sent to them to make peace, and they
accepted.
50

1459

MAQQAḆIM 1

The sovereign and the princes also made an oath
to them, so they went out of the stronghold.
62 Then the sovereign entered into Mount Tsiyon; but
when he saw the strength of the place, he broke his
oath that he had made, and gave command to pull
down the wall round about.
63 Afterward he departed in haste, and returned to
Antioḵeia, where he found Philippos to be master of
the city. So he fought against him, and took the city by
force.
61

7 In the one hundred and fiftieth year, Dĕmĕtrios the
son of Seleukus departed from Rome, and came up
with a few men to a city of the sea coast, and reigned
there.
2 And as he entered into the palace of his ancestors,
it had come to pass, that his army had taken Antioḵos
and Lusias, to bring them to him.
3 Therefore, when he knew it, he said, “Do not let me
see their faces.”
4 So his army slew them. Now when Dĕmĕtrios was
appointed to the throne of his reign,
5 there came to him all the wicked and evil men of
Yisra’ĕl, having Elyaqim, who desired to be kohĕn
ha’gadol, as their captain.
6 And they accused the people before the sovereign,
saying, “Yahuḏah and his brothers have slain all your
friends, and driven us out of our own land.
7 “Now therefore, send some man whom you trust,
and let him go and see what disorder he has made
among us, and in the sovereign’s land, and let him
punish them with all those that assist them.”
8 Then the sovereign chose Bakḵidĕs, a friend of the
sovereign, who ruled beyond the River, and was a
great man in the reign, and trustworthy to the
sovereign,
1460

1 MACCABEES

and he sent him with the wicked Elyaqim, whom he
made kohĕn ha’gadol, and commanded that he should
take vengeance on the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 So they departed, and came with a large force into
the land of Yahuḏah, where they sent messengers to
Yahuḏah and his brothers with peaceable words,
deceitfully.
11 But they gave no heed to their words, for they saw
that they had come with a large force.
12 Then a company of scribes gathered to Elyaqim
and Bakḵidĕs, to require right-ruling.
13 Now the Ḥasiḏim were the first among the children
of Yisra’ĕl that sought peace from them,
14 for they said, “One that is a kohĕn of the seed of
Aharon has come with this army, and he will do us no
wrong.”
15 So he spoke to them peaceably, and swore to
them, saying, “We will neither do evil to you nor your
friends.”
16 So they believed him; however he took from them
sixty men, and slew them in one day, to fill the words
which are written:
17 “The flesh of your qodeshim they have thrown out,
and their blood they have shed round about
Yerushalayim, with no one to bury them.”
18 Therefore the fear and dread of them fell upon all
the people, who said, “There is neither truth nor
righteousness in them; for they have broken the
covenant and oath that they made.”
19 After this, Bakḵidĕs moved from Yerushalayim, and
pitched his tents in Bĕyth Zatha, where he sent and
took many of the men that had forsaken him, and some
of the people also, and when he had slain them, he
threw them into a large pit.
20 Then he entrusted the land to Elyaqim, and left with
him a force to assist him; so Bakḵidĕs returned to the
sovereign.
9

1461

MAQQAḆIM 1

But Elyaqim contended to be kohĕn ha’gadol.
22 And all those who troubled the people assembled
to him, who, after they had taken the land of Yahuḏah
into their power, did much evil in Yisra’ĕl.
23 Now when Yahuḏah saw all the evil that Elyaqim
and his company had done among the Yisra’ĕlites,
even more than the gentiles,
24 he went out to all the coastlands of Yahuḏah round
about, and took vengeance on those that had revolted
from him, so that they no longer dared go out into the
country.
25 On the other side, when Elyaqim saw that Yahuḏah
and his army had gotten the upper hand, and knew that
he was not able to withstand their strength, he went
again to the sovereign, and said all the worst about
them that he could.
26 Then the sovereign sent Nikanor, one of his
honourable princes, a man that bore deadly hatred for
Yisra’ĕl, with a command to destroy the people.
27 So Nikanor came to Yerushalayim with a large
force, and sent to Yahuḏah and his brothers deceitfully
with friendly words, saying,
28 “Let there be no battle between me and you. I will
come with a few men, that I may see you in peace.”
29 Therefore he came to Yahuḏah, and they greeted
one another peaceably; however the enemies were
prepared to take away Yahuḏah with violence.
30 After this matter was known to Yahuḏah, to know
that he came to him with deceit, he was very afraid of
him, and would no longer see his face.
31 Also, when Nikanor saw that his plan was
discovered, went out to fight against Yahuḏah beside
Kephar Salem,
32 where about five thousand men were slain from
Nikanor’s side, and the rest fled to the city of Dawiḏ.
33 After this went Nikanor up to Mount Tsiyon, and
some of the kohenim and some of the elders of the
21

1462

1 MACCABEES

people came out of the Miqdash, to greet him
peaceably, and to show him the burnt offering that was
offered for the sovereign.
34 But he mocked them, and laughed at them, and
abused them shamefully, and spoke proudly,
35 and swore in his wrath, saying, “Unless Yahuḏah
and his army are now delivered into my hands, if I ever
come again in safety, I will burn up this House!” and
with that he went out in a great rage.
36 Then the kohenim entered in, and stood before the
altar and the Hĕyḵal weeping, and saying,
37 “You, O HWHY, chose this House to be called by
Your Name, and to be a House of prayer and petition
for Your people.
38 “Be avenged on this man and his army, and let
them fall by the sword. Remember their blasphemies,
and do not allow them to continue any longer.”
39 So Nikanor went out of Yerushalayim, and pitched
his tents in Bĕyth Ḥoron, where an army out of Suria
met him.
40 But Yahuḏah pitched in Ḥaḏashah with three
thousand men, and he prayed there saying,
41 “O HWHY, when those that were sent from the
sovereign of Ashshur blasphemed, Your messenger
went out, and smote a hundred and eighty-five
thousand of them.
42 “In the same way, destroy this army before us
today, that the rest may know that he has spoken
blasphemy against Your Miqdash, and judge him
according to his wickedness.”
43 So on the thirteenth day of the month Aḏar the
armies joined in battle, but Nikanor’s army was
defeated, and he himself was the first slain in the
battle.
44 Now when Nikanor’s army saw that he was slain,
they threw down their weapons, and fled.
1463

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then they pursued after them a day’s journey, from
Ḥaḏashah to Gezer, sounding a shout after them with
their trumpets.
46 So they came out from all of the towns of Yahuḏah
round about and closed them in, so that they, turning
back upon those that pursued them, were all slain with
the sword, and not one of them was left.
47 Afterward they took the spoils, and the plunder, and
smote off Nikanor’s head, and his right hand, which he
stretched out so proudly, and took them away, and
hanged them up toward Yerushalayim.
48 Because of this the people rejoiced greatly, and
they kept that day as a day of great gladness.
49 And they ordained to guard this day yearly, being
the thirteenth of Aḏar.
50 Thus the land of Yahuḏah was at rest a little while.
45

8 Now Yahuḏah had heard of the Romans, that they
were brave and mighty men, and such that would
kindly accept all that joined themselves to them, and
make a covenant of peace with all that came to them;
2 and that they were men of great courage. To him
was also told of their battles and notable deeds which
they had done among the Galatians, and how they had
conquered them, and brought them under tribute;
3 and what they had done in the country of Spania,
in taking the mines of silver and gold which is there;
4 and that by their strategy and patience they had
conquered all that place, though it was very far from
them; and of the sovereigns that also came against
them from the ends of the earth, till they had defeated
them, and given them a great overthrow, so that the
rest gave them tribute every year.
5 Besides this, how they had defeated Philippos and
Perseus, sovereign of the Ḥittites in battle, with others
that lifted themselves up against them and had
overcome them.
1464

1 MACCABEES

Also how Antioḵos the great sovereign of Asia, that
came against them in battle, having a hundred and
twenty elephants with horsemen and chariots, and a
very great army, was defeated by them;
7 and how they took him alive, and made a covenant
that he and those that reigned after him should pay a
great tribute and give hostages, and that which was
agreed upon.
8 And the country of Hodu, and Maḏai and Ludia and
of the best lands which they took from him and gave to
Sovereign Eumĕnĕs.
9 And how the Yawanites had determined to come
and destroy them;
10 and that they, having knowledge of this sent
against them a certain captain, and fighting with them
slew many of them, and took away captive their wives
and their children, and plundered them, and took
possession of their lands, and pulled down their
strongholds, and took them to be their servants to this
day.
11 It was also told him, how they destroyed and
brought under their rule all other reigns and islands
that at any time resisted them,
12 but they kept peace with their friends and those that
relied upon them; and that they had conquered reigns
both far and near, so that all that heard of their name
were afraid of them.
13 Also that whom they would assist to reign, those
reigned; and again, whom they determined, they
displaced. Lastly, that they were greatly exalted,
14 yet for all this, none of them wore a crown or was
clothed in purple, to be made great by it.
15 And, how they had made for themselves a senate
house, in which three hundred and twenty men sat in
council daily, consulting always for the people, so that
they might be well ordered;
6

1465

MAQQAḆIM 1

and that they committed their government to one
man every year, who ruled over all their country, and
that all were obedient to that one, and that there was
neither envy nor strife among them.
17 In consideration of these matters, Yahuḏah chose
Eupolemus the son of Yoḥanan, the son of Haqqots,
and Yason the son of Eli’ezer, and sent them to Rome,
to make a covenant of peace and ally with them,
18 and to ask them that they would take the yoke from
them; for they saw that the reign of the Yawanites
oppressed Yisra’ĕl with bondage.
19 So they went to Rome, which was a very great
journey, and came into the senate, where they spoke
and said,
20 “Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah with his brothers, and the
people of the Yahuḏim, have sent us to you, to make
peace and an alliance with you, and that we might be
counted your allies and friends.”
21 So that matter pleased the Romans well.
22 And this is the copy of the letter which the senate
wrote back again on tablets of bronze, and sent to
Yerushalayim, that they would possess a memorial of
peace and alliance for them there:
23 “Good success be to the Romans, and to the
people of the Yahuḏim, by sea and by land forever.
Also the sword and enemy be far from them.
24 “If there should come first any battle upon the
Romans or any of their allies throughout all their reign,
25 the people of the Yahuḏim shall assist them at the
appointed time with all their heart.
26 “Neither shall they give whatever to those that fight
against them, or aid them with food, weapons, silver,
or ships, as it seems good to the Romans; but they
shall guard their covenants without taking any for this.
27 “Also in the same manner, if battle should come first
upon the nation of the Yahuḏim, the Romans shall
16

1466

1 MACCABEES

assist them with all their heart, according to the time
appointed for them.
28 “Neither shall food be given to those that take part
against them, or weapons, or silver, or ships, as it
seems good to the Romans; but they shall guard their
covenants, and that, without deceit.
29 “According to these articles, the Romans make a
covenant with the people of the Yahuḏim.
30 “However, if after this, the one party or the other
shall think by rights to add or diminish whatever, they
may do so at their pleasure, and whatever they shall
add or take away shall be consented to.
31 “And regarding the evils that Dĕmĕtrios has done
to the Yahuḏim, we have written to him, saying, ‘Why
have you made your yoke heavy upon our friends and
allies the Yahuḏim?
32 ‘If therefore they complain against you any more,
we will do right by them, and fight with you by sea and
by land.’ ”

9 Furthermore, when Dĕmĕtrios heard that Nikanor
and his army were slain in battle, he sent Bakḵidĕs and
Elyaqim to the land of Yahuḏah a second time, and
with them the main force of his army,
2 who went out by the way that leads to Gilgal, and
pitched their tents before Mĕsaloth, which is in Arbela.
And after they had won it, they slew much people.
3 Also, on the first month of the hundred and fiftysecond year, they encamped before Yerushalayim.
4 From there they moved, and went to Beroia, with
twenty thousand footmen and two thousand
horsemen.
5 Now Yahuḏah had pitched his tents at El’asah, with
three thousand chosen men with him,
6 who, seeing the multitude of the mighty army
opposing him, was greatly afraid. Therefore many
1467

MAQQAḆIM 1

withdrew from the army, so that no more than eight
hundred men of them stayed.
7 Therefore when Yahuḏah saw that his army slipped
away, and that the battle pressed upon him, he was
greatly troubled in mind and very distressed, for he had
no time to assemble them together.
8 Nevertheless, to those that remained he said, “Let
us arise and go up against our enemies, if possible we
are able to defeat them.”
9 But they pleaded with him saying, “We shall never
be able! Let us now rather save our lives, and
afterward we will return with our brothers, and fight
against them, for we are but a few.”
10 Then Yahuḏah said, “Elohim forbid that I should do
this matter, and flee away from them. If our time has
come, let us die bravely for our brothers, and let us not
stain our honour.”
11 With that, the army of Bakḵidĕs moved out of their
tents, and stood opposite them; their horsemen being
divided into two companies, and their slingers and
archers going before the army. And those that
marched in the front were all mighty men.
12 As for Bakḵidĕs, he was in the right wing. So the
army drew near to the two divisions, and sounded their
trumpets.
13 Those of Yahuḏah’s side, even they also sounded
their trumpets, so that the earth shook at the noise of
the armies, and the battle continued from morning till
night.
14 Now when Yahuḏah perceived that Bakḵidĕs and
the strength of his army were on the right side, he took
with him all the brave men,
15 who defeated the right wing, and pursued them to
Mount Ashdoḏ.
16 But when those on the left wing saw that those on
the right wing were defeated, they pursued Yahuḏah,
1468

1 MACCABEES

and those that were with him hard at the heels from
behind.
17 Therefore there was a great battle, so that many
were slain on both sides.
18 Yahuḏah was also killed, and the remnant fled.
19 Then Yahonathan and Shim’on took Yahuḏah their
brother, and buried him in the tomb of his fathers in
Modi’im.
20 And they mourned him, and all Yisra’ĕl made a
great lamentation for him, and mourned many days,
saying,
21 “How the brave man has fallen that delivered
Yisra’ĕl!”
22 As for the other matters concerning Yahuḏah and
his battles, and the mighty deeds which he did, and his
greatness, are they not written; for they were very
many.
23 Now after the death of Yahuḏah, the wicked began
to lift their heads in all the coasts of Yisra’ĕl, and there
arose all those doing wickedness.
24 In those days there was also a very great scarcity
of food; the land revolted because of this, and went
with them.
25 Then Bakḵidĕs chose these wicked men, and made
them masters of the land.
26 And they made inquiry and sought for Yahuḏah’s
friends, and brought them to Bakḵidĕs, who took
vengeance on them, and mistreated them.
27 So was there a great affliction in Yisrael, the like of
which was not seen, since the time that a naḇi was
among them.
28 Because of this, all Yahuḏah’s companions came
together, and said to Yahonathan,
29 “Since your brother Yahuḏah died, we have no man
like him to go out against our enemies, and Bakḵidĕs,
and against those of our nation that are adversaries to
us.
1469

MAQQAḆIM 1

“Now therefore, we have chosen you today to be
our leader and captain in his place, that you may fight
our battles.”
31 Therefore, at that time Yahonathan took the
authority upon himself, and rose up instead of his
brother Yahuḏah.
32 But when Bakḵidĕs learned of this, he sought to
slay him.
33 Then Yahonathan, and Shim’on his brother, and all
that were with him, perceiving this, fled into the
wilderness of Teqowa, and pitched their tents by the
water of the pool Asphar.
34 When Bakḵidĕs knew, he came near to the Yardĕn
with all his army on the Shabbath day.
35 Now Yahonathan had sent his brother Yoḥanan, a
captain of the people, to ask his friends the Naḇothites,
that they might leave with them their goods, which was
much.
36 But the children of Yambri came out of Mĕyḏeḇa,
and took Yoḥanan, and all that he had, and went their
way with it.
37 After this, word came to Yahonathan and Shim’on
his brother, that the children of Yambri held a great
marriage, and were bringing the bride, the daughter of
one of the great princes of Kena’an from Naḏaḇath,
with a great procession.
38 Therefore they remembered Yoḥanan their brother,
and went up, and hid themselves under cover of the
mountain,
39 where they lifted up their eyes, and looked, and,
see, there was a great tumult and a great procession.
And the bridegroom came out, and his friends and
brothers, to meet them with tambourines and music
and many instruments.
40 Then Yahonathan and those that were with him
rose up against them from the place where they lay in
ambush, and made a slaughter of them, so that many
30

1470

1 MACCABEES

fell down dead, and the remnant fled into the mountain;
and they took all their spoil.
41 Thus the marriage was turned into mourning, and
the noise of their song into lamentation.
42 So when they had fully avenged the blood of their
brother, they turned again to the wadi of the Yardĕn.
43 Now when Bakḵidĕs heard of this, he came on the
Shabbath day to the banks of the Yardĕn with a great
force.
44 Then Yahonathan said to his army, “Let us go up
now and fight for our lives, for it does not stand with us
today, as in time past.
45 “For, see, the battle is before us and behind us, and
the water of the Yardĕn on this side and that side, the
wadi and also the forest, neither is there a place for us
to turn aside.
46 “Therefore cry out now to the shamayim, that you
may be delivered from the hand of your enemies.”
47 Therefore, they joined battle, and Yahonathan
stretched out his hand to smite Bakḵidĕs, but he turned
back from him.
48 Then Yahonathan and those that were with him
leaped into the Yardĕn, and swam over to the other
bank; however, the others did not pass over the
Yardĕn to them.
49 So about one thousand men of Bakḵidĕs’ army
were slain that day.
50 Afterward Bakḵidĕs returned to Yerushalayim and
repaired the strong cites in Yahuḏah, the fort in Yeriḥo
and Amma’us and Bĕyth Ḥoron and Bĕyth Ĕl and
Timnathah, Pirathon and Tsaphon. He strengthened
these with high walls, with gates and with bars.
51 And he appointed a garrison in them, that they
might do evil to Yisra’ĕl.
52 He also fortified the city of Bĕyth Tsur, and Gezer,
and the tower, and put forces in them, and provisions
of food.
1471

MAQQAḆIM 1

He also took the chief men’s sons in the land for
hostages, and put them into the tower at Yerushalayim
to be guarded.
54 And in the hundred and fifty-third year, in the
second month, Elyaqim commanded that the wall of
the inner court of the Miqdash should be pulled down.
He also pulled down the works of the neḇi’im.
55 And as he began to pull down, even at that time
Elyaqim was plagued, and his works were hindered;
for his mouth was stopped, and he was paralysed, so
that he could no longer speak a word, nor give orders
concerning his house.
56 So Elyaqim died at that time in great torment.
57 Now when Bakḵidĕs saw that Elyaqim was dead,
he returned to the sovereign. So the land of Yahuḏah
was at rest two years.
58 Then all the wicked men held a council, saying,
“See, Yahonathan and his company are at ease, and
dwell without concern. Now therefore we will bring
Bakḵidĕs here, who shall take them all in one night.”
59 So they went and consulted with him.
60 Then he moved, and came with a great army, and
sent letters secretly to his supporters in Yahuḏah, that
they should take Yahonathan and those that were with
him. However they could not, because their counsel
was known to them.
61 Therefore they took the men of the land that were
the cause of that evil - about fifty people - and slew
them.
62 Afterward Yahonathan, and Shim’on, and those
that were with him, escaped to Bĕyth Bĕsai, which is
in the wilderness, and they repaired the ruins there,
and strengthened it.
63 When Bakḵidĕs knew this, he gathered together all
his army, and sent word to those that were of Yahuḏah.
53

1472

1 MACCABEES

Then he went and laid siege against Bĕyth Bĕsai.
And they fought against it for a long time and built
siege engines.
65 But Yahonathan left his brother Shim’on in the city,
and went out himself into the land, and with a certain
number he went out.
66 And he smote Odomera and his brothers, and the
children of Phaseiron in their tent.
67 And when he began to smite them, and came up
with his forces, Shim’on and his army went out of the
city, and burned the siege engines,
68 and fought against Bakḵidĕs, who was defeated by
them. And they distressed him greatly, for his counsel
and hardship was worthless.
69 Therefore he was very wroth at the wicked men that
gave him counsel to come into the land, so he slew
many of them, and intended to return to his own land.
70 When Yahonathan knew of this, he sent
ambassadors to him, so that he should make peace
with him, and deliver them the prisoners;
71 which he accepted, and did according to his
demands, and swore to him that he would never do
him harm all the days of his life.
72 Therefore when he had restored the prisoners to
him that he had taken previously out of the land of
Yahuḏah, he returned and went his way to his own
land, neither did he come to their borders any more.
73 Thus the sword ceased from Yisra’ĕl, and
Yahonathan dwelt at Miḵmas, and began to rule the
people, and he destroyed the wicked men out of
Yisra’ĕl.
64

10 In the hundred and sixtieth year, Alexandros the
son of Antioḵos, also named Epiphanĕs, went up and
took Ptolemais; for the people had received him, by
means of which he reigned there.
1473

MAQQAḆIM 1

Now when Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios heard of this, he
gathered together an exceedingly great army, and
went out to fight against him.
3 And Dĕmĕtrios sent letters to Yahonathan with kind
words, so that he exalted him.
4 For said he, “Let us first make peace with him,
before he joins with Alexandros against us,
5 or else he will remember all the evils that we have
done against him, and against his brothers and his
people.”
6 Therefore he gave him authority to gather together
an army, and to provide weapons, that he might aid
him in battle. He also commanded that the hostages
that were in the tower should be delivered to him.
7 Then Yahonathan came to Yerushalayim and read
the letters in the hearing of all the people and of those
that were in the tower,
8 who were greatly afraid when they heard that the
sovereign had given him authority to gather together
an army.
9 So those of the tower delivered their hostages to
Yahonathan, and delivered them to their parents.
10 This
done, Yahonathan settled himself in
Yerushalayim, and began to build and repair the city.
11 And he commanded the workmen to build the walls
and Mount Tsiyon round about with square stones for
fortification; and they did so.
12 Then the foreigners, that were in the fortresses
which Bakḵidĕs had built, fled away;
13 so that every man left his place and went into his
own land.
14 Only, some of those still remained at Bĕyth Tsur
that had forsaken the Law and the Commands; for it
was their place of refuge.
15 Now when Sovereign Alexandros had heard what
promises Dĕmĕtrios had sent to Yahonathan; when it
was also told to him of the battles and brave deeds
2

1474

1 MACCABEES

which he and his brothers had done, and of the pains
that they had endured,
16 He said, “Shall we find such another man? Now
therefore we will make him our friend and ally.”
17 Therefore he wrote a letter, and sent it to him,
according to these words, saying:
18 “Sovereign Alexandros, to his brother Yahonathan,
greetings.
19 “We have heard of you, that you are a man of great
strength, and worthy to be our friend.
20 “Therefore now, we ordain you this day to be the
kohĕn ha’gadol of your nation, and to be called the
sovereign’s friend, and require you to take our side,
and maintain friendship with us.” And with all this he
sent him a purple robe and a crown of gold.
21 So in the seventh month of the hundred and sixtieth
year, at the Feast of Sukkoth, Yahonathan put on the
qodesh robe, and gathered together forces, and
provided much armour.
22 When Dĕmĕtrios heard of this, he was very
grieved, and said,
23 “What have we done, that Alexandros has
prevented us in making peace with the Yahuḏim to
strengthen himself?
24 “I will also write words of encouragement to them,
and promise them esteem and gifts, that I may have
their support.”
25 Therefore he sent to them to this word: “Sovereign
Dĕmĕtrios, to the people of the Yahuḏim, greetings.
26 “Whereas you have kept covenants with us, and
continued in our friendship, not joining yourselves with
our enemies, we have heard of this, and are glad.
27 “Therefore now continue to be still trustworthy to
us, and we will recompense you well for the matters
you do on our behalf,
28 and will grant you many exemptions, and give you
rewards.
1475

MAQQAḆIM 1

“And I now release you, and for your sake, I release
all the Yahuḏim from tributes, and from the customs of
salt, and from crown taxes,
30 and from that which pertains to me to receive of the
third part of the seed, and the half of the fruit of the
trees. I release it from this day onward, so that they
shall not be taken from the land of Yahuḏah, nor of the
three governments which are added to them out of the
country of Shomeron and Galil, from this day onward,
forever.
31 “Let Yerushalayim also be qodesh and released,
with its borders, both from tenths and tributes.
32 “And as for the tower which is at Yerushalayim, I
yield up authority over it, and give to the kohĕn
ha’gadol, that he may appoint in it such men as he
shall choose to guard it.
33 “And I freely release every one of the Yahuḏim, that
were carried captive out of the land of Yahuḏah into
any part of my reign, and I purpose that all my officers
release the tributes even of their cattle.
34 “Furthermore, I purpose that all the Feasts, and
Shabbathoth, and New Moons, and Appointed Times,
and the three days before the Feast, and the three
days after the Feast shall be all of tolerance and
freedom for all the Yahuḏim in my reign.
35 “Also, no man shall have authority to meddle with
or to provoke any of them in any matter.
36 “I further purpose, that there be enrolled among the
sovereign’s forces about thirty thousand men of the
Yahuḏim, to whom wages shall be given, as belongs
to all sovereign’s forces.
37 “And of them, some shall be positioned in the
sovereign’s strongholds, some of whom are
trustworthy shall also be appointed over the affairs of
the reign. And I purpose that their overseers and
governors be from among themselves, and that they
29

1476

1 MACCABEES

live after their own Laws, even as the sovereign has
commanded in the land of Yahuḏah.
38 “And concerning the three governments that are
added to Yahuḏah from the country of Shomeron, let
them be joined with Yahuḏah, that they may be
reckoned to be under one, nor bound to obey authority
other than the kohĕn ha’gadol.
39 “As for Ptolemais, and the land pertaining to it, I
give it as a free gift to the Miqdash at Yerushalayim for
the necessary expenses of the Miqdash.
40 “And every year I give fifteen thousand shekels of
silver out of the sovereign’s accounts from the
pertaining places,
41 and all the remainder, which the officers did not pay
as in former time, from now on shall be given toward
the works of the Hĕyḵal.
42 “And besides this, the five thousand shekels of
silver which they took from the uses of the Hĕyḵal out
of the accounts year by year, even those shall be
released, because they pertain to the kohenim that
serve.
43 “And whoever flees to the Hĕyḵal at Yerushalayim,
or comes within these freedoms, being indebted to the
sovereign, or for any other matter, let them be
released, and all that they have in my reign.
44 “Also for the building and repairing of the works of
the Miqdash, expenses shall be given from the
sovereign’s accounts.
45 “And also for the building of the walls of
Yerushalayim, and its fortifications round about,
expenses shall be given out of the sovereign’s
accounts, as also for the building of the walls in
Yahuḏah.”
46 Now when Yahonathan and the people heard these
words, they gave them no trust, nor received them,
because they remembered the great evil that he had
done in Yisra’ĕl; for he had afflicted them very greatly.
1477

MAQQAḆIM 1

But with Alexandros they were well pleased,
because he was the first that sought true peace with
them, and they were allied with him always.
48 Then Sovereign Alexandros gathered great forces,
and encamped opposite Dĕmĕtrios.
49 And after the two sovereigns had joined battle,
Dĕmĕtrios’ army fled, but Alexandros followed after
him, and prevailed against them.
50 And he continued the battle greatly until the sun
went down; and Dĕmĕtrios was slain that day.
51 Afterward, Alexandros sent ambassadors to
Ptolemaeus sovereign of Mitsrayim with a message to
this effect:
52 “Since I have come again to my reign, and am
appointed to the throne of my ancestors, and have
acquired the reign, and overthrown Dĕmĕtrios, and
recovered our country;
53 for after I had joined battle with him, both he and
his army were defeated by us, so that we sit on the
throne of his reign.
54 Now therefore let us make a covenant of peace
together, and give me now your daughter as wife, and
I will be your son-in-law, and will give both to you and
her according to your dignity.”
55 Then Ptolemaeus the sovereign gave answer,
saying, “Joyful is the day in which you returned to the
land of your fathers, and sat on the throne of their
reign.
56 “And now I will do to you, as you have written.
Therefore meet me at Ptolemais, that we may see one
another; for I will marry my daughter to you according
to your desire.”
57 So Ptolemaeus went out of Mitsrayim with his
daughter Cleopatra, and they came to Ptolemais in the
hundred and sixty-second year,
58 where Sovereign Alexandros met him, gave to him
his daughter Cleopatra, and celebrated her marriage
47

1478

1 MACCABEES

at Ptolemais with great esteem, as is the manner of
sovereigns.
59 Now Sovereign
Alexandros had written to
Yahonathan, that he should come and meet him,
60 who therefore went honourably to Ptolemais, where
he met the two sovereigns, and gave they and their
friends silver and gold and many gifts, and found
favour in their sight.
61 At that time some wicked men of Yisra’ĕl, men of a
Beliya’al, assembled themselves against him to
accuse him; but the sovereign would not hear them.
62 Yet furthermore, the sovereign commanded to take
off his garments, and clothe him in purple; and they did
so.
63 And he made him sit beside him, and said to his
princes, “Go with him into the midst of the city, and
proclaim, that no man complain against him for any
matter, and that no man trouble him for any reason.”
64 Now when his accusers saw that he was honored
according to the proclamation, and clothed in purple,
they all fled.
65 So the sovereign honoured him, and wrote him
among his chief friends, and made him a chief, and
shared in his reign.
66 Afterward, Yahonathan returned to Yerushalayim in
peace and gladness.
67 Furthermore, in the hundred and sixty-fifth year
Dĕmĕtrios son of Dĕmĕtrios came out of Krĕtĕ into the
land of his fathers.
68 When Sovereign Alexandros heard of this, he was
grieved, and returned to Antioḵeia.
69 Then Dĕmĕtrios made Apollonios the governor of
Koĕlĕ Suria his general, who gathered together a great
army, and encamped in Yaḇneh, and sent to
Yahonathan the kohĕn ha’gadol saying,

1479

MAQQAḆIM 1

“You alone lift yourself up against us, and I am
mocked for your sake and reproached, and why do you
boast of your strength against us in the mountains?
71 “Now therefore, if you trust in your own strength,
come down to us into the field of the plains, and there
let us try the matter together. For the strength of the
cities is with me.
72 “Ask, and learn who I am, and the rest that take our
side, and they shall tell you that your foot is not able to
flee in their own land.
73 “Therefore now, you shall not be able to stand
against the horsemen and such a great strength in the
plain, where there is neither stone nor flint, nor a place
to flee to!”
74 So when Yahonathan heard these words of
Apollonios, he was moved in his mind, and choosing
ten thousand men he went out of Yerushalayim, where
Shim’on his brother met him to help him.
75 And he pitched his tents against Yapho, but those
of Yapho shut him out of the city, because Apollonios
had a garrison there.
76 Then Yahonathan laid siege against it, so those of
the city let him in for fear. And so Yahonathan won
Yapho.
77 When Apollonios heard of this, he took three
thousand horsemen, with a great army of footmen, and
went to Ashdoḏ as one that journeyed, and then
approached the plain, because he had a great number
of horsemen, in whom he put his trust.
78 Then Yahonathan followed after him to Ashdoḏ
where the armies joined battle.
79 Now Apollonios had left one thousand horsemen in
ambush.
80 And Yahonathan knew that there was an ambush
behind him; for they had surrounded his army, and
shot arrows at the people, from morning till evening.
70

1480

1 MACCABEES

But the people stood still, as Yahonathan had
commanded them, and so the enemy’s horses were
tired.
82 Then brought Shim’on out his army, and positioned
them against the footmen, for the horsemen who were
defeated by him were weary, and fled.
83 The horsemen also, being scattered in the field,
fled to Ashdoḏ, and went to the house of Daḡon, their
idol’s temple, for safety.
84 But Yahonathan lit fire to Ashdoḏ, and the cities
round about it, and took their spoils. And he burned the
temple of Daḡon with fire with those that had fled into
it,
85 so there were nearly eight thousand men burned
and slain with the sword.
86 And from there Yahonathan moved his army, and
encamped against Ashqelon, where the men of the city
came out and met him with great ceremony.
87 After this, Yahonathan and his army returned to
Yerushalayim possessing many spoils.
88 Now, when Sovereign Alexandros heard these
matters, he honoured Yahonathan still further,
89 and sent him a gold buckle, as is the custom to be
given to those of the sovereign’s blood. He also gave
him Eqron with its borders as a possession.
81

11 And the sovereign of Mitsrayim gathered together
a great army, like the sand that lies upon the sea
shore, and many ships, and through deceit attempted
to gain the reign of Alexandros, and join it to his own.
2 So he departed to Spania in a peaceable manner,
so that those of the cities opened to him, and met him;
for Sovereign Alexandros had commanded them to do
so, because he was his brother-in-law.
3 Now as Ptolemaeus entered into the cities, he
positioned a garrison of soldiers in every one of them
to guard it.
1481

MAQQAḆIM 1

And when he came near to Ashdoḏ, they showed
him the temple of Daḡon that was burned, and Ashdoḏ
and the suburbs of there that were destroyed, and the
bodies that were thrown about and those that he had
burned in the battle; for they had made heaps of them
by the way where he should pass.
5 They also told the sovereign all Yahonathan had
done, to the intent he might blame him, but the
sovereign held his peace.
6 Then Yahonathan met the sovereign with great
ceremony at Yapho, where they greeted one another,
and stayed.
7 Afterward, when Yahonathan had gone with the
sovereign to the river called Eleutherus, he returned
again to Yerushalayim.
8 Therefore Sovereign Ptolemaeus, having gained
the reign of the cities by the sea to Seleukeia on the
sea coast, devised wicked plans against Alexandros.
9 So he sent ambassadors to Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios,
saying, “Come, let us make an alliance between us,
and I will give you my daughter whom Alexandros has,
and you shall reign in your father’s reign.
10 “For I regret that I gave my daughter to him, for he
sought to slay me.”
11 So he slandered him, because he desired his reign.
12 Therefore he took his daughter from him, and gave
her to Dĕmĕtrios, and forsook Alexandros, so that their
hatred was openly known.
13 Then Ptolemaeus came to Antioḵeia, where he
placed two crowns upon his head: the crown of Asia,
and of Mitsrayim.
14 In the winter, Sovereign Alexandros was in Kilikia,
because those that dwelt in those parts had revolted
against him.
15 But when Alexandros heard of this, he came to fight
against him; so Sovereign Ptolemaeus brought forth
4

1482

1 MACCABEES

his army, and met him with a mighty strength, and put
him to flight.
16 So Alexandros fled to Araḇia to take defence there,
but Sovereign Ptolemaeus was exalted.
17 For Zaḇdi’ĕl the Araḇian took off Alexandros’ head,
and sent it to Ptolemaeus.
18 Sovereign Ptolemaeus also died after the third day,
and those that were in the strongholds were slain, one
after another.
19 Because of this, Dĕmĕtrios reigned in the hundred
and sixty-seventh year.
20 At the same time Yahonathan gathered together
those that were in Yahuḏah to take the tower that was
in Yerushalayim, and he built many siege engines
against it.
21 Then wicked men, who hated their own people,
went to the sovereign, and told him that Yahonathan
besieged the tower.
22 When he heard of this, he was wroth, and moving
immediately, he came to Ptolemais and wrote to
Yahonathan, that he should not lay siege to the tower,
but come quickly and speak with him at Ptolemais.
23 Nevertheless, when Yahonathan heard this, he
commanded to continue the siege, and he chose some
of the elders of Yisra’ĕl and the kohenim, and put
himself at risk,
24 and took silver and gold and garments, and also
various presents, and went to Ptolemais to the
sovereign, where he found favour in his sight.
25 And though some wicked men of the people had
made complaints against him,
26 the sovereign still treated him as his predecessors
had done before, and promoted him in the sight of all
his friends,
27 and confirmed him in the high kehunnah, and in all
the honours that he had before, and made him first
among his chief friends.
1483

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then Yahonathan requested from the sovereign,
that he would make Yahuḏah free from tribute, as also
the three governments, with the country of Shomeron;
and he promised him three hundred talanton.
29 So the sovereign agreed, and wrote letters for
Yahonathan of all these matters after this manner:
30 “Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios to his brother Yahonathan,
and to the nation of the Yahuḏim, greetings.
31 “We send you here a copy of the letter which we
wrote to our cousin Lasthĕnĕs concerning you, that
you might see it.
32 ‘Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios to his father Lasthĕnĕss
sends greeting.
33 “We are determined to do good to the people of the
Yahuḏim, who are our friends, and guard covenants
with us, because of their favour toward us.
34 ‘Therefore we have assigned to them the borders
of Yahuḏah, with the three governments of Ephrayim
and Loḏ and Ramathayim, that are added to Yahuḏah
from the country of Shomeron, and all pertaining to
them, for all those who offer in Yerushalayim, instead
of the payments which the sovereign received from
them yearly previously out of the fruits of the earth and
of trees.
35 ‘And as for other matters that relate to us, of the
tithes and customs pertaining to us, and also the saltpits and the crown taxes which are due to us, we
release them all for their aid.
36 ‘And none of this shall be revoked from this time on
forever.
37 ‘Now therefore, see that you make a copy of these
matters, and let it be delivered to Yahonathan, and put
on the qodesh mountain in a conspicuous place.’ ”
38 After this, when Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios saw that the
land was at peace before him, and that no resistance
was made against him, he sent away all his armies,
every one to his own place, except some bands of
28

1484

1 MACCABEES

foreigners, whom he had gathered from the islands of
the gentiles; therefore all the armies of his fathers
hated him.
39 Now there was one Truphon, that had been of
Alexandros’ group before, who, seeing that all the
army grumbled against Dĕmĕtrios, went to Imalkuĕ the
Araḇian that brought up Antioḵos the young son of
Alexandros,
40 and pressured him to deliver him this young
Antioḵos, that he might reign in his father’s place. So
he told him of all that Dĕmĕtrios had done, and how
his soldiers were at enmity with him, and he remained
there a long time.
41 In the meantime, Yahonathan sent to Sovereign
Dĕmĕtrios, that he would throw those of the tower out
of Yerushalayim, and also those in the fortresses; for
they fought against Yisra’ĕl.
42 So Dĕmĕtrios sent to Yahonathan saying, “I will not
only do this for you and your people, but I will greatly
honour you and your nation, if opportunity arises.
43 “Now therefore you shall do well if you send me
men to help me; for all my forces are gone from me.”
44 Upon this Yahonathan sent him three thousand
strong men to Antioḵeia; and when they came to the
sovereign, the sovereign was very glad of their arrival.
45 However those that were from the city gathered
themselves together into the midst of the city,
numbering a hundred and twenty thousand men, and
would have slain the sovereign.
46 So the sovereign fled into the court, but those of the
city guarded the passages of the city, and began to
fight.
47 Then the sovereign called to the Yahuḏim for help,
who came to him all at once, and dispersing
themselves throughout the city slew that day in the city
to the number of a hundred thousand.
1485

MAQQAḆIM 1

They also lit the city on fire, and gathered many
spoils that day, and delivered the sovereign.
49 So when those of the city saw that the Yahuḏim had
taken the city as they would, their courage decreased,
therefore they made supplication to the sovereign, and
cried, saying,
50 “Grant us peace, and let the Yahuḏim cease from
assaulting us and the city!”
51 With that, they threw down their weapons, and
made peace; and the Yahuḏim were honoured in the
sight of the sovereign and in the sight of all that were
in his reign; and they returned to Yerushalayim, having
great spoils.
52 So Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios sat on the throne of his
reign, and the land was at rest before him.
53 However, he deceived in all that he spoke, and
estranged himself from Yahonathan, neither rewarded
him according to the good which he had received from
him, but troubled him deeply.
54 After this, Truphon returned, and the young child
Antioḵos with him, who was crowned and reigned.
55 Then all the men of battle gathered to him, whom
Dĕmĕtrios had put away, and they fought against
Dĕmĕtrios, who turned his back and fled.
56 Then Truphon took the elephants, and won
Antioḵeia.
57 At that time young Antioḵos wrote to Yahonathan,
saying, “I confirm you in the high kehunnah and
appoint you ruler over the four governments and to be
one of the sovereign’s friends.”
58 Then he sent him golden vessels to be served in,
allowed him to drink in gold, and to be clothed in
purple, and to wear a golden buckle.
59 He also made Shim’on his brother captain of the
place called ‘The ladder of Tsor’ to the borders of
Mitsrayim.
48

1486

1 MACCABEES

Then Yahonathan went out, and passed through
the cities beyond the waters, and all the forces of Suria
gathered themselves to him to assist him. And when
he came to Ashqelon, those of the city met him
honourably.
61 From there he went to Azzah, but those of Azzah
shut him out, so he laid siege to it, and burned the open
lands with fire, and plundered them.
62 Afterward, when those of Azzah made supplication
to Yahonathan, he made peace with them, and took
the sons of their chief men for hostages, and sent them
to Yerushalayim, and passed through the country to
Dammeseq.
63 Now when Yahonathan heard that the princes of
Dĕmĕtrios had come to Qaḏĕsh, which is in Galil, with
a great force, with the purpose of removing him out of
the land,
64 he went to meet them, and left Shim’on his brother
in the land.
65 Then Shim’on encamped against Bĕyth Tsur and
fought against it a long time, and shut it up.
66 But they desired for peace with him, which he
granted them, and then put them out from there, and
took the city, and positioned a garrison in it.
67 As for Yahonathan and his army, they encamped at
the lake of Gennĕsar, and early in the morning they
went from there to the plain of Ḥatsor.
68 And see, the army of foreigners met them in the
plain, who, having laid men in ambush for him in the
mountains, they came opposite him.
69 So when those that lay in ambush rose out of their
places and joined battle, all that were of Yahonathan’s
side fled;
70 so that there was not one of them left, except
Mattithyahu the son of Aḇshalom, and Yahuḏah the
son of Ḥalphi, the captains of the army.
60

1487

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then Yahonathan tore his garments, and threw
dust upon his head, and prayed.
72 After turning again to battle, he put them to flight,
and so they ran away.
73 Now when his own men that had fled saw this, they
turned again toward him, and with him, pursued them
to Qaḏĕsh, even to their own tents, and there they
encamped.
74 So there were slain that day about three thousand
men of the gentiles, but Yahonathan returned to
Yerushalayim.
71

12 Now when Yahonathan saw that time served him,
he chose some men, and sent them to Rome, to
confirm and renew the alliance that they had with them.
2 He also sent letters to the Lakedaemonians, and to
other places, for the same purpose.
3 So they went to Rome, and entered into the senate,
and said, “Yahonathan the kohĕn ha’gadol, and the
people of the Yahuḏim, sent us to you, so that you
should renew the friendship which you had with them,
and alliance as before.”
4 Upon this, the Romans gave them letters to the
governors of every place that they should bring them
into the land of Yahuḏah peaceably.
5 And this is the copy of the letters which Yahonathan
wrote to the Lakedaemonians:
6 “Yahonathan the kohĕn ha’gadol, and the elders of
the nation, and the kohenim, and the other of the
Yahuḏim, to the Lakedaemonians their brothers,
greetings.
7 “There were letters sent in time past to Onyah the
kohĕn ha’gadol from Dareyawesh, who then reigned
among you, to signify that you are our brothers, as the
copy here underwritten specifies;
8 at which time Onyah entreated the ambassador
that was sent honourably, and received the letters, in
1488

1 MACCABEES

which declaration was made of the alliance and
friendship.
9 “Therefore we also - although we need none of
these matters, in that we have the qodesh Books of
Scripture in our hands to comfort us 10 have nevertheless attempted to send to you for the
renewing of brotherhood and friendship, lest we should
become strangers to you altogether; for a long time
has passed since you sent to us.
11 “We therefore at all times without ceasing, both in
our Feasts, and other convenient days, remember you
in the slaughterings which we offer, and in our prayers,
as is right, and as it is fitting for us to think upon our
brothers,
12 and we are rightly pleased for your honour.
13 “As for ourselves, we have had great troubles and
battles on every side, because the sovereigns that are
round about us have fought against us.
14 “However, we would not be troublesome to you, nor
to others of our allies and friends, in these battles,
15 for we have help from the shamayim that upholds
us, so that we are delivered from our enemies, and our
enemies are brought under foot.
16 “For this cause we chose Numĕnios the son of
Antioḵos, and Antipater the son of Yason, and sent
them to the Romans, to renew the friendship that we
had with them, and the former alliance.
17 “We also commanded them to go to you, and to
greet and to deliver you our letters concerning the
renewing of our brotherhood.
18 “Therefore now you shall do well to give us an
answer to this.”
19 And this is the copy of the letters which he sent to
Onyah:
20 “Arĕios sovereign of the Lakedaemonians to Onyah
the kohĕn ha’gadol; greetings.
1489

MAQQAḆIM 1

“It is found in writing, that the Lakedaemonians and
Yahuḏim are brothers, and that they are of the race of
Aḇraham.
22 “Now therefore, since this has come to our
knowledge, you shall do well to write to us of your
prosperity.
23 “We write back again to you, that your cattle and
goods are ours, and ours are yours. We command
therefore our ambassadors to make report to you in
this way.”
24 Now when Yahonathan heard that Dĕmĕtrios’
princes had come to fight against him with a greater
army than before,
25 he moved from Yerushalayim, and met them in the
land of Amathos; for he gave them no release to enter
his country.
26 He also sent spies to their tents, who came again,
and told him that they were positioned to attack them
in the night.
27 Therefore, as soon as the sun was down,
Yahonathan commanded his men to be armed and to
watch all night long so that they would be ready to fight.
He also sent out watchmen round about the army.
28 But when the adversaries heard that Yahonathan
and his men were ready for battle, they feared, and
trembled in their hearts, and they kindled fires in their
camp.
29 However Yahonathan and his army did not know it
till the morning; for they saw the lights burning.
30 Then Yahonathan pursued after them, but did not
overtake them, for they had passed over the River
Eleutherus.
31 Therefore Yahonathan turned to the Araḇians, who
were called Zaḇaḏeans, and smote them, and took
their spoils.
32 And moving from there, he came to Dammeseq,
and so passed through all the land.
21

1490

1 MACCABEES

Shim’on also went out and passed through the land
to Ashqelon and the towers beside there, from where
he turned aside to Yapho, and took it,
34 for he had heard that they would deliver the
stronghold to those that allied with Dĕmĕtrios;
therefore he positioned a garrison there to guard it.
35 After this, Yahonathan returned home again, and
calling the elders of the people together, he consulted
with them about building strongholds in Yahuḏah,
36 and making the walls of Yerushalayim higher, and
raising a great mound between the tower and the city
to separate it from the city, so that it might stand alone,
that men might neither sell nor buy in it.
37 Upon this they came together to build up the city,
because part of the wall toward the wadi on the east
side had fallen down, and they repaired that which was
called Kaphenatha.
38 Shim’on also built up Aḏiḏa in Shephelah, and
strengthened if with gates and bars.
39 Now Truphon went about to take the reign of Asia,
and to kill Antioḵos the sovereign, that he might place
the crown upon his own head.
40 However he was afraid that Yahonathan would not
allow him, and that he would fight against him;
therefore he sought a way how to take Yahonathan,
that he might kill him. So he moved, and came to Bĕyth
She’an.
41 Then Yahonathan went out to meet him with forty
thousand men chosen for the battle, and came to
Bĕyth She’an.
42 Now when Truphon saw Yahonathan come with so
great a force, he dared not stretch out his hand against
him;
43 but received him honourably, and commended him
to all his friends, and gave him gifts, and commanded
his men of battle to be as obedient to him, as to
himself.
33

1491

MAQQAḆIM 1

To Yahonathan he also said, “Why have you
brought all this people such great trouble, seeing there
is no battle between us?
45 “Now therefore, send them home again, and
choose a few men to wait on you, and you, come with
me to Ptolemais, for I will give it to you, and the rest of
the strongholds and forces, and all that have any
charge. As for me, I will return and depart, for this is
why I have come.”
46 So Yahonathan believing him, did as he asked him,
and sent away his army, who went into the land of
Yahuḏah.
47 And he only kept three thousand men with himself,
of which he sent two thousand into Galil, and one
thousand went with him.
48 Now as soon as Yahonathan entered into
Ptolemais, those of Ptolemais shut the gates and took
him, and all those that came with him they slew with
the sword.
49 Then Truphon sent an army of footmen and
horsemen into Galil, and into the great plain to destroy
all Yahonathan’s army.
50 But when they knew that Yahonathan and those
that were with him were taken and slain, they
encouraged one another, and drew close together
preparing to fight.
51 Therefore those that pursued them, seeing that
they were ready to fight for their lives, turned back
again.
52 So they all came into the land of Yahuḏah
peaceably, and there they mourned for Yahonathan,
and those that were with him, and they were very
afraid. And so all Yisra’ĕl made a great lamentation.
53 Then all the gentiles that were round about sought
to destroy them, for they said, “They have no captain,
nor any to help them. Now therefore let us fight them,
and take away their remembrance from among men.”
44

1492

1 MACCABEES

13 Now when Shim’on heard that Truphon had
gathered together a great army to invade the land of
Yahuḏah, and destroy it,
2 and seeing that the people were in great trembling
and fear, went up to Yerushalayim, and gathered the
people together,
3 and gave them encouragement, saying, “You
yourselves know what great deeds my brothers and I
and my father’s house have done for the Laws and the
Miqdash; also the battles and troubles which we have
seen.
4 “For this reason all my brothers are slain for
Yisra’ĕl’s sake, and I alone am left.
5 “Now therefore, far be it from me that I should spare
my own life in any time of trouble, for I am no better
than my brothers.
6 “Certainly I shall avenge my nation, and the
Miqdash and our wives and our children; for all the
gentiles are gathered with great evil to destroy us.”
7 Now as soon as the people heard these words their
spirit revived,
8 and they answered with a loud voice saying, “You
shall be our leader instead of Yahuḏah and
Yahonathan your brother!”
9 “You fight our battles, and whatever, you command
us, that we shall do.”
10 So then he gathered together all the men of battle,
and made haste to finish the walls of Yerushalayim,
and he fortified it round about.
11 He also sent Yahonathan the son of Aḇshalom, and
a great force with him to Yapho, who throwing out
those that were there, remained there in it.
12 So Truphon moved from Ptolemais with a great
strength to invade the land of Yahuḏah, and
Yahonathan was with him under guard.
1493

MAQQAḆIM 1

But Shim’on pitched his tents at Aḏiḏa, opposite the
plain.
14 Now when Truphon knew that Shim’on had risen up
instead of his brother Yahonathan, and meant to fight
with him, he sent messengers to him, saying,
15 “Although we have Yahonathan your brother under
guard, it is for silver that he owes to the sovereign’s
treasury, concerning that which was delivered to him.
16 “Now therefore, send a hundred talanton of silver
and two of his sons as hostages, that when he is
released he may not revolt against us, and we will let
him go.”
17 Although Shim’on perceived that they spoke
deceitfully to him, because of this he sent the silver and
the children, lest he should possibly gain great hatred
for himself from the people,
18 who might have said, “Because he did not send him
the silver and the children, therefore Yahonathan is
dead.”
19 So he sent them the children and the hundred
talanton. However, Truphon was deceitful, neither
would he let Yahonathan go.
20 And after this, Truphon came to invade the land and
destroy it, going round about by the way that leads to
Aḏorayim. But Shim’on and his army marched against
him in every place, wherever he went.
21 Now those that were in the tower sent messengers
to Truphon, so that he should hasten his coming to
them by the wilderness, and send them food.
22 Therefore Truphon prepared all his horsemen to
come that night, but he did not come because a very
great snow fell. So he departed, and came into the land
of Gil’aḏ.
23 And when he came near to Baskama he slew
Yahonathan, who was buried there.
24 Afterward Truphon returned and went into his own
land.
13

1494

1 MACCABEES

Then Shim’on sent, and took the bones of
Yahonathan his brother, and buried them in Modi’im,
the city of his fathers,
26 and all Yisra’ĕl made a great lamentation for him,
and mourned for him many days.
27 Shim’on also built a monument upon the tomb of
his father and his brothers, and raised it up to be seen,
with hewn stone in front and behind.
28 And, he put up seven memorials, one against
another, for his father, and his mother, and his four
brothers.
29 And in these he made skilled works, around which
he placed great column. And he placed all their armour
upon the columns for a remembrance forever, and
ships were carved by the armour, that they might be
seen of all that sail on the sea.
30 This is the tomb which he made at Modi’im, and it
still stands to this day.
31 Now Truphon dealt deceitfully with the young
Sovereign Antioḵos, and slew him,
32 and he reigned in his place, and crowned himself
sovereign of Asia, and brought great distress upon the
land.
33 Then Shim’on built up the strongholds in Yahuḏah,
and walled them around with high towers, and great
walls, and gates, and bars, and stored up food within.
34 And Shim’on chose men, and sent to Sovereign
Dĕmĕtrios so that he would give the land immunity,
because all that Truphon did was to plunder;
35 unto whom Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios answered and
wrote after this manner:
36 “Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios, to Shim’on the kohĕn
ha’gadol, and friend of sovereigns, also to the elders
and nation of the Yahuḏim, greetings.
37 “The golden crown, and the scarlet robe which you
sent to us, we have received, and we are ready to
make lasting peace with you, and also to write to our
25

1495

MAQQAḆIM 1

officers to confirm the immunities which we have
granted.
38 “And whatever covenants we have made with you
shall stand, and the strongholds which you have built
shall be your own.
39 “As for any oversight or fault committed to this day,
we forgive it, and also the crown tax which you owe us.
And if there were any other tribute paid in
Yerushalayim, it shall no longer be paid.
40 “And seek those who are upright among you to be
in our court; let them be enrolled, and let there be
peace between us.”
41 Thus the yoke of the gentiles was taken away from
Yisra’ĕl in the hundred and seventieth year.
42 Then the people of Yisra’ĕl began to write in their
documents and contracts, “In the first year of Shim’on
the kohĕn ha’gadol, the governor and leader of the
Yahuḏim.”
43 In those days Shim’on encamped against Azzah
and besieged it round about. He also made a siege
engine, and positioned it by the city, and battered a
certain tower, and took it.
44 And those that were in the siege engine leaped into
the city; therefore there was such a great uproar in the
city,
45 that the people of the city tore their garments, and
climbed up on the walls with their wives and children,
and cried with a loud voice pleading for Shim’on to
grant them peace.
46 And they said, “Do not deal with us according to our
wickedness, but according to your kindness!”
47 So Shim’on was appeased toward them and no
longer fought against them, but put them out of the city,
and cleansed the houses in which the idols were, and
so entered into it with songs and thanksgiving.
48 He also removed all its uncleanness, and
appointed men there that would guard the Law, and
1496

1 MACCABEES

made it stronger than it was before, and built a dwelling
place for himself there.
49 Also, those of the tower in Yerushalayim were kept
so restricted, that they could neither come out, nor go
into the country, nor buy, nor sell. Therefore they were
in great distress for need of food, and a great number
of them perished through scarcity of food.
50 Then they cried to Shim’on, pleading for him to be
at one with them, which he granted them. And when
he had put them out from there, he cleansed the tower
from uncleannesses,
51 and entered into it on the twenty-third day of the
second month, in the hundred and seventy-first year
with thanksgiving and branches of palm trees, and with
harps and cymbals and with stringed instruments, and
songs of praise and songs; because a great enemy
was destroyed out of Yisra’ĕl.
52 He also ordained that the day should be kept every
year with gladness. And he made the hill of the Hĕyḵal
that was by the tower stronger than it was, and he
dwelt there himself with his army.
53 And when Shim’on saw that Yoḥanan his son was
a brave man, he made him captain of all the armies;
and he dwelt in Gezer.

14 Now in the hundred and seventy-second year
Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios gathered his forces together,
and went into Maḏai to gain help to fight against
Truphon.
2 But when Arsakĕs, the sovereign of Paras and
Maḏai, heard that Dĕmĕtrios had entered within his
borders, he sent one of his princes to take him alive,
3 who went and smote the army of Dĕmĕtrios, and
took him and brought him to Arsakĕs, by whom he was
put under guard.
4 As for the land of Yahuḏah, it was quiet all the days
of Shim’on; for he sought the good of his nation in
1497

MAQQAḆIM 1

order that his authority and honour pleased them well
all the days.
5 And as he was honourable in all his deeds, so in
this, that he took Yapho for a harbour, and made an
entrance to the islands of the sea,
6 and enlarged the boundary of his nation, and
recovered the land,
7 and gathered together a great number of captives,
and had the reign of Gezer, and Bĕyth Tsur, and the
tower, out of the which he took all uncleanness, neither
was there any that resisted him.
8 Then they tilled their ground in peace, and the earth
gave its increase, and the trees of the field their fruit.
9 All the old men sat in the streets, speaking good
words together, and the young men put on splendid
armour.
10 He provided food for the cities, and appointed in
them all manner of fortification, so that his honourable
name was known to the ends of the world.
11 He made peace in the land, and Yisra’ĕl rejoiced
with great joy,
12 for every man sat under his vine and his fig tree,
and there was none to trouble them,
13 neither was there any left in the land to fight against
them. The sovereigns themselves were also
overthrown in those days,
14 and he strengthened all those of his people that
were brought low. He searched out the Law, and he
removed every despiser of the Law and wicked
person.
15 He adorned the Miqdash, and multiplied vessels for
the Hĕyḵal.
16 Now when it was heard in Rome, and as far as
Sparta, that Yahonathan was dead, they were very
sorry,

1498

1 MACCABEES

but as soon as they heard that his brother Shim’on
was made kohĕn ha’gadol in his place, and ruled the
country, and the cities there,
18 they wrote to him on tablets of bronze, to renew the
friendship and alliance which they had made with
Yahuḏah and Yahonathan his brothers;
19 writings which were read before the assembly at
Yerushalayim.
20 And this is the copy of the letters that the
Lakedaemonians sent: “The rulers of the
Lakedaemonians, with the city, to Shim’on the kohĕn
ha’gadol, and the elders, and kohenim, and remnant of
the people of the Yahuḏim, our brothers, greetings.
21 “The ambassadors that were sent to our people
informed us of your esteem and honour, therefore we
were glad of their coming,
22 and registered the words that they spoke in the
council of the people in this manner: ‘Numĕnios son of
Antioḵos, and Antipater son of Yason, the Yahuḏim’s
ambassadors, came to us to renew the friendship they
had with us,
23 and it pleased the people to receive the men
honourably, and to put the copy of their message in
public record, so that the people of the
Lakedaemonians might have a memorial of it.
Furthermore we have written a copy of it to Shim’on
the kohĕn ha’gadol.’ ”
24 After this Shim’on sent Numĕnios to Rome with a
great golden shield of one thousand minas weight to
confirm the alliance with them.
25 When the people heard of this, they said, “What
thanks shall we give to Shim’on and his sons?
26 “For he and his brothers and the house of his father
have established Yisra’ĕl, and chased away their
enemies from them in battle, and confirmed their
freedom.”
17

1499

MAQQAḆIM 1

So then they wrote it on tablets of bronze, which
they placed on columns in Mount Tsiyon. And this is
the copy of the writing: “The eighteenth day of the
month Elul, in the hundred and seventy-second year,
being the third year of Shim’on the kohĕn ha’gadol,
28 at Asaramel in the great assembly of the kohenim
and people and rulers of the nation and elders of the
country, these words were declared to us.
29 “Since many times there have been battles in the
country, for which the maintenance of their Miqdash,
and the Law, Shim’on the son of Mattithyahu, of the
descendants of Yariḇ, together with his brothers, put
themselves in danger, and resisting the enemies of
their nation did their nation great honour.
30 “For after Yahonathan, having gathered his nation
together, and been their kohĕn ha’gadol, was added to
his people,
31 their enemies prepared to invade their country, that
they might destroy it, and lay hands on the Miqdash.
32 “At which time Shim’on rose up, and fought for his
nation, and spent much of his own wealth, and armed
the brave men of his nation and gave them wages,
33 and fortified the cities of Yahuḏah, together with
Bĕyth Tsur that lies on the borders of Yahuḏah, where
the armour of the enemies had been before; but he
positioned a garrison of Yahuḏim there.
34 “He also fortified Yapho, which lies on the coast,
and Gezer, that borders on Ashdoḏ, where the
enemies had dwelt before. And he appointed Yahuḏim
there, and supplied them with all matters necessary for
its repairs.”
35 So the people sang the deeds of Shim’on, and to
what esteem he thought to bring his nation, making
him their governor and chief kohĕn, because he had
done all these matters, and for the Right-Ruling and
belief which he guarded for his nation, and that by all
means he sought to exalt his people.
27

1500

1 MACCABEES

For in his time matters prospered in his hands, so
that the gentiles were taken out of their country, and
also those that were in the city of Dawiḏ in
Yerushalayim who had made themselves a tower from
which they came out and polluted all around the
Miqdash and did much evil in the qodesh place.
37 But he appointed Yahuḏim in it and fortified it for
the safety of the country and the city, and raised up the
walls of Yerushalayim.
38 Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios also confirmed him in the
high kehunnah according to those matters,
39 and made him one of his friends, and honoured him
with great honour.
40 For he had heard it said, that the Romans had
called the Yahuḏim their friends and allies and
brothers; and that they had entertained the
ambassadors of Shim’on honourably.
41 Also that the Yahuḏim and kohenim were well
pleased that Shim’on should be their governor and
kohĕn ha’gadol forever, until there should arise a
trustworthy naḇi.
42 That he should also be their leader, and would take
charge of the Miqdash, to appoint them over their
works, and over the country, and over the armoury,
and over the fortresses.
43 Besides this, that he should be obeyed by every
man, and that all the writings in the country should be
made in his name, and that he should be clothed in
purple and wear gold.
44 Also that it should be not allowed for the people or
kohenim to break any of these matters, or to refute his
words, or to gather an assembly in the country without
him, or to be clothed in purple, or wear a gold buckle;
45 and whoever should do otherwise, or break any of
these matters should be punished.
46 So it pleased all the people to establish Shim’on,
and to do as had been said.
36

1501

MAQQAḆIM 1

Then Shim’on accepted this, and was well pleased
to be kohĕn ha’gadol, and leader and governor of the
Yahuḏim and kohenim, and to defend them all.
48 So they commanded that this writing should be put
on tablets of bronze, and that they should be put up
within the surrounds of the Miqdash in a conspicuous
place;
49 also that the copies of this should be stored in the
treasury, so that Shim’on and his sons might have
them.
47

15 Now Antioḵos son of Dĕmĕtrios the sovereign
sent letters from the islands of the sea to Shim’on the
kohĕn and prince of the Yahuḏim, and to all the people;
2 the contents of which were these: “Sovereign
Antioḵos to Shim’on the kohĕn ha’gadol and leader of
his nation, and to the people of the Yahuḏim,
greetings.
3 “Since some troublesome men have usurped the
reign of our fathers, and my purpose is to challenge it
again that I may restore it to the old estate, and to that
end have gathered a multitude of foreign soldiers
together and prepared ships of battle;
4 my purpose also being to go through the country
that I may be avenged of those that have destroyed it
and made many cities in the reign desolate.
5 “Now therefore I confirm to you all the offerings
which the sovereigns before me granted you, and also
whatever gifts they granted.
6 “I allow you to coin silver for your country with your
own stamp.
7 “And concerning Yerushalayim and the Miqdash;
let them be free, and all the armour that you have
made, and fortresses that you have built, and keep in
your hands, let them remain with you.

1502

1 MACCABEES

“And if whatever is, or shall be, owing to the
sovereign, let it be forgiven you from this time on
forever.
9 “Furthermore, when we have obtained our reign,
we will honour you, and your nation, and your Hĕyḵal,
with great honour, so that your honour shall be known
throughout the world.”
10 In the hundred and seventy-fourth year Antioḵos
went into the land of his fathers, at which time all the
forces came together to him, so that few were left with
Truphon.
11 Therefore being pursued by Sovereign Antioḵos,
he fled to Dora, which lies by the sea coast,
12 for he saw that troubles came upon him all at once,
and that his forces had deserted him.
13 Then Antioḵos encamped against Dora, having
with him a hundred and twenty thousand men of battle,
and eight thousand horsemen.
14 And when he had surrounded the city and linked
ships close to the town on the sea coast, he troubled
the city by land and by sea, neither did he allow any to
go out or in.
15 In the winter Numĕnios and his army came from
Rome, having letters to the sovereigns and countries
in which were written these matters:
16 “Lukios, consul of the Romans to Sovereign
Ptolemaeus, greetings.
17 “The Yahuḏim’s ambassadors, our friends and
allies, came to us to renew the old friendship and
alliance, being sent from Shim’on the kohĕn ha’gadol
and from the people of the Yahuḏim,
18 and they brought a gold shield of one thousand
minas.
19 “We thought it good therefore to write to the
sovereigns and countries, that they should do them no
harm, nor fight against them, their cities, or countries,
nor indeed aid their enemies against them.
8

1503

MAQQAḆIM 1

“It also seemed good to us to receive the shield
from them.
21 “If therefore there are any troublesome fellows, that
have fled from their country to you, deliver them to
Shim’on the kohĕn ha’gadol, that he may punish them
according to their own Law.”
22 He also wrote the same words to Dĕmĕtrios the
sovereign, and Attalus, to Ariarathĕs, and Arsakĕs,
23 and to all the countries and to Lampsakos, and the
Lakedaemonians and to Dĕlos and Mundos and Sikion
and Karia and Samos and Pamphulia and Lukia and
Halikarnassos and Rhodos and Arados and Kos and
Sidĕ and Aradus and Gortina and Knidos and Kupros
and Kurĕnĕ.
24 And the copy of this they wrote to Shim’on the
kohĕn ha’gadol.
25 So Antioḵos the sovereign encamped against Dora
the second day, assaulting it continually, and making
siege engines by which means he shut up Truphon,
that he could neither go out nor go in.
26 At that time Shim’on sent him two thousand chosen
men to aid him; also silver and gold and much armour.
27 Nevertheless he would not receive them, but broke
all the covenants which he had made with him before,
and became hostile toward him.
28 Furthermore he sent Athĕnobius, one of his friends
to him, to speak with him, and say, “You withhold
Yapho and Gezer - with the tower that is in
Yerushalayim - which are cities of my reign.
29 “You have destroyed its borders, and done great
evil in the land, and taken the rule of many places
within my reign.
30 “Now therefore, deliver the cities which you have
taken, and the tributes of the places, of which you have
taken rule outside the borders of Yahuḏah;
31 or else give me five hundred talanton of silver for
them and for the damage that you have done, and the
20

1504

1 MACCABEES

tributes of the cities - another five hundred talanton. If
not, we will come and fight against you.”
32 So Athĕnobius the sovereign’s friend came to
Yerushalayim, and when he saw the esteem of
Shim’on, and the storage of gold and silver plate and
his great attendance, he was astonished and told him
the sovereign’s message.
33 Then Shim’on answered and said to him, “We have
neither taken other men’s land, nor held that which
belongs to others, but the inheritance of our fathers
which our enemies held wrongfully in possession for a
certain time.
34 “Therefore we, having opportunity, hold the
inheritance of our fathers.
35 “And whereas you demand Yapho and Gezer although they did great harm to the people in our
country - yet we will give you a hundred talanton for
them.” To this Athĕnobius answered him not a word,
36 but returned in a rage to the sovereign, and
reported these words to him, and of the esteem of
Shim’on, and of all that he had seen. So the sovereign
was exceedingly wroth.
37 In the meantime, Truphon fled by ship to Orthosia.
38 Then the sovereign made Kendĕbeus captain of
the sea coast, and gave him an army of footmen and
horsemen,
39 and commanded him to move his army toward
Yahuḏah. He also commanded him to build up Qiḏron,
and to fortify the gates, and to fight against the people.
But as for the sovereign himself, he pursued Truphon.
40 So Kendĕbeus came to Yaḇneh and began to
provoke the people and to invade Yahuḏah, and to
take the people captive and slay them.
41 And when he had built up Qiḏron, he positioned
horsemen there, and an army of footmen, so that
coming out they might make attacks on the roads to
Yahuḏah, as the sovereign had commanded him.
1505

MAQQAḆIM 1

16 Then Yoḥanan came up from Gezer, and told
Shim’on his father what Kendĕbeus had done.
2 Therefore Shim’on called his two eldest sons
Yahuḏah and Yoḥanan and said to them, “My brothers
and I and my father’s house have from my youth to this
day always fought against the enemies of Yisra’ĕl. And
matters have prospered so well in our hands, that we
have delivered Yisra’ĕl many times.
3 “But now I am old, and you, by Elohim’s kindness,
are of a sufficient age. You take the place of myself
and my brother, and go and fight for our nation, and
the help the shamayim be with you.”
4 So he chose twenty thousand men of battle out of
the country with horsemen, who went out against
Kendĕbeus, and rested that night at Modi’im.
5 And when as they rose in the morning, and went
into the plain, see, a mighty great army of both footmen
and horsemen came against them. However, there
was a wadi of water between them,
6 so he and his people encamped opposite them. But
when he saw that the people were afraid to go over the
wadi of water, he went over first himself, and then the
men seeing him, passed over after him.
7 That done, he divided his men, and positioned the
horsemen in the midst of the footmen, for the enemy’s
horsemen were very numerous.
8 Then they sounded with the qodesh trumpets, so
Kendĕbeus and his army were put to flight, so that
many of them were slain, and the remnant went to the
stronghold.
9 At that time Yahuḏah, Yoḥanan’s brother was
wounded; but Yoḥanan still pursued them until he
came to Qiḏron which Kendĕbeus had built.
10 So they fled even to the towers in the fields of
Ashdoḏ; therefore he burned it with fire, so that there
1506

1 MACCABEES

were about two thousand of them slain. Afterward he
returned to the land of Yahuḏah in peace.
11 And in the plain of Yeriḥo Ptolemaeus the son of
Aboubus was made captain, and he had an
abundance of silver and gold,
12 for he was the kohĕn ha’gadol’s son-in-law.
13 Therefore his heart being lifted up, he thought to
take the land for himself, and therefore planned
deceitfully against Shim’on and his sons to destroy
them.
14 Now Shim’on was visiting the cities that were in the
country and taking care for the good ordering of them;
at which time he himself came down to Yeriḥo with his
sons Mattithyahu and Yahuḏah, in the hundred and
seventy-seventh year, in the eleventh month called
Sheḇat,
15 where the son of Aboubus, receiving them
deceitfully into a small fortress called Doḵ - which he
had built - made them a great feast. However, he had
men hidden there.
16 So when Shim’on and his sons had drunk plenty,
Ptolemaeus and his men rose up, and took their
weapons, and came upon Shim’on into the feasting
place, and slew him, and his two sons, and some of
his servants.
17 In doing so, he committed a great treachery, and
repaid evil for good.
18 Then Ptolemaeus wrote these matters, and sent to
the sovereign, that he should send him an army to aid
him, and he would deliver him the land and cities.
19 He also sent others to Gezer to kill Yoḥanan. And
he sent letters to the tribunes to come to him, that he
might give them silver and gold and rewards.
20 And others he sent to take Yerushalayim and the
mountain of the Hĕyḵal.

1507

MAQQAḆIM 1

Now one had run before to Gezer and told Yoḥanan
that his father and brothers were slain, and he said,
“Ptolemaeus has sent to slay you also.”
22 When he heard of this, he was greatly astonished,
so he took hold of those that came to destroy him, and
slew them; for he knew that they sought to take him
away.
23 Concerning the rest of the acts of Yoḥanan, and his
battles, and worthy deeds which he did, and the
building of the walls which he made, and his doings,
24 see, these are written in the chronicles of his
kehunnah, from the time he was made kohĕn ha’gadol
after his father.
21

1508

2 MACCABEES

MAQQAḆIM 2
‫ מכבים ב‬B mYBKm

1 The brothers, the Yahuḏim that are at Yerushalayim
and in the land of Yahuḏah desire health and peace to
the brothers, the Yahuḏim that are throughout
Mitsrayim.
2 Elohim show favour to you, and remember His
Covenant that He made with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ His trustworthy servants;
3 and give you all a heart to serve Him and to do His
desire with good courage and an eager mind.
4 And open your hearts in His Torah and Commands,
and send you peace,
5 and hear your prayers, and be at one with you, and
never forsake you in time of trouble.
6 And now we are here praying for you.
7 Such time as Dĕmĕtrios reigned, in the hundred
and sixty-ninth year, we the Yahuḏim wrote to you in
the extreme trouble that came upon us in those years,
from the time that Yason and his company revolted
from the qodesh land and reign,
8 and burned the porch and shed innocent blood; we
then prayed to HWHY and were heard. We also offered
slaughterings and fine flour, and lit the lamps, and put
out the loaves.
9 And now, see that you guard the Feast of Sukkoth
in the month Kislĕw.
10 In the hundred and eighty-eighth year, the people
that were at Yerushalayim and in Yahuḏah, and the
council, and Yahuḏah, sent greeting and health to
Aristobulus, Sovereign Ptolemaeus’ master, who was
of the descendants of the anointed kohenim, and to the
Yahuḏim that were in Mitsrayim.

1509

MAQQAḆIM 2

In so far as Elohim has delivered us from great
perils, we thank Him highly, as having been in battle
against a sovereign.
12 For He threw out those that fought within the
qodesh city.
13 For when the leader had come to Paras, and the
army with him that seemed invincible, they were slain
in the temple of Nanaia by deceit of the priests of
Nanaia.
14 For Antioḵos and his friends that were with him
came into the place as though he would marry her, to
receive silver in name of a dowry.
15 Which when the priests of Nanaia had presented
and he had entered into the surrounds of the temple
with a small company, they shut the temple as soon as
Antioḵos had come in.
16 And opening a secret door of the roof, they threw
stones like thunderbolts, and struck down the captain,
cut them in pieces, smote off their heads and threw
them to those that were outside.
17 Baruḵ be our Elohim in all, who has delivered up
the wicked.
18 Therefore now that we have purposed to guard the
purification of the Hĕyḵal on the twenty-fifth day of the
month Kislĕw, we thought it necessary to notify you of
this, that you also might guard it, as the Feast of the
Sukkoth, and of the fire which was given to us when
Neḥemyah brought an offering after he had built the
Hĕyḵal and the altar.
19 For when our fathers were led into Paras, the
kohenim that were then dedicated took the fire of the
altar secretly, and hid it in a hollow place of a well
without water, where they kept it safe, so that the place
was unknown to all men.
20 Now after many years, when it pleased Elohim,
Neḥemyah, having been sent from the sovereign of
Paras, sent the descendants of those kohenim that
11

1510

2 MACCABEES

had hid the fire. But when they told us they found no
fire, but thick water;
21 he then commanded them to draw it up, and to
bring it. And when the slaughterings were laid,
Neḥemyah commanded the kohenim to sprinkle the
wood and the matters laid upon it with the water.
22 When this was done, and the time came that the
sun shone, which was hid in the cloud before, there
was a great fire kindled, so that every man marvelled.
23 And the kohenim made a prayer while the
slaughtering was consumed; both the kohenim and all
the rest - Yahonathan beginning, and the rest
answering to it - as Neḥemyah did.
24 And the prayer was after this manner: “O HWHY,
Aḏonai, Elohim, Creator of all things who is awesome
and mighty and righteous and showing favour and the
only kind Sovereign,
25 the only Giver of all things, the only righteous,
almighty and everlasting. You who delivers Yisra’ĕl
from all trouble and chose the fathers and qadosh
them.
26 “Receive the offering for all Your people Yisra’ĕl
and preserve Your own portion and qadosh them.
27 “Gather together those that are scattered from us,
deliver those that serve among the gentiles, look upon
those who are despised and abhorred and let the
gentiles know that You are our Elohim.
28 “Punish those that oppress us and do evil to us with
pride.
29 “Plant Your people again in Your qodesh place as
Mosheh has spoken.”
30 And the kohenim sang songs of thanksgiving.
31 Now when the offering was consumed, Neḥemyah
commanded the water that was left to be poured on
the great stones.

1511

MAQQAḆIM 2

When this was done, there was a flame kindled,
and it was added to by the light that shone from the
altar.
33 So when this matter was known, it was told the
sovereign of Paras, that in the place where the
kohenim that were led away had hid the fire, there
appeared water, and that Neḥemyah had purified the
offerings with it.
34 Then the sovereign, enclosing the place, qadosh it,
after he had examined the matter.
35 And the sovereign took many gifts, and bestowed
them on those whom he would esteem.
36 And Neḥemyah called this Naphthar, which is to
say, a cleansing; but many men call it Nephtar.
32

2 It is also found in the records that Yirmeyahu the
naḇi commanded those that were carried away to take
from the fire, as it has been declared,
2 and how the naḇi, having given them the Law,
charged them not to forget the Commands of HWHY,
and that they should not stray in their minds when they
see images of silver and gold with their ornaments.
3 And with other such words he urged them that the
Law should not depart from their hearts.
4 It was also contained in the same writing, that the
naḇi, being warned by Elohim, commanded the
Mishkan and the ark to go with him as he went up to
the mountain where Mosheh climbed up and saw the
inheritance of Elohim.
5 And when Yirmeyahu came there, he found a
hollow cave where he laid the Mishkan and the ark and
the altar of incense, and so sealed the entrance.
6 And some of those that followed him came to mark
the way, but they could not find it.
7 When Yirmeyahu saw this, he charged them
saying, “As for that place, it shall be unknown until the
1512

2 MACCABEES

time that Elohim gathers his people together again and
receives them in kindness.
8 “Then HWHY shall show them these matters and the
esteem of HWHY shall appear and also the cloud as it
was shown under Mosheh, and as when Shelomoh
desired that the place might be qadosh with honour.”
9 It was also declared, that he, being wise, offered
the slaughtering of dedication and of the finishing of
the Hĕyḵal.
10 And as when Mosheh prayed to HWHY, the fire
came down from the shamayim and consumed the
offerings. Even as Shelomoh also prayed and the fire
came down from the shamayim and consumed the
burnt offerings.
11 And Mosheh said, “Because the sin offering was
not to be eaten, it was consumed.”
12 So Shelomoh kept those eight days.
13 The same matters were also reported in the
writings and commentaries of Neḥemyah; and how he,
establishing a library, gathered together the acts of the
sovereigns and the neḇi’im and of Dawiḏ and the
letters of the sovereigns concerning the qodesh gifts.
14 Likewise, Yahuḏah also gathered together all those
matters that were lost because of the battle we had,
and they remain with us.
15 Therefore if you have need of these, send some to
bring them to you.
16 Now that we are about to celebrate the purification,
we have written to you, and you shall do well, if you
guard the same days.
17 We also trust, that the Elohim who delivered all His
people and gave them all an inheritance and the reign
and the kehunnah and the Miqdash,
18 as He promised in the Law, will shortly show favour
upon us, and gather us together out of every land
under the shamayim to the qodesh place; for He has
1513

MAQQAḆIM 2

delivered us out of great troubles and has qadosh the
place.
19 Now concerning Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah and his
brothers and the purification of the great Hĕyḵal and
the dedication of the altar,
20 and the battles against Antioḵos Epiphanĕs and
Eupator his son,
21 and the visible signs that came from the shamayim
to those that acted bravely in their honour for the
Yahuḏim so that, being but a few, they overcame the
whole country, and chased a multitude of foreigners,
22 and again recovered the Hĕyḵal renowned all the
world over, and freed the city, and upheld the Laws
which were declining, HWHY showing favour to them
with all kindness.
23 All these things I say, being declared by Yason of
Kurĕnĕ in five books, we will attempt to shorten in one
volume.
24 For considering the limitless number and the
difficulty which they find who desire to look into the
narrations of the story, for the variety of the matter,
25 we have been careful that those who read may
have delight, and that those who are eager to commit
to memory might have ease, and that all into whose
hands it comes might benefit.
26 Therefore to we who have taken upon ourselves
this painful labour of abridging, it was not easy, but a
matter of sweat and watchfulness.
27 Even as it is not easy for he that prepares a
banquet and seeks the benefit of others, yet for the
pleasure of many we will gladly undertake this with
great pains,
28 leaving to the author the exact handling of every
particular, and labouring to follow the rules of an
abridgement.
29 For as the master builder of a new house must care
for the whole building; but he that undertakes to lay it
1514

2 MACCABEES

out and paint it, must seek out proper adornments for
it; even so I think it is with us.
30 To stand upon every point and go over matters at
large and to be watchful in particulars, belongs to the
first author of the story,
31 but to use brevity, and avoid much labouring of the
work, is allowed to him that will make an abridgment.
32 Here then we will begin the story, only adding this
much to that which has been said, that it is a foolish
thing to make a long prologue, and to be short in the
story itself...

3 Now when the qodesh city was inhabited with all
peace and the Laws were guarded very well, because
of the righteousness of Onyah the kohĕn ha’gadol and
his hatred of wickedness,
2 it came to be that even the sovereigns themselves
honoured the place and extolled the Hĕyḵal with their
best gifts,
3 so that Seleukus of Asia bore all the costs
pertaining to the service of the offerings from his own
revenues.
4 But a certain Shim’on of the tribe of Binyamin, who
was made governor of the Hĕyḵal, fell out with the
kohĕn ha’gadol about disorder in the city.
5 And when he could not overcome Onyah, he went
to Apollonios the son of Thraseas, who then was
governor of Koĕlĕ Suria and Phoinikĕ,
6 and told him that the treasury in Yerushalayim was
full of an endless amount of silver, so that the multitude
of their riches, which did not pertain to the account of
the offerings, was innumerable, and that it was
possible to bring all into the sovereign’s hand.
7 Now when Apollonios came to the sovereign, and
had showed him some of the silver of which he was
told, the sovereign chose out Heliodorus his treasurer,
1515

MAQQAḆIM 2

and sent him with a command to bring him the silver
spoken of.
8 So Heliodorus promptly took his journey, under
pretense of visiting the cities of Koĕlĕ Suria and
Phoinikĕ, but indeed to fill the sovereign’s purpose.
9 And when he came to Yerushalayim, and had been
received in friendship by the kohĕn ha’gadol of the city,
he told him what information was given regarding the
silver and declared why he came and asked if these
things were indeed so.
10 Then the kohĕn ha’gadol told him that there was
such silver laid up for the relief of widows and
fatherless children,
11 and that some of it belonged to Hurkanos son of
Toḇiyah, a man of high position, and not as that wicked
Shim’on had misinformed; the sum of which in total
was four hundred talanton of silver and two hundred of
gold,
12 and that it was altogether impossible that such
wrongs should be done to those that had committed it
to the qodeshah of the place, and to the esteem and
undefiled qodeshah of the Hĕyḵal honoured all over
the world.
13 But because of the sovereign’s command given
him, Heliodorus said that by any means it must be
brought into the sovereign’s treasury.
14 So on the day which he appointed, he entered in to
order this matter, therefore there was no small distress
throughout the whole city.
15 But the kohenim, bowing themselves before the
altar in their kehunnah garments, called to the
shamayim on He that made a Law concerning matters
given to be kept, that they should safely be preserved
for such as had committed them to be kept.
16 Then whoever the kohĕn ha’gadol had looked in
the face, it would have wounded his heart, for his
1516

2 MACCABEES

appearance and his change in colour made clear the
inward agony of his mind.
17 For the man was so encompassed with fear and
horror of the body, that it was made clear to those that
looked upon him what sorrow he now had in his heart.
18 Others ran out of their houses gathering to the
general supplication, because the place was likely to
come into contempt.
19 And the women, girded with sackcloth under their
breasts, overflowed in the streets, and the maidens
that were kept in ran, some to the gates and some to
the walls, and others looked out of the windows.
20 And all, holding their hands toward the shamayim,
made supplication.
21 Then it would have pitied a man to see the falling
down of the multitude of all sorts, and the fear of the
kohĕn ha’gadol being in such an agony.
22 They then called upon HWHY the Almighty to guard
the matters entrusted safe and secure for those that
had committed them.
23 Nevertheless Heliodorus executed that which was
decreed.
24 Now as he was there present with his guard around
the treasury, HWHY of Ruaḥoth and the Prince of all
power, caused a great appearance, so that all that
though to come in with him were astonished at the
power of Elohim and fainted and were greatly
frightened.
25 For there appeared to them a horse with a
fearsome rider upon it, and adorned with a very
attractive covering. And it ran fiercely and smote at
Heliodorus with its forelegs and it seemed that he that
sat upon the horse had a harness completely of gold.
26 And two other young men appeared before him,
notable in strength, excellent in beauty and splendid in
apparel, who stood by him on either side and flogged
him continually and gave him very many stripes.
1517

MAQQAḆIM 2

And Heliodorus fell suddenly to the ground and was
surrounded with great darkness, but those that were
with him picked him up and put him into a palanquin.
28 So he, that recently came with a great procession
and with all his guard into the treasury, they carried
out, being unable to help himself with his weapons,
and making it clear they acknowledged the power of
Elohim.
29 For he, by the hand of Elohim was thrown down,
and lay speechless without any expectancy of life.
30 And they praised HWHY who had miraculously
honoured His own place, for the Hĕyḵal - which shortly
before was full of fear and trouble - when HWHY the
Almighty appeared, was filled with joy and gladness.
31 Then immediately some friends of Heliodorus who
lay ready to breathe his last, pleaded with Onyah that
he would call upon the Most High to grant him his life.
32 So the kohĕn ha’gadol, suspecting lest the
sovereign should wrongly think that some treachery
had been done to Heliodorus by the Yahuḏim, offered
an offering for the health of the man.
33 Now as the kohĕn ha’gadol was making an
atonement, the same young men in the same
garments appeared and stood beside Heliodorus
saying, “Give Onyah the kohĕn ha’gadol great thanks,
because for his sake HWHY has granted you life.
34 “And seeing that you have been flogged from the
shamayim, declare to all men the mighty power of
Elohim.” And when they had spoken these words, they
no longer appeared.
35 So after he had brought an offering to HWHY, and
made great vows to Him that had saved his life, and
embraced Onyah, Heliodorus returned with his army to
the sovereign.
36 Then he witnessed to all men the works of the great
Elohim, which he had seen with his eyes.
27

1518

2 MACCABEES

And when the Sovereign Heliodorus, who might be
a suitable man to be sent yet once again to
Yerushalayim said,
38 “If you have any enemy or traitor, send him there,
and you shall receive him well flogged, if he escapes
with his life. For in that place, no doubt; there is a
special power of Elohim.
39 “For he that dwells in the shamayim has His eye on
that place, and defends it; and He beats and destroys
those that come to damage it.”
40 And the matters concerning Heliodorus and the
keeping of the treasury, fell out on this sort.
37

4 This Shim’on now, of whom we spoke before,
having been a betrayer of the silver and of his country,
slandered Onyah as if he had terrified Heliodorus and
been the worker of these evils.
2 Thus he was bold to call him a traitor, that had
deserved good from the city and shown concern for his
own nation and was so ardent for the Laws.
3 But when their hatred went so far that murders were
committed by one of Shim’on’s faction,
4 Onyah seeing the danger of this contention, and
that Apollonios - being the governor of Koĕlĕ Suria and
Phoinikĕ - raged and increased Shim’on’s evil.
5 He went to the sovereign, not to be an accuser of
his countrymen, but seeking the good of all, both public
and private.
6 For he saw that it was impossible that the situation
should remain calm, and Shim’on leave his folly,
unless the sovereign looked into it.
7 But after the death of Seleukus, when Antioḵos
called Epiphanĕs took the reign, Yason the brother of
Onyah acted corruptly to be kohĕn ha’gadol,
8 promising to the sovereign by intercession three
hundred and sixty talanton of silver, and eighty
talanton from another revenue.
1519

MAQQAḆIM 2

Besides this, he promised to assign a hundred and
fifty more if he might have authority to establish a place
for exercise, and for the training up of youth in the
manner of the gentiles, and to describe those of
Yerushalayim by the name of Antioḵeians;
10 which when the sovereign had granted, and he had
acquired the rulership into his hand, he promptly
brought his own nation to Yawanite manner.
11 And he took away the royal privileges granted by
special favour to the Yahuḏim by means of Yoḥanan
the father of Eupolemus - who went ambassador to
Rome for peace and assistance - and putting down the
governments which were according to the Law, he
brought up new customs against the Law.
12 For he gladly built an exercise arena under the
tower itself, and brought the chief young men under his
subjection, and made them wear a hat.
13 Now such was the height of Yawanite ways and
increase of gentile manners through the exceeding
profaneness of Yason, that wicked wretch, and no
kohĕn ha’gadol;
14 that the kohenim had no heart to serve any more at
the altar, but despising the Hĕyḵal and neglecting the
slaughterings, hastened to be partakers of the unlawful
allowance in the exercise arena, called out after
striking the gong;
15 not remaining in the honours of their fathers, but
loving the esteem of the Yawanites above all.
16 For this reason severe calamity came upon them,
for those whose custom they followed so earnestly and
to whom they desired to be like in every way, came to
be their enemies and avengers.
17 For it is not a light thing to do wickedly against the
Laws of Elohim, but the time following shall make
known these things.
18 Now when the sovereign was present at the
quadrennial games that were held at Tsor,
9

1520

2 MACCABEES

this shameful Yason sent special messengers from
Yerushalayim, who were Antioḵeians to carry three
hundred draḵmas of silver to the offering of Heraklĕs,
which even the bearers thought not fit to present upon
the offering, because it was not right, but to be
reserved for other charges.
20 This silver then, in regard to the sender, was
appointed to Heraklĕs’ offering; but because of the
bearers, it was applied to the making of galleys.
21 Now when Apollonios the son of Mĕnĕstheos was
sent to Mitsrayim for the coronation of Sovereign
Ptolemaeus Philometor, Antioḵos, understanding him
not to be well inclined to his affairs, provided for his
own safety. So he came to Yapho, and from there to
Yerushalayim,
22 where he was honourably received by Yason and
by the city, and was brought in with torch alight and
with great shouting, and so afterward went with his
army to Phoinikĕ.
23 Three years afterward Yason sent Menelaos, the
brother of the same Shim’on, to take the silver to the
sovereign, and to put him in mind of some necessary
matters.
24 But he, being brought to the presence of the
sovereign, when he had exalted him for the splendid
appearance of his power, obtained the kehunnah for
himself, offering more than Yason by three hundred
talanton of silver.
25 So he came with the sovereign’s authority, bringing
nothing worthy of the high kehunnah, but having the
fury of a cruel tyrant and the rage of a savage beast.
26 Then Yason, who had undermined his own brother,
being undermined by another, was compelled to flee
to the land of the Ammonites;
27 so Menelaos gained the principality. But as for the
silver that he had promised to the sovereign, he gave
19

1521

MAQQAḆIM 2

no good order for it, although Sostratos the ruler of the
fortress required it,
28 for the gathering of the customs belonged to him.
Therefore they were both called before the sovereign.
29 Now Menelaos left his brother Lusimaḵos in his
place in the kehunnah, and Sostratos left Krĕtĕs, who
was governor of the Kuprians.
30 While those matters were taking place, those of
Tarsos and Mallos revolted because they were given
to the sovereign’s concubine called Antioḵos.
31 Then the sovereign came in haste to appease
matters, leaving Andronikos, a man in authority as his
deputy.
32 Now Menelaos, supposing that he had gained a
convenient time, stole some vessels of gold out of the
Hĕyḵal, and gave some of them to Andronikos, and
some he sold to Tsor and the cities round about.
33 When Onyah knew for certain, he reproved him and
withdrew himself to a refuge at Daphnĕ, that is near
Antioḵeia.
34 Therefore Menelaos, taking Andronikos aside,
asked him to take Onyah into his hands; who being
persuaded and coming to Onyah in deceit, gave him
his right hand with oaths. And though he was
suspected by him, yet he persuaded him to come out
from the refuge, whom he promptly shut up without
regard for righteousness.
35 For which cause, not only the Yahuḏim, but also
many of other nations were greatly enraged and were
very grieved for the unrighteous murder of the man.
36 And when the sovereign had come again from the
places around Kilikia, the Yahuḏim that were in the city
and some of the Yawanites that loathed the fact also,
complained because Onyah was slain without cause.
37 Therefore Antioḵos was deeply sorry and moved to
pity, and wept because of the sober and modest
behaviour of he that was dead.
1522

2 MACCABEES

And being kindled with wrath, he promptly took
away from Andronikos his purple, and tore off his
garments, and leading him through the whole city to
that very place where he had committed
unrighteousness against Onyah, there he slew the
cursed murderer. Thus HWHY repaid him his
punishment as he had deserved.
39 Now when many temple robberies had been
committed in the city by Lusimaḵos with the consent of
Menelaos, and the fruit of which was spread abroad,
many vessels of gold already having been carried
away, the multitude gathered themselves together
against Lusimaḵos.
40 So when the common people rose up being filled
with rage, Lusimaḵos armed about three thousand
men and first began to do violence; a certain Auranus
being the leader, a man far gone in years, and no less
in folly.
41 Some of them then seeing the attempt of
Lusimaḵos took stones, some clubs, others taking
handfuls of dust that was at hand, threw them all
together at Lusimaḵos, and those that attacked them.
42 Thus they wounded many of them, and some they
struck to the ground, and they forced all of them to flee.
But as for the temple-robber himself, they killed him
beside the treasury.
43 Therefore because of these matters there was an
accusation laid against Menelaos.
44 Now when the sovereign came to Tsor, three men
that were sent from the senate pleaded the case
before him,
45 but Menelaos, being now convicted, promised
Ptolemaeus the son of Dorumĕnĕs to give him much
silver, if he would pacify the sovereign toward him.
46 So Ptolemaeus taking the sovereign aside into a
certain gallery, as it were to get some air, caused him
to think differently,
38

1523

MAQQAḆIM 2

so that he discharged Menelaos from the
accusations, who was causing all the evil however,
and those poor men, who, if they had stated their case
- even before the Skuthians, should have been judged
innocent - those he condemned to death.
48 So those that pursued the matter for the city and for
the people and for the qodesh vessels, quickly
suffered unrighteous punishment.
49 Therefore even those of Tsor, moved with hatred
for that wicked deed, had them buried honourably.
50 And so through the covetousness of those that
were of power, Menelaos still remained in authority,
increasing in evil, and being a great traitor to the
citizens.
47

5 About the same time Antioḵos prepared his second
voyage to Mitsrayim.
2 And then it came to be, that through all the city for
almost forty days, there was seen horsemen running
in the air in golden garments, and armed with lances
like a band of soldiers,
3 and bands of horsemen in array attacking and
charging against one another with shaking shields and
multitudes of spears and drawing swords and shooting
arrows and glittering golden ornaments with harnesses
of all kinds.
4 Therefore every man prayed that the apparition
might turn to good.
5 Now when a false rumour had gone out, as though
Antioḵos had been dead, Yason took at the least one
thousand men, and made a sudden assault on the city;
and those that were on the walls retreated, and with
the city being eventually taken, Menelaos fled into the
fortress.
6 But Yason slew his own citizens without pity, not
considering that to win the day from them over his own
nation would be a very grievous day for him; but
1524

2 MACCABEES

thinking they had been his enemies whom he
conquered, and not his countrymen.
7 However for all this he did not obtain the
principality, but in the end received shame for the
recompense of his treason, and fled again into the land
of the Ammonites.
8 In the end therefore, he had an unpleasant return,
being accused before Aretas the sovereign of the
Araḇians, fleeing from city to city, pursued by all men,
hated as a forsaker of the Laws, and being held in
abomination as an open enemy of his country and
countrymen, he was thrown out into Mitsrayim.
9 So he that had driven many out of their land
perished in a strange land, retiring to the
Lakedemonians, and thinking to find support there by
reason of his relatives.
10 And he that had thrown out many unburied had
none to mourn for him, nor any solemn funerals at all,
nor tomb with his fathers.
11 Now when this that was done came to the
sovereign’s ear, he thought that Yahuḏah had
revolted, so departing from Mitsrayim in a rage, he took
the city by force of arms,
12 and commanded his men of battle not to spare any
they met, but to slay any who went up on the houses.
13 Thus there was slaughter of young and old; doing
away with men, women and children; slaying of
maidens and infants.
14 And there were eighty thousand destroyed within
the space of three whole days, of which forty thousand
were slain in the battle, and no fewer sold than slain.
15 Yet was he not content with this, but presumed to
go into the most qodesh Hĕyḵal of all the world Menelaos being his guide - that traitor to the Laws and
to his own country.
16 And taking the qodesh vessels with polluted hands,
and with profane hands pulling down those that were
1525

MAQQAḆIM 2

dedicated by other sovereigns to the adornment and
esteem and honour of the place, he gave away.
17 And Antioḵos was so proud of heart that he did not
consider that HWHY was wroth for a while for the sins
of those that dwelt in the city, and therefore his eye
was not on the place.
18 For had they not been previously entwined in many
sins, this man as soon as he had come, had promptly
been scourged and put back from his presumption, as
Heliodorus was, whom Seleukus the sovereign sent to
view the treasury.
19 Nevertheless Elohim did not choose the people for
the sake of the place, but the place for the sake of the
people.
20 And therefore the place itself, that shared with
those in the distress that befell the nation, afterward
shared in the benefits sent from HWHY, and as it was
forsaken in the wrath of the Almighty, so again, HWHY
the Almighty having restored it to favour, was put up
with all esteem.
21 So when Antioḵos had carried out of the Hĕyḵal one
thousand eight hundred talanton, he departed in haste
to Antioḵeia, thinking in his pride to sail on the land and
pass over the sea on foot, such was the pride of his
heart.
22 And he left governors to oppress the nation: at
Yerushalayim, Philippos, a Phrugian of his land, and in
many ways more barbarous than he that appointed
him there.
23 And at Gerizim: Andronikos, and also Menelaos,
who worse than all the rest bore a heavy hand over the
citizens, having a malicious heart against his race the
Yahuḏim.
24 He also sent that detestable ringleader Apollonios
with an army of twenty-two thousand, commanding
him to slay all those in their prime and to sell the
women and the younger ones,
1526

2 MACCABEES

who coming to Yerushalayim and pretending
peace, waited till the qodesh day of the Shabbath,
when finding the Yahuḏim keeping a qodesh day, he
commanded his men to arm themselves.
26 And so he slew all those that went to the celebration
of the Shabbath, and running through the city with
weapons slew great multitudes.
27 But Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah with about nine others,
withdrew into the wilderness with his army, and lived
in the mountains after the manner of beasts, eating
plants continually, lest they should be partakers of the
pollution.
25

6 Not long after this, the sovereign sent an old man of
Athĕnai to compel the Yahuḏim to depart from the
Laws of their fathers and not to live after the Laws of
Elohim,
2 and to also pollute the Hĕyḵal in Yerushalayim, and
to call it the temple of Zeus Olympios; and the one in
Gerizim: of Zeus the defender of foreigners, as those
that dwelt in the place desired.
3 The coming of this trouble was very grievous to the
people,
4 for the Hĕyḵal was filled with loose behaviour and
revelry by the gentiles, who played with whores and
went aside with women within the borders of the
qodesh places, and besides that, brought in objects
that were not right.
5 The altar was also filled with abominations which
the Law forbids,
6 neither was it allowed for a man to guard Shabbath
days or ancient feasts, or to profess himself at all to be
a Yahuḏi.
7 And every month in the day of the sovereign’s birth
they were taken under bitter constraint to eat of the
offerings; and when the fast of Dionusos was kept, the
1527

MAQQAḆIM 2

Yahuḏim were compelled to go in the procession of
Dionusos carrying ivy.
8 And a decree went out to the neighbouring cities of
the gentiles by the word of Ptolemaeus, against the
Yahuḏim, that they should observe the same practice
and be partakers of their offerings,
9 and whoever would not conform themselves to the
ways of the gentiles should be put to death. Then one
could see the present misery;
10 for there were two women brought who had
circumcised their children, whom when they had
openly led round about the city - the infants hanging at
their breasts - they threw them down from the wall.
11 And others that had run together into caves nearby
to guard the Shabbath day secretly, being discovered
by Philippos, were all burned together, for they would
not for conscience defend themselves in honour of the
most qodesh day.
12 Now I plead to those that read this book, that they
do not be discouraged because of these calamities,
but that they consider these punishments not to be for
destruction, but for a disciplining of our nation.
13 For it is a sign of His great goodness, when evildoers are not given any length of time, but promptly
punished.
14 For He does not deal with us as with other nations
whom HWHY patiently awaits to punish, till they have
come to the fulness of their sins,
15 lest having come to the height of sin, He should
take vengeance on us afterwards,
16 and therefore He never withdraws His kindness
from us. And though He punishes with adversity, yet
He never forsakes His people.
17 But let this that we have spoken be for a warning to
us; and now will we come to the declaring of the matter
in a few words.
1528

2 MACCABEES

Eli’ezer, one of the principal scribes, an aged man
and of a well-favoured presence, was forced to open
his mouth, and to eat pig’s flesh.
19 But he, choosing rather to die with honour than to
live stained with such an abomination, spat it out, and
went to the torture of his own accord,
20 as is necessary for those to go that stand firm
against such matters that are not Lawful to be tasted
even for love of life.
21 But those who were in charge of that wicked feast,
took aside the man because of the old acquaintance
they had with him, and urged him to bring flesh of his
own provision, such as was Lawful for him to use, and
make as if he ate of the flesh taken from the offering
commanded by the sovereign;
22 that in doing so he might be delivered from death,
and find favour with them for the old friendship.
23 But he began to consider wisely, as was befit for
his years and the excellency of his old age and the
honour of his head on which grey had come, and his
most upright Torah from childhood, or rather the
qodesh Law made and given by Elohim. Therefore he
answered
accordingly,
and
requested
they
immediately send him to the grave.
24 “For it is not proper for our age,” he said, “in any
way to pretend, whereby many young ones might think
that Eli’ezer, being ninety years old, had now gone to
a strange religion.
25 “And so they, through my hypocrisy and desire to
live a little time and a moment longer should be
deceived by me and I bring a stain on my old age and
make it abominable.
26 “For though for the present time I should be
delivered from the punishment of men, yet I would not
escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive, nor
dead.
18

1529

MAQQAḆIM 2

“Therefore now, bravely exchanging this life, I will
show myself such a one as befits my age,
28 and leave a notable example to those who are
young; to die willingly and courageously for the
esteemed and qodesh Laws.” And when he had said
these words, he immediately went to the torture,
29 those leading him changing the kindness they bore
him a little before into hatred, because they supposed
the previous words came from a desperate being.
30 And when he was ready to die with stripes, he
groaned and said, “It is known to HWHY who has the
qodesh wisdom, that whereas I might have been
delivered from death, I now endure severe pains in
body by being beaten, but in spirit I am well content to
suffer these, because I revere Him!”
31 And so the man died, leaving his death as an
example of a noble courage, and a remembrance of
strength, not only to young men, but to all his nation.
27

7 It also came to be, that seven brothers with their
mother were taken, and compelled by the sovereign against the Law - to eat pig’s flesh, and were tortured
with scourges and whips.
2 But one of them that spoke first said, “What would
you ask or learn from us? We are ready to die, rather
than to transgress the Laws of our fathers.”
3 Then
the
sovereign
becoming
enraged,
commanded pots and cauldrons to be heated.
4 These promptly being heated, he commanded to
cut out the tongue of he that spoke first, and to cut off
the outer parts of his body with the rest of his brothers
and his mother looking on.
5 Now when he was mutilated in this way over his
entire body, he commanded him while still alive to be
brought to the fire, and to be fried in the cauldron. And
as the smoke of the cauldron spread widely, they
1530

2 MACCABEES

encouraged one another with their mother to die
bravely saying,
6 “HWHY Elohim watches over us and in truth has
compassion on us, as Mosheh spoke in his song which
witnessed to their faces saying, ‘And He has
compassion on his servants.’ ”
7 So when the first had died in this manner, they
brought the second to make him a mockery. And when
they had pulled off the skin from his head with the hair,
they asked him, “Will you eat before you are tortured
over every part of your body?”
8 But he answered in his own language and said,
“No.” Therefore he also received the next torture in turn
as the former had.
9 And when he was at the last gasp he said, “In wrath
you remove us from this present life, but the Sovereign
of the world shall raise up we who have died for His
Laws, unto everlasting ḥai!”
10 After him, the third was made a mockery, and when
demanded, he immediately put out his tongue and held
out his hands bravely
11 and said courageously, “These I had from the
shamayim and for His Laws I despise them, and from
Him I expect to receive them again.”
12 Therefore the sovereign, and those that were with
him, marvelled at the young man’s courage that he
regarded the pains as nothing.
13 Now when this man was also dead, they tortured
and mutilated the fourth in a similar way.
14 So when he was ready to die he said, “It is good to
be put to death by men; to look for expectancy from
Elohim to be raised up again by Him. As for you, you
shall have no resurrection to ḥai.”
15 Afterward they brought the fifth also, and mutilated
him.
16 Then he looked at the sovereign and said, “You
have power over men, you are corruptible, you do what
1531

MAQQAḆIM 2

you want; yet do not think that our nation is forsaken
by Elohim.
17 “But wait a while and see His great power, how He
will distress you and your seed.”
18 After him they also brought the sixth, who being
ready to die said, “Do not be deceived by any means,
for we suffer these matters because of ourselves,
having sinned against our Elohim; therefore great
matters are done to us.
19 “But do not think, you who takes in hand to strive
against Elohim, that you shall escape unpunished.”
20 But the mother was greater above all and worthy of
honourable remembrance; for when she saw her
seven sons slain within the space of one day, she bore
it with good courage because of the expectancy that
she had in HWHY.
21 She also encouraged every one of them in her own
language. Filled with a courageous spirit and stirring
up her womanly thoughts with a brave face, she said
to them,
22 “I cannot tell how you came into my womb; for I
neither gave you breath nor life, nor was it I that formed
the members of every one of you.
23 “But without doubt the Creator of the world who
formed the generation of man and revealed the
beginning of all, will also give you of His own kindness,
breath and ḥai again, as you disregard now your own
beings for the sake of His Laws.”
24 Now while the youngest was still alive, Antioḵos,
thinking himself despised and suspecting it to be a
reproachful speech, did not only encourage him with
words, but also assured him with oaths, that he would
make him both a rich and baruḵ man if he would turn
from the Laws of his fathers, and that he would also
accept him as his friend, and trust him with affairs.
25 But when the young man would in no way listen to
him, the sovereign called his mother and encouraged
1532

2 MACCABEES

her that she should counsel the young man to save his
life.
26 And when he had encouraged her with many
words, she promised him that she would counsel her
son.
27 But she, bowing herself toward him, laughing the
cruel tyrant to scorn, spoke in her nation’s language in
this way; “O my son, have pity on me who bore you
nine months in my womb, and gave you three years
and nourished you and brought you up to this age and
endured the troubles of teaching.
28 “Please my son, look on the shamayim and the
earth and all that is in them and consider that Elohim
made them from that which was not; and so was
mankind made likewise.
29 “Do not fear this torturer, but being worthy of your
brothers, accept your death that I may receive you
again in kindness with your brothers.”
30 While she was still speaking these words, the
young man said, “Whom do you wait for? I will not obey
the sovereign’s command, but I will obey the
Command of the Law that was given to our fathers by
Mosheh.
31 “And you, who has been the author of all evil
against the Iḇrim, shall not escape the hands of
Elohim!
32 “For we suffer because of our sins,
33 and although the living Elohim is wroth with us a
little while for our discipline and correction, yet He shall
be at one again with his servants.
34 “But you, O wicked man, and of all others most evil,
do not be lifted up without a cause nor puffed up with
uncertain expectancies, lifting up your hand against
the servants of Elohim;
35 for you have not yet escaped the judgment of Ĕl
Shaddai, who sees all.
1533

MAQQAḆIM 2

“For our brothers, who now have suffered a short
pain, are dead under Elohim’s Covenant of everlasting
ḥai; but you, through the judgment of Elohim, shall
receive righteous punishment for your pride.
37 “But I, as my brothers, offer up my body and life for
the Laws of our fathers, pleading to Elohim that He
would speedily be kind to our nation, and that you, by
torture and plagues may confess that He alone is
Elohim.
38 “And that in my brothers and I, the wrath of the
Almighty, which is brought upon our nation, may
cease.”
39 Then the sovereign being in a rage, and taking
seriously how he was mocked treated him worse than
all the rest.
40 So this man died undefiled, and put his whole trust
in HWHY.
41 Last of all, the mother died after the sons.
42 Let this be enough now to have spoken concerning
the idolatrous feasts and the extreme tortures.
36

8 Then Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah, and those that were with
him, went secretly into the towns and called their clans
together, and took to them all who continued in the
belief of the Yahuḏim and assembled about six
thousand men.
2 And they called upon HWHY, that He would look
upon the people that were trodden down most of all,
and also favour the Hĕyḵal profaned by wicked men,
3 and that He would have compassion on the city
severely despoiled and ready to be levelled to the
ground, and hear the blood that cried out to Him.
4 And remember the evil slaughter of harmless
infants, and the blasphemies committed against His
Name, and that He would show His hatred against the
wicked.
1534

2 MACCABEES

Now when Maqqaḇah had his army with him, he
could not be resisted by the gentiles, for the wrath of
HWHY was turned into kindness.
6 Therefore he came suddenly, and burned towns
and cities, and took into his hands the most
advantageous positions, and overcame and put to
flight no small number of his enemies.
7 And he took special advantage of the night for such
secret attacks, so that the renown of his deeds was
spread everywhere.
8 So when Philippos saw that this man increased
little by little, and that matters prospered with him still
more and more, he wrote to Ptolemaeus the governor
of Koĕlĕ Suria and Phoinikĕ to give more support to
the sovereign’s affairs.
9 Then promptly choosing Nikanor the son of
Patroklos, one of his special friends, he sent him with
no fewer than twenty thousand of all nations under him
to root out the whole generation of the Yahuḏim, and
he also joined Gorgias, a captain with him, who in
matters of battle had great experience.
10 So Nikanor undertook to make much silver from the
captive Yahuḏim, to bear the expense of the tribute of
two thousand talanton which the sovereign was to pay
to the Romans.
11 Therefore he immediately sent to the cities on the
sea coast, proclaiming a sale of the captive Yahuḏim,
and promising that they should have ninety bodies for
one talent - not expecting the vengeance that was to
follow upon him from Ĕl Shaddai.
12 Now when word was brought to Yahuḏah of
Nikanor’s coming, and he had informed those that
were with him that the army was at hand,
13 those that were fearful and distrusted the rightruling of Elohim, fled and carried themselves away.
5

1535

MAQQAḆIM 2

Others sold all that they had left, and also sought
HWHY to deliver those sold by the wicked Nikanor
before they met together.
15 And if not for their own sakes, yet for the Covenants
He had made with their fathers, and for the sake of His
qodesh and esteemed Name by which they were
called.
16 So Maqqaḇah called his men together totaling six
thousand, and encouraged them not to be stricken with
terror by the enemy nor to fear the great multitude of
the gentiles who came wickedly against them; but to
fight bravely,
17 and to put before their eyes the unrighteous
destruction that they had done to the qodesh place,
and the cruel handling of the city of which they made a
mockery, and also the taking away of the authority of
their forefathers.
18 “For they,” he said, “trust in their weapons and
boldness; but our confidence is in the Almighty who at
a nod can throw down both they that come against us,
and also all the world.”
19 And, he recounted to them what helps their
forefathers had found, and how they were delivered,
when a hundred and eighty-five thousand perished
under Sanḥĕriḇ.
20 And he told them of the battle that they had in Baḇel
with the Galatians, how they came with eight thousand
Yahuḏim in all to the battle, with four thousand
Makedonians, and with the Makedonians being
perplexed, the eight thousand destroyed a hundred
and twenty thousand because of the help that they had
from the shamayim, and so received a great booty.
21 So when he had emboldened them with these
words, and were ready to die for the Law and their
nation, he divided his army into four parts.
14

1536

2 MACCABEES

And he joined with his own brothers, leaders of
each band, that is: Shim’on and Yosĕph and
Yahonathan, giving each one fifteen hundred men.
23 He also appointed Eli’ezer to read the qodesh
Book. And when he had given them this watchword:
‘The help of Elohim,’ he led the first band.
24 And by the help of the Almighty they slew over nine
thousand of their enemies, and wounded and injured
the most part of Nikanor’s army, and so put all to flight,
25 and took the silver of those that came to buy them
and pursued them a long way, but lacking time they
returned.
26 For it was the day before the Shabbath and
therefore they would no longer pursue them.
27 So when they had gathered their armour together,
and plundered their enemies, they occupied
themselves on the Shabbath giving much praise and
thanks to HWHY who had delivered them that day,
which was the beginning of kindness poured upon
them.
28 And after the Shabbath, when they had given part
of the spoils to the wounded and the widows and
orphans, the remainder they divided among
themselves and their servants.
29 When this was done and they had made a common
prayer, they pleaded the kindness of Elohim to be
reconciled with his servants forever.
30 And of those that were with Timotheos and
Bakḵidĕs, who fought against them, slew over twenty
thousand and easily took high and strong towers and
divided much more spoils among themselves and
made the wounded, orphans, widows and also even
the aged, equal in spoils with themselves.
31 And when they had gathered their armour together,
they laid them all up carefully in convenient places, and
the remnant of the spoils they brought to
Yerushalayim.
22

1537

MAQQAḆIM 2

They also slew Phularḵĕs, that wicked person, who
with Timotheos, and had hated the Yahuḏim in many
ways.
33 Furthermore at the time they kept the feast for the
victory in their country they burned Kallisthĕnĕs, who
had lit fire to the qodesh gates and had fled into a little
house. And so he received a right reward for his
wickedness.
34 As for that most shameful Nikanor who had brought
one thousand merchants to buy the Yahuḏim,
35 he was, through the help of HWHY, brought down by
those of whom he regarded as least; and removing his
splendid apparel and discharging his army, he went
through the land like a fugitive slave to Antioḵeia
receiving great dishonour, in that his army was
destroyed.
36 So he, who took it upon himself to provide to the
Romans their tribute by means of captives in
Yerushalayim, proclaimed abroad, that the Yahuḏim
had Elohim to fight for them, and therefore they could
not be hurt because they followed the Laws that He
gave them.
32

9 About that time Antioḵos came out of the country of
Paras with dishonour;
2 for he had entered the city called Persepolis, and
attempted to rob the temple and to hold the city;
therefore the multitude running to defend themselves
with their weapons put them to flight. And so it came
to be, that Antioḵos being put to flight by the
inhabitants returned with shame.
3 Now when he came to Aḥmetha, news was brought
to him what had befallen Nikanor and Timotheos.
4 Then swelling with wrath, he thought to avenge
upon the Yahuḏim the shame done to him by those
that made him flee. Therefore he commanded his
charioteer to drive without stopping, and to complete
1538

2 MACCABEES

the journey, the judgment of Elohim now following him.
For he had spoken proudly in this manner: that he
would come to Yerushalayim and make it a common
graveyard of the Yahuḏim.
5 But HWHY Almighty, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl smote
him with an incurable and invisible plague; for as soon
as he had spoken these words, a pain of the bowels
that was incurable came upon him and severe pain of
the inner parts.
6 And that most righteously, for he had tortured other
men’s inward parts with many and strange tortures.
7 However he did not cease at all from his boasting,
but was still filled with pride, breathing out fire in his
rage against the Yahuḏim and commanded to hasten
the journey. But it came to be that he fell down from
his chariot, dragged violently so that having a serious
fall, all the members of his body were in severe pain.
8 And so he that shortly before thought he might
command the waves of the sea - so proud was he
beyond the condition of man - and weigh the high
mountains in a balance, was now thrown to the ground
and dragged in a chariot, showing to all the manifest
power of Elohim.
9 Therefore the worms crawled out of the body of this
wicked man, and while he lived in anguish and pain,
his flesh rotted away and the filthiness of his smell was
offensive to his whole army.
10 And the man that shortly before thought he could
reach to the stars of the shamayim, no man could
endure to carry for his intolerable stench.
11 Therefore being plagued, he began to diminish his
great pride and to come to the knowledge of himself by
the punishment of Elohim - his pain increasing every
moment.
12 And when he could not stand his own smell himself,
he spoke these words: “It is right to be subject to
1539

MAQQAḆIM 2

Elohim, and a man who is mortal should not think
proudly of himself as if he were Elohim.”
13 This wicked person also vowed to HWHY who would
no longer show favour to him, saying
14 that the qodesh city - to which he was going in
haste to lay it level to the ground, and to make it a
common graveyard - he would release.
15 And regarding the Yahuḏim - whom he had judged
not worthy so much as to be buried, but to be thrown
out with their children to be devoured by the birds and
wild beasts - he would make them all equals to the
citizens of Athĕnai.
16 And the qodesh Hĕyḵal, which he had previously
plundered, he would embellish with costly gifts and
restore all the qodesh utensils with many more, and
out of his own revenue provide the charges pertaining
to the offerings.
17 And that even he would also become a Yahuḏi
himself and go through all the inhabited world and
declare the power of Elohim.
18 But for all this, his agony would not cease; for the
righteous judgment of Elohim had come upon him.
Therefore in despair over his health, he wrote to the
Yahuḏim the following letter containing the form of a
plea, in this manner:
19 “Antioḵos, sovereign and governor, desires much
joy, health and prosperity to his citizens the good
Yahuḏim.
20 “If you and your children are well and your affairs
are pleasing to you, I give very great thanks to Elohim,
having my expectancy in the shamayim.
21 “As for me, I was weak, or else I would have
remembered kindly your honour and kindness in
returning from Paras. But being taken with a grievous
disease, I thought it necessary to care for the common
safety of all;
1540

2 MACCABEES

not distrusting my health, but having great
expectancy to escape this sickness.
23 “But considering that even my father, at the time he
led an army into the high countries appointed a
successor,
24 so that if any thing fell out contrary to expectation,
or if any news was brought that was grievous, those of
the land, knowing to whom the state was left, might not
be troubled.
25 “Also, considering that the bordering princes and
neighbours of my reign wait for opportunities and
expect what shall take place, I have appointed my son
Antioḵos sovereign, whom I often entrusted and
commended to many of you when I went up into the
high provinces; to whom I have written as follows.
26 “Therefore please, I ask you to remember the
service that I have done for you in general, and in
special, and that every man will remain trustworthy to
my son and I.
27 “For I persuaded that he, understanding my mind
will kindly and favourably render your desires.”
28 Thus the murderer and blasphemer having suffered
most grievously, as he had treated other men, so he
died a miserable death in a foreign country in the
mountains.
29 And Philippos, who was brought up with him,
carried away his body, who also fearing the son of
Antioḵos went to Mitsrayim to Ptolemaeus Philometor.
22

10 Now with HWHY guiding them Maqqaḇah and his
army recovered the Hĕyḵal and the city.
2 And they pulled down the altars and also the
chapels which the gentiles had built in the open street.
3 And having cleansed the Hĕyḵal they made
another altar, and striking flint they made fire out of it
and offered a slaughtering after two years, and offered
incense and lamps and showbread.
1541

MAQQAḆIM 2

When that was done, they bowed down and
pleaded to HWHY that they would no longer come upon
such troubles; but if they sinned any more against Him,
that He Himself would discipline them with kindness,
and that they would not be delivered over to the
blasphemous and foreign nations.
5 Now on the same day that the foreigners profaned
the Hĕyḵal; on that very same day it was cleansed
again, even the twenty-fifth day of the same month,
which is Kislĕw.
6 And they observed the eight days with gladness, as
in the Feast of Sukkoth, remembering that not long
before they had held the Feast of Sukkoth, as when
they wandered in the mountains and caves like beasts.
7 Therefore they carried branches and leafy twigs
and also palms, and sang psalms to He that had given
them good success in cleansing His Place.
8 They also made a law by common decree, that
every year those days should be observed by the
whole nation of the Yahuḏim.
9 And this was the end of Antioḵos, called
Epiphanĕs.
10 Now we shall declare the acts of Antioḵos Eupator,
who was the son of this wicked man, assembling
briefly the calamities of the battles.
11 So when he had attained the crown, he appointed
a certain Lusias over the affairs of his reign, and
appointed him his chief governor of Koĕlĕ Suria and
Phoinikĕ.
12 For Ptolemaeus, who was called Makron, choosing
rather to do righteousness to the Yahuḏim for the
wrong that had been done to them, sought to continue
peace with them.
13 So being accused by the sovereign’s friends before
Eupator, and called a traitor at every command that
Philometor had given to him, because he had left
Cyprus and departed to Antioḵos Epiphanĕs. And
4

1542

2 MACCABEES

seeing that he was in a dishonourable position, he was
so discouraged that he poisoned himself and died.
14 But when Gorgias was governor of the towers, he
hired soldiers and maintained battle continually with
the Yahuḏim.
15 And also the Eḏomites, having taken into their
hands the most advantageous towers, kept the
Yahuḏim occupied and accepting those that were
banished from Yerushalayim, they prepared to engage
in battle.
16 Then those that were with Maqqaḇah pleaded and
sought Elohim that He would be their Helper; and so
they ran with force upon the strongholds of the
Eḏomites.
17 And attacking them mightily, they gained the towers
and held off all that fought on the wall and slew all that
fell into their hands, and killed no fewer than twenty
thousand.
18 And because some, who were no less than nine
thousand, had fled together into two very strong
fortresses, having all the provisions necessary to
sustain the siege,
19 Maqqaḇah left Shim’on and Yosĕph and also
Zakkai and those that were with him, who were enough
to besiege them, and he departed to those places
which needed his help more.
20 Now those that were with Shim’on, being led by
covetousness, were persuaded with silver by some of
those that were in the fortress, and took seventy
thousand draḵmas and let some of them escape.
21 But when Maqqaḇah was told what was done, he
called the governors of the people together and
accused those men, that they had sold their brothers
for silver and released their enemies to fight against
them.
22 So he slew those that were found traitors and
immediately took the two fortresses.
1543

MAQQAḆIM 2

And having good skill with all weapons he took in
hand, he slew more than twenty thousand in the two
towers.
24 Now when Timotheos, whom the Yahuḏim had
overcome before, had gathered a great multitude of
foreign armies, and not a few horses from Asia, came
intending to take the Yahuḏim by force.
25 But when he drew near, those that were with
Maqqaḇah turned to pray to Elohim, and threw dust on
their heads and girded their loins with sackcloth,
26 and fell down at the foot of the altar and pleaded for
Him to be kind to them and to be an enemy to their
enemies and an adversary to their adversaries, as the
Law declares.
27 So after the prayer they took their weapons and
went further on from the city; and when they drew near
to their enemies, they remained secluded.
28 Now early when the sun had risen, they both
engaged in battle; the one group having their strength
together with also their refuge in HWHY for a promise of
their win and deliverance, the other side making rage
the leader of their battle.
29 But when the battle grew fierce, five radiant men
from the shamayim on horses appeared to the enemy,
with bridles of gold. And two of them led the Yahuḏim,
30 and took Maqqaḇah between them, and covered
him on every side with weapons, guarding him and
shooting arrows and lightning against the enemy, so
that being confused with blindness and troubled, they
were killed.
31 And there were twenty thousand five hundred
footmen slain, and six hundred horsemen.
32 As for Timotheos himself, he fled into a stronghold,
called Gezer, where Ḵaereas was governor.
33 But those that were with Maqqaḇah laid siege
against the fortress courageously for four days.
23

1544

2 MACCABEES

And those that were within, trusting in the strength
of the place, blasphemed exceedingly, and spoke
wicked words.
35 Nevertheless, early on the fifth day, twenty young
men of Maqqaḇah’s army filled with wrath because of
the blasphemies, assaulted the wall bravely and with
great courage killed all those they encountered.
36 Others also going up after them, while they were
occupied with those that were within, burned the
towers, and lighting fires burned the blasphemers
alive. And others broke open the gates, and having let
in the rest of the army, took the city
37 and killed Timotheos who was hiding in some pit,
with Ḵaereas his brother and Apollophanĕs.
38 When this was done, they praised HWHY with
psalms and thanksgiving who had done such
greatness for Yisra’ĕl, and given them the victory.
34

11 Not long after, Lusias the sovereign’s protector
and cousin, who also managed the affairs, took great
displeasure in that which was done.
2 And when he had gathered about eighty thousand
with all the horsemen, he came against the Yahuḏim,
thinking to make the city a dwelling for the gentiles,
3 and to make a profit from the Hĕyḵal, as from the
other temples of the gentiles, and to put up the high
kehunnah for sale every year;
4 not at all considering the power of Elohim, but
puffed up with his tens of thousands of footmen, and
his thousands of horsemen, and his eighty elephants.
5 So he came to Yahuḏah, and drew near to Bĕyth
Tsur which was a fortified town, but about five stadion
away from Yerushalayim, and he laid heavy siege to it.
6 Now when those that were with Maqqaḇah heard
that he besieged the towers, they and all the people
pleaded to HWHY with lamentation and tears that He
would send a good messenger to deliver Yisra’ĕl.
1545

MAQQAḆIM 2

Then Maqqaḇah himself took weapons first of all,
encouraging the others to risk their lives together with
him to help their brothers. So they went out together
with one mind.
8 And while they were at Yerushalayim, there
appeared before them one in white garments on
horseback, brandishing his weapons of gold.
9 Then they praised the kindness of Elohim all
together and took courage, so that they were ready not
only to fight with men, but with most fierce beasts, and
to break through walls of iron.
10 So they marched forward with their weapons,
having a Helper from the shamayim, for HWHY was kind
to them.
11 And making a charge on their enemies like lions,
they slew eleven thousand footmen and sixteen
hundred horsemen, and put all the others to flight.
12 Also many of them escaped stripped and wounded,
and Lusias himself fled away shamefully and escaped.
13 Being a man of understanding, accepting the loss
he had, and considering that the Iḇrim could not be
overcome because Ĕl Shaddai helped them, he sent
to them
14 and persuaded them to agree to all reasonable
conditions, and promised that he would persuade the
sovereign that he must be a friend to them.
15 Then Maqqaḇah consented to all that Lusias
desired, being careful of the common good, and
whatever Maqqaḇah wrote to Lusias concerning the
Yahuḏim, the sovereign granted it.
16 For there were letters written to the Yahuḏim from
Lusias to this effect: “Lusias to the people of the
Yahuḏim, greetings.
17 “Yoḥanan and Aḇshalom, who were sent from you,
delivered the written request and asked for the
completion of it’s contents.
7

1546

2 MACCABEES

“Therefore whatever matters were right to be
reported to the sovereign, I have declared them, and
he has granted as much as possible.
19 “And if you will then keep yourselves loyal to the
state, from now on I will also endeavour to be a source
for your good.
20 “And of these matters I have given order both to
these and the others that came from me, to speak with
you.
21 “Farewell. The hundred and forty-eighth year, the
twenty-fourth day of the month Dioskorinthios.”
22 Now the sovereign’s letter contained these words:
“Sovereign Antioḵos to his brother Lusias sends
greeting.
23 “Since our father is taken up to the mighty ones, our
desire is, that those that are in our reign live peaceably,
that everyone may attend to his own affairs.
24 “We also understand that the Yahuḏim would not
agree with our father to be brought into the custom of
the gentiles, but rather keep their own manner of living;
which is the reason they ask from us that we should
allow them to live after their own laws.
25 “Therefore our decision is, that this nation shall be
at peace and we have determined to restore them their
Hĕyḵal that they may live according to the customs of
their forefathers.
26 “You shall do well therefore to send to them and
grant them peace, that when they are informed of our
decision, they may take courage and always go
cheerfully about their own affairs.”
27 And the letter of the sovereign to the nation of the
Yahuḏim was in this manner: “Sovereign Antioḵos
sends greeting to the council, and the rest of the
Yahuḏim.
28 “If you are well, we have our desire; we are also in
good health.
18

1547

MAQQAḆIM 2

“Menelaos has informed us, that your desire was to
return home and to follow your own business,
30 therefore those that would depart shall have safe
conduct with safety till the thirtieth day of Xanthikos.
31 “And the Yahuḏim shall apply their own kind of food
and Laws as before; and none of them in any way shall
be provoked for whatever is done in ignorance.
32 “I have sent also Menelaos, that he may encourage
you.
33 “Farewell. In the hundred forty and eighth year, and
the fifteenth day of the month Xanthikos.”
34 The Romans also sent a letter to them containing
these words: “Quintus Memmius and Titus Manlius,
ambassadors of the Romans, sends greeting to the
people of the Yahuḏim.
35 “Whatever Lusias the sovereign’s cousin has
granted, with that we are also well pleased.
36 “But regarding such matters that he has decided to
be referred to the sovereign, after you have advised of
this, send someone promptly that we may declare as
it is appropriate for you, for we are now going to
Antioḵeia.
37 “Therefore send messengers with speed, so that
we may know what is your decision.
38 “Farewell. This hundred and forty-eighth year, the
fifteenth day of the month Xanthikos.”
29

12 When these covenants were made, Lusias went
to the sovereign, and the Yahuḏim were within their
land.
2 But of the governors of several places, Timotheos
and Apollonios the son of Genneus, also Hieronumos
and Dĕmophon, and besides them, Nikanor the
governor of Cyprus, would not allow them to be at rest
and live in peace.
3 The men of Yapho also did a very wicked deed:
they asked the Yahuḏim that dwelt among them to go
1548

2 MACCABEES

with their wives and children into the boats which they
had prepared, as though they had meant them no
harm.
4 Who accepted according to the common decree of
the city, desiring to live in peace and suspecting
naught. But when they had gone out into the deep,
they drowned no less than two hundred of them.
5 When Yahuḏah heard of this cruelty done to his
countrymen, he commanded those that were with him
to ready themselves.
6 And calling upon Elohim the righteous Judge, he
came against those murderers of his brothers, and
burned the harbour by night, and lit the boats on fire,
and he slew those that attempted to flee.
7 And when the town was shut up, he withdrew,
intending to return to root out all those of the city of
Yapho.
8 But when he heard that the Yaḇne’ĕlites were
planning to do the same to the Yahuḏim that dwelt
among them,
9 he came upon the Yaḇne’ĕlites again by night, and
lit the harbour on fire and the fleet, so that the light of
the fire was seen at Yerushalayim two hundred and
forty stadion away.
10 Now when they had gone nine stadion from there
on their march against Timotheos, no less than five
thousand footmen and five hundred Araḇian horsemen
attacked him.
11 So there was a very fierce battle, but with the help
of Elohim Yahuḏah’s side overcame. So the Nomads
of Araḇia, having been overcome, begged Yahuḏah for
peace, promising to give him both cattle and to fulfill
other delights.
12 Then Yahuḏah, thinking that they would indeed be
profitable in many ways, granted them peace.
Therefore they shook hands, and so they departed to
their tents.
1549

MAQQAḆIM 2

He also constructed a bridge to a certain strong
city, which was fortified around about with walls, and
inhabited by people of various nations; and the name
of it was Kasphor.
14 But those that were within put such trust in the
strength of the walls and stores of food, that they
behaved rudely toward those that were with Yahuḏah,
cursing and blaspheming and speaking such words
which should not be spoken.
15 Therefore Yahuḏah and his army - calling on HWHY
the Almighty of the world, who without rams or siege
engines threw down Yeriḥo in the time of Yahoshua gave a fierce assault against the walls,
16 and took the city by the desire of Elohim, and slew
innumerable numbers so that an adjoining lake near
there two stadion across, being full, was seen running
with blood.
17 Then they moved on seven hundred and fifty
stadion from there, and came to Ḵaraka to the
Yahuḏim that are called Toḇians.
18 But as for Timotheos, they did not find him in the
area, for before he had done any matter, he departed
from there, having left a very strong garrison in a
certain tower.
19 However Dositheos and Sosipatros, who were
Maqqaḇah’s captains went out and slew those that
Timotheos had left in the fortress - over ten thousand
men.
20 And Maqqaḇah arranged his army in divisions and
appointed them over the divisions, and went against
Timotheos, who had a hundred and twenty thousand
footmen and two thousand five hundred horsemen
with him.
21 Now when Timotheos
knew of Yahuḏah’s
approach, he sent the women and children and the
extra baggage to a fortress called Qarnayim, because
13

1550

2 MACCABEES

the town was hard to besiege, and difficult to assault
because of the steepness of all the approaches.
22 But when Yahuḏah’s first division came into sight,
the enemies fled, being smitten with fear and terror
with the appearance of He who sees all things; one
running this way, another that way, so that many of
them were injured by their own men, and wounded with
the points of their own swords.
23 Yahuḏah was also very earnest in pursuit of them,
killing those wicked wretches, of whom he slew about
thirty thousand men.
24 And Timotheos himself fell into the hands of
Dositheos and Sosipatros, whom he begged with
much guile to let him go with his life, because he had
many of the Yahuḏim’s parents and the brothers of
some of them, who if they put him to death, would be
shown no regard.
25 So when he had assured them with many words
that he would restore them without harm, they let him
go according to the agreement for the deliverance of
their brothers.
26 Then Maqqaḇah marched onward to Qarnayim and
to the temple of Atarathĕh, and he slow twenty-five
thousand people there.
27 And after he had put them to flight and destroyed
them, Yahuḏah moved the army toward Ephron, a
strong city in which Lusias dwelt, and a great multitude
of various nations. And the strong young men guarded
the walls, and also defended them mightily with a great
supply of weapons and arrows inside.
28 But when Yahuḏah and his army had called upon
Ĕl Shaddai, who with His power breaks the strength of
His enemies, they took the city and slew twenty and
five thousand of those that were in it.
29 From there they departed to Bĕyth She’an, which
lies six hundred stadion from Yerushalayim.
1551

MAQQAḆIM 2

But when the Yahuḏim that dwelt there had
witnessed that the Skuthopolitans were friendly to
them, and treated them kindly in the time of their
adversity,
31 they thanked them, desiring them to continue being
friendly toward them. And so they came to
Yerushalayim - the Festival of Shaḇuoth approaching.
32 And after the Festival called Shaḇuoth, they went
out against Gorgias the governor of Eḏom,
33 who came out with three thousand footmen and
four hundred horsemen.
34 And it came to be that a few of the Yahuḏim were
slain in the battle,
35 at which time Dositheos, one of Bakenor’s division
who was a strong man and on horseback, was still
upon Gorgias. And taking hold of his cloak dragged
him with force. But when he would have taken that
cursed man alive, a horseman of Thrakeia coming
upon him cut off his arm, allowing Gorgias to flee to
Marisa.
36 Now when those that were with Gorgias had fought
long and were weary. Yahuḏah called upon HWHY that
He would show Himself to be their Helper and Leader
of the battle.
37 And with that, he began and sung psalms with a
loud voice in his own language, and charging on
Gorgias’ men unaware, he put them to flight.
38 So Yahuḏah gathered his army, and came into the
city of Aḏullam, and when the seventh day came, they
purified themselves, as was the custom, and kept the
Shabbath in that very place.
39 And on the following day, as the practice had been,
Yahuḏah and his army came to take up the bodies of
them that were slain, and to bury them with their
relatives in their fathers’ graves.
40 Now under the cloaks of every one that was slain
they found objects dedicated to the idols of Yaḇnĕh,
30

1552

2 MACCABEES

which are forbidden by the Law for the Yahuḏim. Then
every man saw that this was the reason why they had
been slain.
41 All men therefore praised HWHY the righteous
Judge, who had revealed that which was hidden,
42 committed themselves to prayer, and begged Him
that the sin committed might be completely blotted out
of
remembrance.
Righteous
Yahuḏah
also
encouraged the people to keep themselves from sin,
because they saw before their eyes that which came
upon those that were slain for their sins.
43 And when he had gathered from throughout the
army the sum of two thousand draḵmas of silver, he
sent it to Yerushalayim to offer a sin offering, acting
very well and honourable in doing so, bearing in mind
the resurrection.
44 For if he had not had expectancy that those that
were slain would rise again, it would be unnecessary
and worthless to pray for the dead.
45 And he also perceived that there was great favour
stored up for those who died righteously, which was a
qodesh and good thought. So he made an atonement
for the dead, that they might be delivered from sin.

13 In the hundred and forty-ninth year Yahuḏah was
informed Antioḵos Eupator was approaching Yahuḏah
with a great force
2 with Lusias his guardian and governor with him,
each having a Yawanite force of a hundred and ten
thousand footmen and five thousand three hundred
horsemen and twenty-two elephants and three
hundred chariots armed with scythes.
3 Menelaos also joined himself with them and
encouraged Antioḵos with great deception; not for the
safeguard of the country, but because he thought he
may have been made governor.
1553

MAQQAḆIM 2

But the Sovereign of sovereigns moved Antioḵos
against the wicked wretch, and Lusias informed the
sovereign that this man was the reason for all the evil,
so that the sovereign commanded to bring him to
Beroia, and to put him to death by the method of the
place.
5 Now there was a tower of fifty ammah high in that
place full of ashes, and it had a round turret on which
every side hung down into the ashes.
6 And whoever was condemned of temple robbery or
had committed any other grievous crime, there all men
were thrown to their death.
7 And quite righteously such a death to die came
upon that wicked man, not having so much as burial in
the earth.
8 Because he had committed many sins pertaining to
the altar, whose fire and ashes were qodesh, so he
received his death in ashes.
9 Now the sovereign came with a wicked and
haughty plan to do far worse to the Yahuḏim than had
been done in his father’s time.
10 When Yahuḏah learned of this, he commanded the
multitude to call on HWHY night and day that He would
help them now if ever at any other time, being at the
point of being removed their Law, from their country
and from the qodesh Hĕyḵal;
11 and that He would not allow the people that had
only just now been a little refreshed, to be in subjection
to the blasphemous nations.
12 So when they had all done this together and
pleaded for the kindness of Elohim with weeping and
fasting and lying flat upon the ground for three days,
Yahuḏah, having encouraged them, commanded they
should make themselves ready.
13 And Yahuḏah, determined privately with the elders,
that before the sovereign’s army could enter Yahuḏah,
4

1554

2 MACCABEES

and take the city, to go out and determine the matter
in battle with the help of HWHY.
14 So when he had committed all to the Creator of the
world and encouraged his soldiers to fight bravely,
even to death, for the Laws, the Hĕyḵal, the city, the
country and the citizenship, he encamped by Modi’im.
15 And having given the watchword to those that were
with him, “Victory is of Elohim,” he went into the
sovereign’s camp by night with the bravest and chosen
young men and slew about four thousand men in the
camp, and the leading elephant with all that were upon
it.
16 And by the end they had filled the camp with fear
and disorder and withdrew with good success.
17 This was done at daybreak because the protection
of HWHY helped him.
18 Now when the sovereign had a taste of the courage
of the Yahuḏim, he attempted to take the towers using
strategy,
19 and marched toward Bĕyth Tsur, which was a
stronghold of the Yahuḏim; but he failed, was put to
flight and lost his men,
20 for Yahuḏah had dispatched to those that were in it
that which was necessary.
21 But Rhodokos, who was in the Yahuḏim’s army,
disclosed secrets to the enemies; therefore he was
sought out, and when they had taken him, they put him
in prison.
22 The sovereign made a treaty with those in Bĕyth
Tsur a second time, gave his pledge, took theirs,
departed, fought with Yahuḏah, was overcome;
23 heard that Philippos, who was left over the affairs
in Antioḵeia was hard pressed, being confounded
made a treaty with the Yahuḏim, submitted himself and
swore to all equal conditions, agreed with them and
brought an offering, honoured the Hĕyḵal and dealt
kindly with the place.
1555

MAQQAḆIM 2

And accepting good from Maqqaḇah, made him
principal governor from Ptolemais to the Gerarians,
25 and went to Ptolemais. The people there were
grieved because of the covenants, and they raged for
they wanted to annul their covenants.
26 Lusias went up to the judgment seat, said as much
as he could in defence of the cause, persuaded,
pacified, appeased them and returned to Antioḵeia. So
it was regarding the sovereign’s coming and going.
24

14 After three years Yahuḏah was informed that
Dĕmĕtrios the son of Seleukus, having entered by the
harbour of Tripolis with a fleet of great strength,
2 had taken the country and killed Antioḵos, and
Lusias his guardian.
3 Now a certain Elyaqim, who had been kohĕn
ha’gadol, and had deliberately defiled himself in the
times of their mixing with the gentiles, seeing he could
not save himself by any means, nor have any more
access to the qodesh altar,
4 came to Sovereign Dĕmĕtrios in the hundred and
fifty-first year, presenting a crown of gold to him and a
palm, and also the branches which were used on
Festivals in the Hĕyḵal. But that day he remained
silent.
5 However having taken opportunity to further his
foolish plan, and being called into counsel by
Dĕmĕtrios and asked how the Yahuḏim stood affected
and what they intended, he answered in this way:
6 “Those of the Yahuḏim that are called Ḥasiḏim,
whose captain is Yahuḏah Maqqaḇah, fight continually
and are treasonous and will not let the others be at
peace.
7 “I therefore, being deprived of the honour of my
ancestors, meaning the high kehunnah, have now
come here.
1556

2 MACCABEES

“First indeed for the sincere concern I have of
matters pertaining to the sovereign, and secondly,
even after that, I intend for the good of my own
countrymen; for all our nation is in no small grief
through the foolishness of those already mentioned.
9 “Therefore O sovereign, seeing you know all these
matters, have concern for this country and our nation
which is pressed on every side, according to the
gentleness that you readily show to all.
10 “For as long as Yahuḏah lives, it is not possible for
the nation to be at rest.”
11 No sooner was this said of him, when other friends
of the sovereign, being wickedly disposed toward
Yahuḏah, enraged Dĕmĕtrios further.
12 And promptly calling Nikanor, who had been chief
over the elephants, and making him governor over
Yahuḏah, he sent him out,
13 commanding him to slay Yahuḏah and to scatter
those that were with him, and to make Elyaqim kohĕn
ha’gadol of the great Hĕyḵal.
14 Then the gentiles that had fled out from Yahuḏah
out of Yahuḏah, flocked to Nikanor, thinking the harm
and destruction of the Yahuḏim to be to their
advantage.
15 Now when the Yahuḏim heard of Nikanor’s coming,
and that the gentiles were against them, they threw
dust on their heads and pleaded to He who had
established His people forever, and who always helps
His portion with manifestation of His presence.
16 So at the command of the captain they immediately
moved from there and approached those at the town
of Dessaou.
17 Now Shim’on, Yahuḏah’s brother, had joined in
battle with Nikanor, but was somewhat confused
through the sudden silence of his enemies.
18 Nevertheless Nikanor, hearing of the courage of
those that were with Yahuḏah, and the courage that
8

1557

MAQQAḆIM 2

they had to fight for their country, did not dare try the
matter by the sword.
19 Therefore he sent Poseidonius and Theodotus and
Mattithyahu to make peace.
20 So when they had spent a long time taking counsel
and the captain had made the multitude aware of this
and it appeared that they were all of one mind, they
agreed to the covenants,
21 and appointed a day to meet together by
themselves. And when the day came, and chairs were
placed for either of them,
22 Yahuḏah positioned soldiers at the ready in
suitable places, lest some treachery should suddenly
be taken by the enemies; so they held peace
negotiations.
23 Now Nikanor dwelt in Yerushalayim, and did no
harm, but sent away the people that came flocking to
him.
24 And he would not readily allow Yahuḏah out of his
sight, for he loved the man from his heart.
25 He asked him to also take a wife, and to bring forth
children; so he married, was peaceable, and shared in
this life.
26 But Elyaqim, perceiving the love that was between
them, and considering the covenants that were made,
came to Dĕmĕtrios and told him that Nikanor was
disloyal to the government, in that he had ordained
Yahuḏah, a traitor to his reign, to be successor to the
sovereign.
27 Then the sovereign being enraged and provoked
with the accusations of this very wicked man, wrote to
Nikanor signifying that he was very displeased with the
covenants, and commanded that he send Maqqaḇah
prisoner in all haste to Antioḵeia.
28 When this came to Nikanor’s hearing, he was very
troubled within himself, and was grieved that he should
1558

2 MACCABEES

annul the conditions that were agreed upon, the man
having done no wrong.
29 But because there was no going against the
sovereign, he watched for his time to accomplish this
matter strategically.
30 However, when Maqqaḇah saw that Nikanor began
to harden toward him, and that he dealt with him more
roughly than he used to, perceiving that such sour
behaviour did not come from goodness, he gathered
not a few of his men together, and withdrew himself
from Nikanor.
31 But the other, knowing that he was obviously
hindered by Yahuḏah’s strategy, came into the great
and qadosh Hĕyḵal, and commanded the kohenim that
were offering their usual slaughterings to deliver the
man to him.
32 And when they swore that they could not tell where
the man whom he sought was,
33 he stretched out his right hand toward the Hĕyḵal,
and made this oath: “If you will not deliver me Yahuḏah
as a prisoner, I will lay this Hĕyḵal of Elohim even to
the ground, and I will break down the altar, and build a
splendid temple to Dionusos!”
34 After these words he departed. Then the kohenim
lifted up their hands toward the shamayim, and
pleaded to Him who was always a defender of their
nation, saying,
35 “You, O Aḏon of all, who has need of nothing, was
pleased that the Hĕyḵal of Your dwelling should be
among us.
36 “Now therefore, O qodesh Aḏon of all qodeshah,
keep this House which was recently cleansed,
undefiled forever, and stop every unrighteous mouth.”
37 Now a certain Razis, one of the elders of
Yerushalayim, a lover of his countrymen and a man of
very good report, who for his kindness was called a
father of the Yahuḏim, was accused before Nikanor.
1559

MAQQAḆIM 2

For formerly, when they had not mixed themselves
with the gentiles, he had been accused of Yahuḏaism,
and boldly risked his body and life with all vehemency
for the belief of the Yahuḏim.
39 So Nikanor, wanting to show the hate that he held
for the Yahuḏim, sent over five hundred men of battle
to capture him.
40 For he thought to do the Yahuḏim much harm by
taking him.
41 Now when the multitude had almost taken the
tower and violently broken through the outer door and
called for fire to be brought to burn it, he, being ready
to be taken on every side fell upon his sword;
42 choosing to die bravely rather than to fall into the
hands of the wicked, to be abused otherwise
appropriate to his noble birth.
43 But missing his stroke through haste, the multitude
also rushing within the doors, he ran boldly up to the
wall and threw himself down bravely among the
thickest of them.
44 But when they quickly retreated, and made a
space, he fell down into the midst of the empty space.
45 Nevertheless, while there was still breath within
him, being inflamed with wrath, he rose up; and though
his blood gushed out like spouts of water, and his
wounds were severe, he ran through the midst of the
crowd. And standing upon a steep rock,
46 when his blood was now almost gone, he gathered
out his bowels, and taking them in both his hands, he
threw them upon the crowd. And calling upon the Aḏon
of Ḥai and Ruaḥ to restore those again; therefore he
died.
38

15 But Nikanor, hearing that Yahuḏah and his army
were in the strongholds around Shomeron, resolved to
attack them without any defence on the Shabbath day.
1560

2 MACCABEES

Nevertheless the Yahuḏim that were compelled to
go with him said, “Do not destroy so cruelly and
ruthlessly, but give honour to that day, which He who
sees all things has honoured with qodeshah above all
other days.”
3 Then that most shameful wretch demanded, if there
were a Mighty One in the shamayim, that had
commanded the Shabbath day to be guarded!
4 And when they said, “There is in the shamayim a
living Aḏon, and Ĕl, who commanded the seventh day
to be guarded.”
5 Then the other said, “And I also am mighty upon
the earth, and I command to take arms, and to do the
sovereign’s work!” But he did not succeed in having his
wicked plan done.
6 So with great pride and haughtiness Nikanor
determined to put up a public monument of his victory
over Yahuḏah and those that were with him.
7 But Maqqaḇah had assured confidence that HWHY
would help him,
8 therefore he encouraged his people not to fear the
gentiles coming against them, but to remember the
help which they had received from the shamayim in
former times, and now to expect the deliverance and
help, which would come to them from the Almighty.
9 And so encouraging them from the Law and the
neḇi’im, and reminding them of the battles that they
had won before, he encouraged them further.
10 And when he had stirred up their spirits, he gave
them their orders, also showing them the falsehood of
the gentiles, and the breach of oaths.
11 So he armed every one of them, not so much with
defence of shields and spears, as with encouragement
and good words; and besides that, he told them a
dream worthy of belief, as if it had indeed been so,
which encouraged them not a little.
2

1561

MAQQAḆIM 2

And this was his vision: That Onyah - a virtuous and
a good man who had been kohĕn ha’gadol, reverent in
conversation, gentle in spirit, also well spoken and
taught in all points of righteousness from a young age
- holding up his hands, prayed for the whole body of
the Yahuḏim.
13 Having done this, there also appeared a man with
grey hair, and exceedingly splendid, who was a
wonder of excellence and majesty.
14 Then Onyah answered, saying, “This is a lover of
the brothers who prays much for the people and for the
qodesh city, that is, Yirmeyahu the naḇi of Elohim.”
15 So Yirmeyahu holding out his right hand gave
Yahuḏah a sword of gold, and in giving it said,
16 “Take this qodesh sword - a gift from Elohim - with
which you shall smite the adversaries.”
17 Thus being well encouraged by the words of
Yahuḏah which were very good, and able to stir them
up with bravery and to encourage the hearts of the
young men, they determined not to pitch camp, but to
courageously attack them, and to bravely try the
matter in battle, because the city and the Miqdash and
the Hĕyḵal were in danger.
18 For the concern that they had for their wives and
their children, their brothers and families, was less for
them; but the greatest and main fear was for the
qodesh Hĕyḵal.
19 Those that were in the city were also not the least
concerned, being troubled for the struggle abroad.
20 And now, when all looked what was to be the trial,
and the enemies had already come near and the army
was in battle array and the beasts strategically
positioned and the horsemen positioned on the flanks,
21 Maqqaḇah seeing the approach of the multitude
and the various preparations of armour and the ferocity
of the beasts, stretched out his hands toward the
shamayim, and called upon HWHY who works wonders,
12

1562

2 MACCABEES

knowing that deliverance does not come by weapons,
but even as it seems good to Him, He gives to those
who are worthy.
22 Therefore in his prayer he spoke in this way; “O
HWHY, You sent Your messenger in the time of
Yeḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah and slew five
thousand eight hundred in the army of Sanḥĕriḇ.
23 “Therefore now also, O Aḏon of the shamayim,
send a good messenger before us for a fear and dread
upon them.
24 “And through the might of Your arm let those who
come against Your qodesh people to blaspheme be
stricken with terror.” And so he ended.
25 Then Nikanor and those that were with him came
forward with trumpets and songs,
26 but Yahuḏah and his army countered the enemies
with supplication and prayer,
27 so fighting with their hands and praying to Elohim
with their hearts, they slew no less than thirty-five
thousand men; for they were greatly encouraged
through the manifestation of Elohim.
28 Now when the battle was over, returning again with
joy, they knew that Nikanor lay dead in his armour.
29 Then they made a great shout and a noise, praising
the Almighty in their own language.
30 And Yahuḏah, who was ever the chief defender of
the people both in body and mind, and who continued
his love toward his countrymen all his life, commanded
to strike off Nikanor’s head, and his arm at the
shoulder, and bring them to Yerushalayim.
31 So when he was there and called those of his
nation together and appointed the kohenim before the
altar, he sent for those that were in the tower,
32 and showed them vile Nikanor’s head, and the arm
of that blasphemer, which he had stretched out against
the qodesh Hĕyḵal of the Almighty with proud
boastings.
1563

MAQQAḆIM 2

And when he had cut out the tongue of that wicked
Nikanor, he commanded that they should give the
pieces to the birds, and hang up the reward of his
madness opposite the Hĕyḵal.
34 So every man praised the esteemed Aḏon toward
the shamayim saying, “Baruḵ be He that has kept His
own Place undefiled!”
35 He also hung Nikanor’s head upon the tower, a
clear and visible sign to all of the help of HWHY.
36 And they all appointed with a common decree to by
no means let that day pass without honour, but to
celebrate the thirtieth day of the twelfth month, which
in the Surian tongue is called Aḏar, the day before
Mordeḵai’s day.
37 So it came to be for Nikanor; and from that time on
the Iḇrim had the city in their possession. And here I
make an end.
38 And if I have done well, and as befits the story, it is
that which I desired. But if scant and poorly, it is the
best I could do.
39 For as it is harmful to drink wine or water alone, and
as wine mingled with water is pleasant and delights the
taste; even so, words finely formed delights the ears of
those that read the story. And here shall be the end.
33

1564

BOOK OF JOHN

BOOK OF YOḤANAN
‫!! ספר יהוחנן‬XWhY Rps

1 These are the things written in his book concerning
Yoḥanan of the Wilderness, which was brought to
these shores by Aristolas and is no longer with us. The
father of Yoḥanan was Zeḵaryah, son of Baraḵias; and
he was a kohĕn at the Hĕyḵal, married to Elisheḇa
from the stock of Aharon.
2 They were both strong in the faith of their Elohim,
obeying the Laws revealed to His neḇi’im, but childless
and well advanced in years. Elisheḇa had resorted to
many shrines, praying for a child, but hitherto her pleas
had gone unanswered.
3 In the fifth month of the year, when fire was burnt
before Gaḇri’ĕl in the court within the outer walls of the
Hĕyḵal enclosure - called the Court of the Nations Zeḵaryah was a kohĕn at the altar of incense. Then a
strange thing happened while he was alone inside, the
people being outside praying. A messenger appeared
on the right side of the altar, and a voice said, “Have
no fear of me, for I come to say your prayers have not
gone unheeded and your wife will bear a son.
4 “He will become a great teacher, filled with the
power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh; but you must bring him
up in the ways of the Nazirite. He will herald the coming
of an Enlightener who will turn men from wrongful
ways, making them upright and strong in ruaḥ.”
5 Zeḵaryah listened, too frightened to speak, but
thought, “How can this be when we are both weighed
down with years?”
6 The messenger said, “He will save many from the
effects of ignorance, leading men back to the fold of
Elohim, whom he will serve with the ruaḥ and power
which was once Ĕliyahu’s. He will turn the hearts of
fathers towards the welfare of their children, and those
who have fallen away from the teachings of their
fathers towards the wisdom of the Torah. He will go
1565

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

before the people like a brazier bearer before a
caravan, like a naḇi of old, to make ready a people
purified and dedicated to The Most High Elohim.”
7 When Elisheḇa knew she was with child, she went
to the Hĕyḵal and gave thanks to the Elohim who had
caused her to conceive, dedicating the child to Him,
according to the custom. Thus it had been with
Shemu’ĕl, who was given back to his Father for service
in the sanctuary.
8 Now when her time came, the wife of Zeḵaryah
gave birth to a son. And there was no midwife to bring
him into the world, neither was a birthbell made for him.
Though all others wished him to be called after the
kindred of his father, Elisheḇa said he should be called
after hers, and he was named Yoḥanan.
9 At the time of circumcision, when many people
were standing about, Zeḵaryah became filled with the
inflowing of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh and, under its
influence, spoke as follows:
10 “Baruḵ be the Elohim of our people, who has given
them the means of their redemption. He has brought
forth a spring of deliverance for us, fulfilling the words
spoken by the mouths of His inspired neḇi’im which
have been since the beginning, that we should be
delivered from the hands of our enemies and saved
from those who hate us.
11 “The child of my body shall go before the people,
proclaiming the Way of HWHY and giving knowledge of
deliverance for His people, with the remission of their
misdeeds through repentance and reparation. Like the
light of the sun on high, he has descended to give light
to those who sit in darkness. He will console them in
the shadow of death and guide the feet of men into the
ways of shalom.
12 “As it is written in the books of the Hĕyḵal, ‘Hear the
voices crying out of Lĕwi and Yahuḏah, never turning
away, for from their loins shall come the chastening
rod of the Highest Elohim. He will raise up from Lĕwi a
kohĕn above all other kohenim, and from Yahuḏah
1566

BOOK OF JOHN

someone greater than a sovereign who will deliver My
people.’ ”
13 The people, hearing these and many other things,
were amazed and stored them up in their hearts,
saying one to the other, “This is no ordinary child, and
surely he will grow up to be an unusual man; therefore,
let us watch and wait for some interesting
developments.”
14 Among those who heard was one with an unbridled
tongue who spread the word of these things abroad.
And between the ears and mouths of many people, the
events became magnified in such a way as to cause
concern in high places.
15 When Hĕrodĕs who was sovereign heard these
things, he deliberated with the Council; for all awaited
the coming of the Mashiaḥ anointed by HWHY, but the
learned kohenim said this could not be he whom they
awaited. For, said they, it was not possible that one
with his blood could be either the Mashiaḥ or the
Deliverer; such would be an abomination.
16 Then Hĕrodĕs said, “That may be, but let us bring
the child into our own fold; for if perchance he be the
Mashiaḥ, it is well for him to be raised among us. But
if it be otherwise, no harm is done. And in days such
as these, it is well to be prudent.”
17 Now, word of these intentions was sped out by a
maidservant, passing through the ears of slaves to the
kindred of Elisheḇa, who hastened to warn her. They
said, “This is a day of woe, for men come from Hĕrodĕs
to take away your child and offer him up as a sacrifice.”
18 Elisheḇa, in fear for her child, gathered him up,
saying to a manservant, “Take all that can be carried
and meet us at such a place,” and then she went to
Zeḵaryah.
19 Elisheḇa found him at his place in the Hĕyḵal and
said, “Come, my husband, let us flee quickly with the
babe, for here he is in danger. Tarry for nothing; unless
we make haste, our little one will be lost to us, he who
is the treasure of our life and the hope of our people.”
1567

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

Zeḵaryah said, “How can I leave my post in the
Hĕyḵal to go into a strange land where perchance
people will have no knowledge of HWHY?”
21 Then Elisheḇa said, “O my husband, if you will not
come, tell me what I must do to save my baby. I cannot
waste time here when men come to put him to death.”
22 He answered her, “Flee to the wilderness of Shaḇa
where, by the will of HWHY, you will both survive. If they
come seeking to find him here, or expect to find him
through me, then my blood will be shed instead of his;
for it is blood they want.”
23 Then Zeḵaryah took the babe into a place beside
the altar and kissed and baruḵ him, saying, “My son,
treasure of my latter years, who gladdened my heart
and made light the burden of days, now my cup of
sorrow overflows. I am to be cut off from the pleasure
of holding you; no longer may I feel my heart leap with
gladness when I see your face. You are too young for
my words to reach your understanding, and it is not my
hand which will guide your feet, but go out strong in
your dedication to HWHY.”
24 To Elisheḇa he said, “May our Elohim and the
Elohim of our fathers protect you.”
25 Elisheḇa said, “Dedicated kohĕn and husband,
pray for us both, that we may not be taken, and I shall
be given strength to overcome the difficulties of the
wilderness.”
26 Zeḵaryah said, “He who gave us a child in our old
age will not take it away from you; neither will the child
perish. May the protective power of HWHY overshadow
your journey.”
27 Now the men sent out by Hĕrodĕs were of his
guard, and when they came to Zeḵaryah and asked
concerning the child, he did not lie, but said, “His
mother has taken him and fled in fear into the
wilderness.”
28 They who had come returned to Hĕrodĕs and said,
“The child has been taken into the wilderness by its
mother. No food or water is there, but many wild
20

1568

BOOK OF JOHN

beasts; and the woman, being old, surely both must
perish.”
29 Then those who had the ear of Hĕrodĕs said,
“Surely there is something more to all this. Is it likely
the woman would have fled friendless? Let us send
other men, not of the guard, who will act differently.”
30 Hĕrodĕs, being troubled in his heart, agreed. Three
men with knives came to Zeḵaryah before sunrise,
saying, “Hĕrodĕs has commanded us, ‘Tell Zeḵaryah
his life is in my hand, and I order him to speak truly
concerning the whereabouts of his son.’ ”
31 Zeḵaryah answered, “I am a dedicated servant of
HWHY and obliged to continually attend His Hĕyḵal;
therefore, my son’s whereabouts are not within my
knowledge.”
32 They said, “Our knives will open your mouth.”
33 But Zeḵaryah was unafraid and replied, “If my blood
be shed, HWHY Himself will bear witness to the deed,
and innocent blood never cries out to Him in vain.”
34 When Zeḵaryah saw he spoke in vain and no words
would turn their intentions, he took refuge at the
sanctuary behind the altar, his hands on the horns. But
they stabbed him with knives so he died, for they were
strangers in ignorance of the Torah.
35 When the morning hour of salutation came and the
kohenim went out, it was seen that Zeḵaryah failed to
pay the accustomed homage, and they asked among
themselves why he tarried. Then one went from them
into the sanctuary of Zeḵaryah and saw his body lying
bloodied beside the altar.
36 A voice was heard saying, “Zeḵaryah is dead and
lies in his blood, but the stain shall not be removed until
the coming of One who will avenge the deed. Woe to
those who shed innocent blood. Woe to those who let
it remain unavenged. Woe, for One comes who will
destroy the Hĕyḵal rites.”
37 On hearing this, the kohenim ran out, crying,
“Zeḵaryah is dead, and an avenging ruaḥ has taken up
residence in his place.” But the others went in and saw
1569

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

the cloths about the altar were torn and the carved
woodwork broken. Report of these things was made to
the people, who mourned three days and nights, after
which another kohĕn was appointed. The body of
Zeḵaryah was shrouded in linen and placed in a tomb
beside his father.
38 Elisheḇa was alone with the child. She was old and
found life difficult to sustain in the wilderness, the
manservant having departed with her goods. She
discovered a cave where there was a seepage of water
and lived there until Yoḥanan was eight years of age.
Then she died, and the child did not understand;
neither did he know what to do or how to bury her. But
the ever-present Elohim intervened in His manner, and
some people who lived apart from others were directed
to him, and he was raised in their ways. He remained
with them until the day he went forth to herald the
coming of the Deliverer.
39 The people among whom Yoḥanan was raised did
not marry, but adopted outcasts and orphans while
they were young. They were reverent people in their
own way, but did not concern themselves with others.
Yoḥanan rebelled against their exclusiveness, desiring
to carry tidings concerning the coming Instructor in
Goodness to the common people. In those days, there
was much confusion among men regarding One Who
Would Come, and he was given many names and
attributes. Therefore, none really knew what he would
be like, and many sought only for enlightenment on this
matter.

2 When Yoḥanan had grown to manhood, he
reappeared in the wilderness of Bethimra, proclaiming,
“Change your ways, for you have fallen into error and
ignorance. Return to the teachings of the Torah,
interpreting them without guile, and turn your eyes
towards the new light of the coming day. For One
comes who will be the promised Instructor in
Goodness, to establish the government of Elohim.”
2 Then the people said among themselves, “Surely
1570

BOOK OF JOHN

this is he of whom it is written, ‘The voice of a herald
will cry out from the wilderness, “Make a highway for
HWHY, let the swift rivers be bridged, the high
mountains passed, and the rough places made
smooth; for the impassable places will be crossed, and
the wilderness made to flourish.” ’ ”
3 Some came to Yoḥanan from the place of his
upbringing, who said, “Withdraw from the people, for
they are no concern of yours. In good time, preach
purification of the ruaḥ and suppression of passion; but
meanwhile you are too inexperienced.”
4 Yoḥanan said, “Worthy teachers, you dress in
white, proclaiming your purity, yet fear to put this to the
test. Is your flesh so weak that it must be kept
continually under restraint? Is the imprisoned
malefactor good by his own desire, or by his
circumstances? Is not the world a place of temptation
so each may discover his own strength or weakness?
Untested you can know neither and must always
remain in a state of doubt.”
5 “The fire hidden in wood gives warmth only when
released. It also provides light and is useful. But while
hidden away it is of little value. A tree left growing uncut
falls and rots, serving no man. So too is it with
knowledge and wisdom, for only when utilized can they
have any value. Goodness is not assessed only by the
things done, for the things left undone are not
overlooked.”
6 Yoḥanan appeared strange in the eyes of those
who saw him, for he was wild-haired and large, clothed
in a garment of hair as were the neḇi’im of old and
bound about with a leather girdle, like Ĕliyahu. His food
was locusts and bread dipped in wild honey, for he was
of the Zofim who watched for the Coming of the Reign.
He came to bear witness to the light which should
shine in the hearts of all men. But the Yahuḏim would
not heed him, for he used cleansing waters, which they
did not. This, he said, signified the washing away of
the causes of illusion and the impurities of life. He was
1571

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

a cleanser of minds and hearts.
7 There were mockers, but they were afraid to come
near Yoḥanan. Yet many listened to the message and
were cleansed in the River of Ḥai, providing they were
wholehearted in a desire to change their ways.
Yoḥanan knew some were hypocrites, and he held
them long under the water, for he said they required a
lot of purifying. Few men argued with Yoḥanan, though
it is in the nature of Yahuḏim to argue.
8 This is how Yoḥanan testified when kohenim and
learned men were sent to question him, saying, “Who
are you?”
9 He said, “I am not the One you anticipate, whose
coming is at hand. Is it not written, ‘I will send a
forerunner to prepare the way’? I am that herald. Soon
the One you seek will hasten to acquire His Reign. He
will be like a refining fire, preparing you for
participation.”
10 “I am one who verifies the neḇi’im of old who said,
‘Take heed, for the day comes which shall burn like a
fire, when the self-satisfied and wrongdoers shall burn
like stubble, so neither branch nor root of their
wickedness shall be left.’ ”
11 Then some who enquired of Yoḥanan said, “If you
are not the Expected One, why do you immerse?”
12 He replied, “I teach cleansing in water as a sign of
repentance for the past and rebirth into another way of
life. I herald the coming of someone much greater who
is now born among you. He is one whose sandal bands
I am unworthy to unlace. I use water, but He will
immerse men in the Ruaḥ and cleanse them with
disciplinary fire. He is the bearer of a winnowing fan
and will thoroughly cleanse the threshing floor,
gathering the wheat into the granary and burning the
useless chaff.”
13 Then one said, “No good thing ever came out of the
wilderness.”
14 But Yoḥanan, overhearing him, said, “Recall the
days of our forefathers, when the wandering in the
1572

BOOK OF JOHN

wilderness was over, and they came to a land where
there was an abundance of milk, butter and cheese,
where the sheep grew fat and corn grew plentifully,
where the vine flourished and all good things for the
nurture and comfort of man were found.
15 Then the people became weak in body, slothful,
their minds turning to unclean things. They forsook the
Ways of HWHY and had little respect for the teachings
of the Torah. From which did they derive the most
benefit - from the wilderness or from the land
overflowing with good things? Pity me not for my days
in the wilderness but pity yourselves who have been
denied man-making experiences.”
16 Yoḥanan said, “Woe to you who have taken to the
keeping of many slaves, for you, having robbed the
man with a small plot of ground of his livelihood, are
worse than thieves. You roll your eyes upward, saying,
‘Never would I steal a loaf of bread,’ and condemn one
who steals because of his emptiness. Your stomachs
are full, but your hearts are empty of goodness. Take
heed of my words, for surely if any man act so he
brings another to wrongdoing; even though the other
be in a far distant land, he shall not be blameless in the
sight of HWHY.”
17 “Hypocrites, you cast a piece of silver at the feet of
a beggar sitting beside the Hĕyḵal and say, ‘I have
done good,’ but how small the goodness compared
with the wickedness done to those unseen! What of
the disinherited ones, victims of your avarice? They
have been driven from their homes and lie shivering in
the coldness of the night, no roof protecting them from
the night dampness. They huddle uncomfortably under
rocks for shelter, aching stomachs denying them
sleep. They rake the hard, hot ground with bony fingers
and gnaw coarse roots with teeth loosened in their
gums. Their mouths are dry, and sour and bitter
unsatisfying leaves become an acceptable diet.”
18 “When they crave for the relief of bread, driven
desperate by mouthwatering smells carried on the air,
1573

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

and steal some small thing, they are harried by wellfed tyrants such as the slave owners among you. Take
heed of this, for it is the Torah: If a hungry man steals
because of the emptiness within his stomach, the
crime is not with him, but with those whose hands hold
the power.”
19 Those to whom Yoḥanan spoke said, “Tell us not of
these things, for we have rulers. We give to the poor
outside the Hĕyḵal, but if we gave to the multitude of
the poor, we would only be added to their number. Tell
us about the Deliverer.”
20 Yoḥanan said, “From what do you expect the
Deliverer to save you?” They said, “It is written, ‘He will
deliver us from the hands of our enemies.’ ”
21 Yoḥanan said, “He will perform no mean task, but
will save you from the greatest of enemies. Tell me,
which presents the most danger - those who lay siege
to a fortress from outside, or those within its gates,
cunningly biding their time with concealed weapons?
Surely it is the enemy within who is most to be feared.
Therefore, I declare to you, the Deliverer comes not to
fight against the enemy clamoring outside, for the
silent unseen foe within is most to be feared.”
22 Many shook their heads and said quietly, “This man
is mad.” Then one among those who listened said, “If
he tells of the ways of Elohim, surely those ways are
strange.”
23 Yoḥanan, overhearing this, said, “The ant cannot
understand the ways of an eagle, nor an eagle the
ways of a man. How much less can man understand
the ways of HWHY!”
24 One standing close to Yoḥanan said, “If a man is
ruled by two sovereigns, which should he obey - the
one who is close, or the one who is far distant?”
Yoḥanan said, “If I answered you straightly, would you
follow my advice?”
25 The man replied, “Surely, for I am perplexed and
would hear your words.” Yoḥanan said, “Obey the rule
of the sovereign closest to you, he who reigns in your
1574

BOOK OF JOHN

heart.”
26 Now, Yoḥanan testified concerning {vWHY in this
manner. “These are the things written in the Qodesh
Books about He who will come. ‘Then shall HWHY raise
up a new Kohĕn ha’Gadol like no other before Him,
and He will reveal Elohim in a new light to the
understanding of men. He will set the feet of men on
the path of rightful judgment.”
27 “He shall shine forth as the sun over the Earth,
removing all darkness from it, and will arm men with
the sword which brings everlasting shalom. His star
will shine above like that of a sovereign, its light
kindling the lamp of knowledge, enlightening men as
the sun lightens the day.”
28 “He will proclaim the reign wherein the sword will
be drawn against the wrongdoers, and the injustices of
the poor will be redressed. There shall arise the
Mashiaḥ from among you who will deliver you from
your enemies.’ ”
29 Yoḥanan also said, “Already the ax is laid at the
root of the vines; for was it not naḇu that every tree
bearing sour fruit will be hewn down and burned?
Therefore, do not be fuel for the fire, but produce the
good fruits of repentance wherein lie the seeds of your
deliverance. The day is not far distant when each shall
be called to an accounting, some enjoying the fruits of
their labor and rising into glory, while others go down
into darkness and shame.”
30 There was a time when many Hĕyḵal worshippers
came to gain rebirth through the cleansing waters, and
Yoḥanan said to some self-righteous ones among
them, “Children of the viper’s brood, what has caused
you to seek escape from the fate in store for you?
Produce deeds consistent with repentance and
console yourselves no longer by saying, ‘We are of the
seed of Aḇraham.’ I say, being of the seed of Aḇraham
serves you no better than being one of those stones.”
31 When the people said, “Tell us what we should do,”
Yoḥanan replied, “No man wears two coats, so let the
1575

BOOK OF YOḤANAN

man who has two share with the man who has none.
Whoever has a store of food beyond his needs, let him
do likewise.”
32 A tax gatherer asked him, “What shall I do?”
Yoḥanan answered, “Exact nothing above the amount
fixed for collection, and never exploit the defenseless
and unlearned.”
33 Some soldiers asked him what they should do.
Yoḥanan said, “Never be unnecessarily cruel or
threaten to bring false charges, and make sure you
always live within your earnings as soldiers.”
34 Then a captain said, “What shall I do, who must
enforce commands?” Yoḥanan replied, “Make sure the
commands are just, and do not extend beyond the
need of the circumstances.”
35 A man of kehunnah said to Yoḥanan, “Why do you
not offer incense and sacrifice?” Yoḥanan answered,
“Such things are not fitting for The Most High Elohim,
who is already full with all things and lacks nothing.
Therefore, honor Him by giving thanks for His benefits,
and let your only sacrifice be dedication to His service.”
36 A kohĕn among the crowd said to Yoḥanan, “Do
you say the Elohim of our fathers is not a great
Elohim?” Yoḥanan replied, “You know His
requirements and whether these be worthy of a great
or small Elohim.”
37 Then some cried out, “Pity him, for he is only a waif
of the wilderness, having neither father nor mother.”
38 Yoḥanan answered, “Have I not said, ‘Pity me not,
for the wilderness was a goodly father, making me
strong and hardy’? Can I not outrun the gazelle and lift
a great stone? No sickness eats my body, and I can
bite through a halter line.”
39 “What of these people fattened at the tables of their
fathers, like geese prepared for the banquet? They
say, ‘We are the light of the land,’ but I tell you, they
are an unprofitable burden. They say, ‘Give us white
water to quench the fire in our stomachs,’ when every
day they kindle the fire anew through their mouths. For
1576

BOOK OF JOHN

things that pass pleasantly through the mouth often stir
up strife in the belly.”
40 Yoḥanan was the beacon of the Light, the herald of
the Deliverer, coming to purge the world of wrongdoing
by enlightening men, showing what was right and what
was wrong. For though men had the light of the Torah,
many saw it only dimly or with distortion, while many
interpreted the Torah to make it accord with their
convenience. The true Deliverer was one who would
deliver men from themselves, exposing their
weaknesses, failings and hypocrisies only that they
might benefit, the purpose and intent being wholly
good.
41 Glory to the Supreme Elohim reigning in the
shamayim above all. May shalom and plenty fill the
Earth and goodwill extend to all creation. May
suffering, turmoil and disaster quickly serve their
purpose through the cooperation and understanding of
man,
so
they
may
pass
away
as
things no longer necessary for his upbringing.
42 Baruḵ be those who preserve these words and may
those who alter them suffer for what they do.
43 The world is glorified through men whose lives are
governed by dedication and duty, who completely
devote themselves to carrying out the purpose
ordained by HWHY, using earthly conditions to this end.
The desires and longings of the heart - the hopes and
aspirations of men - will never go unfulfilled or be
ignored by Elohim while men are willing to rise to
greatness through selfless sacrifices and devotion to
duty. The highest duty to which anyone can be called
is service and suffering in the cause of HWHY.

1577

BOOK OF NATSARIM

BOOK OF KAILEDY
‫ ספר קאילדי‬YdLYAq Rps

1 The birth of {vWHY the Nazirite, who became our
Aḏonai and Interpreter of Elohim and the Torah, a
worthy vessel for the greatest manifestation of the
power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh seen on Earth,
occurred in this manner:
2 About
the time Yoḥanan the Forerunner
commenced teaching the Way of the Wilderness
beside Yardĕn, in the year before Hĕrodĕs died,
when Augustus Kaisar ruled the Roman world, a
Babe was born. The father was Yosĕph, son of Heli,
a carpenter of Galil, and the mother Miryam, his wife,
who had been a virgin pledged to HWHY and the
Hĕyḵal by her father Shim’on, son of Yoachim, son of
Nathan, son of El’azar.
3 A decree had gone out that all who claimed kinship
within the House of Dawiḏ should be gathered for
enrollment at the City of Dawiḏ, called Bĕyth Leḥem
in Galil. Therefore Yosĕph, being rightfully born into
the stock of Dawiḏ, took the scroll of his parentage
and went to Bĕyth Leḥem so his kinship could be
established.
4 Now Miryam, being then heavy with Child, longed
in her heart to be among her kinsmen, and she
prevailed upon Yosĕph to take her, for Bĕyth Leḥem
was only a day’s journey from them. The two, with a
servant, came to Bĕyth Leḥem at eventide, but
because so many had gathered, the inns were filled.
Then as Miryam’s time was close upon her after the
journey, a man took pity on her and provided a cave
used as a stable. There the travelers found shelter
and rest.
5 That night, Miryam’s labors came upon her, and
she suffered the pangs of childbirth and cried out in
pain. Nearby, some shepherds were tending sheep,
for in the midst of so many strangers these needed
1578

BOOK OF KAILEDY

protection, and, hearing her cry, went to help. They
provided a shepherd’s basket which was filled with
straw and placed it in the manger, and the newborn
Babe was wrapped in the clothes brought for Him.
6 After eight days had elapsed, the Child was
named Yeshua meaning “One Who Delivers,” for a
messenger of HWHY had appeared to Yosĕph in a
dream, saying, “That which lies within Miryam, your
wife, is filled with the power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh
and will respond to the hopes of men.”
7 Later, men called Him {vWHY; and because He
fulfilled their hopes and was anointed with the power
of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh, He became acknowledged
as ha’Mashiaḥ.
8 [Now, the stable was against a hill, behind an inn
where sages from the East were staying - men of
Sastera, wise in the Books of the Shamayim, and of
Nimroḏ, who carried the stake of fire. So, Yosĕph sent
for them, requesting they come and foretell the
Child’s future, for such was the custom.]
9 One of the sages said, “It is strange indeed, for
this Child is born under no usual star, but under one
that is a star in appearance only and not in nature,
having a power not in other stars. He is destined for
greatness and will motivate events touching the lives
of all men.”
10 When word of this was passed around, there was
much excitement among those belonging to the
House of Dawiḏ. And many, remembering the neḇuah
of Yoḥanan - for they had passed his way - wondered
in their hearts, “Is this not He for whom we wait, the
consolation of the Yahuḏim and Deliverer of Men?”
This displeased the people of Bĕyth Leḥem who
awaited another Deliverer.
11 When the sages spoke of the matter at their
journey’s end in Yerushalayim and word came of the
excitement among those of the House of Dawiḏ in
Bĕyth Leḥem, there was great consternation among
the kohenim and learned men. They tried to discover
1579

BOOK OF NATSARIM

where the babe was, but the sages answered
deviously and said, “His star points towards the East.”
12 An elder of the House of Dawiḏ, attending the
beraḵah of the Child on the eighth day, lifted up his
voice and declared, “Surely this is He who has been
promised to redeem us out of the hands of evil. This
is He upon whom the power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh
will descend, bestowing strength, compassion and
wisdom. Surely, He will rule in the Reign of Elohim.”
13 When the sovereign heard about these things and
that a Babe had been born who, many claimed, was
destined to be the Deliverer, he was greatly disturbed
and summoned the Council. With the Council were
learned scribes and elders who disputed among
themselves concerning the babe.
14 Some said that while HWHY’s Anointed would be
born in Bĕyth Leḥem, the Deliverer would not, for the
birth of HWHY’s Anointed in that place had been
foretold by the neḇi’im. Others said it might not be
more than an Enlightener who was expected to be
born at that time. However, when many agreed that
HWHY’s Anointed and the Deliverer might be the same
Person, the sovereign sent three men to discover the
Child.
15 The dispute before the Council had been long, and
Yosĕph had been forewarned, so when the men sent
by Hĕrodĕs came to Bĕyth Leḥem, Yosĕph had
departed with his family. They went to the place
where the kinsmen of Miryam lived. The men who
came did not search long for {vWHY, for after the
Council had been dismissed, Hĕrodĕs slew the son
who sat with him on the throne, as he had slain others
of his blood. Later, Hĕrodĕs died himself; but after
these happenings, the Romans did not bestow the
title of sovereign on any Yahuḏi, and it was unlawful
for any man to claim the title.
16 In this manner the neḇuah was fulfilled which said,
“A virgin shall give birth to a Son, naming Him ‘Elohim
with Us.’ He will be the bearer of knowledge,
1580

BOOK OF KAILEDY

discriminating between good and evil. But before this
is given to the people, the land will lose its
sovereigns.”
17 When time had passed, Yosĕph and Miryam came
to Yerushalayim and stayed at the house of a relative
- a man strongly set against wrongdoing and well
learned in the Torah. The forty days having been
accomplished for the purification of Miryam, she
came to the Hĕyḵal, and Yosĕph offered the
prescribed sacrifice and dedicated the Child.
18 Hearing from Yosĕph and Miryam the things which
the sages had foretold about the Child {vWHY, the
devout man took the Babe into his arms and praised
HWHY in this manner:
19 “Because the things foretold have come about,
your servant is prepared to depart in shalom. For my
eyes have been gladdened by the Deliverer of my
people, a beacon Light for others and the glorifier of
Your Name. He will teach all men the Ways of HWHY
and how to walk in His paths; so swords shall be
made into plowshares and spears into billhooks, and
shalom will reign over men.”
20 Yosĕph and Miryam could not understand the
meaning of this and asked what was meant,
whereupon the man replied, “I hold a sapling which
will grow into a sturdy tree, under the shade of which
many nations will find shalom. Yet He will also test the
strength of our people, tearing them apart in dispute.
He comes as a separator, dividing the sheep from the
goats, showing each His rightful place. He will place
a sword in the hands of the weak and strengthen
them, and the Beliya’al will be smitten.”
21 After complying with the requirements of the Torah
of the kohenim, Yosĕph and Miryam returned with the
Infant to their home in Galil, a small place in a hollow
at the foot of a hillside. There the Child grew up,
developing a strong body and keen mind, for He was
strangely talented. He was wise beyond His years
and deft with His hands, and when old enough, He
1581

BOOK OF NATSARIM

began learning the craft of plow-making.
22 His parents, following the custom, went each year
to Yerushalayim for the Festival of Deliverance. And
when {vWHY was twelve, they went as usual, but this
time taking Him with them. Having remained the
seven days of the festival, Yosĕph and Miryam set off
to return home, but let the Boy linger in Yerushalayim;
for a kinsman of theirs was also returning, and they
thought {vWHY was in his company.
23 Having gone a day’s journey and finding {vWHY
was not with His kinsman, they became perturbed
and at first light in the morning returned to
Yerushalayim. It was some time before they found
{vWHY in a small outside room of the Hĕyḵal, sitting
before an instructor of the Torah of the kohenim. His
parents were astonished at finding Him accepted
among learned men, and the teacher expressed
amazement at the Child’s love of learning.
24 But
Miryam scolded the Boy for His
inconsideration, saying, “We have suffered much
during the search for You.”
25 {vWHY replied, “Why search for Me elsewhere,
knowing I must concern Myself with the work of My
Father?”
26 This saying disturbed the instructor. Neither could
His parents understand the meaning of the reply, but
they took the Boy away with them. Henceforth He
always obeyed His parents, but Miryam kept these
things in the storehouse of her heart. As {vWHY grew
up, His intelligence increased, and He was well liked
by all, but He was a solitary Child much given to
wandering.

2 Yosĕph died when {vWHY was a youth, at that time
working as a craftsman among the Kenites.
2 After {vWHY had been away a long time, He
returned to the house of His brothers. One day, while
He worked under the shade of a tree, they came to
Him and said, “Out in the wilderness by Yardĕn there
is a man who cleanses people by immersion in water.
1582

BOOK OF KAILEDY

He claims strange knowledge and calls himself the
Forerunner. We are going to see what he teaches.”
3 {vWHY said, “I have heard of these things, and
surely as the son of our forefather Yishai prayed to be
cleansed of his secret faults and presumptions, the
sons of our father should not stand aloof from
cleansing. I will go with you.”
4 The brothers of {vWHY said, “This man is called
Yoḥanan. He heralds the coming of an Enlightener
who will be an all-wise instructor in goodness. He
himself does not bear this new light which will dispel
the darkness in men’s minds. He tells of One who will
grant men the privilege of becoming children of
Elohim, awakening to eternal ḥai that part within them
not born of earthly desires.”
5 So {vWHY and His brothers went out seeking
Yoḥanan, finding him beside the Yardĕn, at the place
of crossing where there was a pool. The hairs on the
head of Yoḥanan were already white.
6 Yoḥanan, seeing {vWHY among those gathered
about him, said, “Look, all of you; here He is, a Man
in whom there is no guile, the true Lamb of Elohim,
the One we await. For Sethel, sending me forth to
immerse, instructed me thus: ‘When you discover a
Man worthy to be the receptacle of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh in abundance, the same shall you
acknowledge as the Enlightener.’ ”
7 Hearing these words, {vWHY joined with those to
be cleansed. But when He stood before the
Forerunner in the water, Yoḥanan said, “You have
greater powers of cleansing than I, yet You come to
me.”
8 {vWHY replied, “The power to cleanse and
revitalize with the Ruaḥ is not in men but in the Ruaḥ
which fills man. It is important each should be allowed
to do whatever he is called upon to do.”
9 {vWHY asked of Yoḥanan, “What do you know
about Me?”
10 Yoḥanan said, “Years gone by, I had a vision of
1583

BOOK OF NATSARIM

three lights of the shamayim, and as the sun sank so
they rose. A flame of fire went up over Yerushalayim,
and smoke filled the Hĕyḵal, and a star fell down into
Yahuḏah. The meaning I know, for it was this: The
Deliverer is born, and woe unto the house of Hĕrodĕs;
woe to you scribes and your interpretations of the
Torah.”
11 “The star that appeared and stood over
Yerushalayim was a Child planted into Bĕyth Leḥem
from out of the heights of the shamayim, as was
foretold; and it was naḇu He would be the Deliverer.
The fire that burned was the fire of a strange altar.”
12 “I naḇa great things for You. You are the true Bĕn
of Elohim. Soon You will see the glory of the
shamayim revealed, and the power of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh will be poured out upon You as a stream
of pure water. The time has come to proclaim
Yourself. Shalom, shalom on You whom our Elohim
has chosen as His Messenger, for You will proclaim
the true Besorah. Strengthen Your heart, for the road
ahead is steep and stony. No man is hated so much
as one who tries to point out defects in character and
attitudes and seeks to guide men along the path of
right and beneficial living.”
13 Then Yoḥanan took {vWHY down to the river and
immersed Him, and He was overshadowed by the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh and became fully filled with its
power, so His face glowed. And the people wondered
and were bewildered, for they did not understand. Yet
the face of their forefather Mosheh had also glowed
after he had been in the presence of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh of HWHY.
14 Yoḥanan
said, “Go and wait upon the
mountainside nearby.”
15 Later, Yoḥanan went to join {vWHY and told Him
that He was the Anointed One but should not yet
make this known to the people.
16 Then Yoḥanan prayed thus: “We give thanks, O
HWHY, with souls purified through realization of our
1584

BOOK OF KAILEDY

misdeeds, and Ruaḥoth reaching upward to
commune with You. It is by Your power alone we
have seen the light of Truth manifested and come to
know the secret of Your hidden Name. In humility we
call You by the name of Father because You have
shown us a father’s compassion and kindness, and
because we know You chastise and discipline us after
the manner of a father. You have granted us freedom
of activity, that we may enjoy the beraḵah of ḥai. We
have been saved by the waters of Your affection. We
approach You as the only Good and Great Being,
asking only that we be united with You in the waters
of the Ruaḥ and never become separated from the
source of ḥai.”
17 This is how Yoḥanan testified concerning these
events: “On that day the Ruaḥ outflowing from Elohim
came with a great surge of power. I did not know this
Man from others, but seeing Him I recalled what I had
been told by those who gave me power to cleanse
with water. They had said, ‘When you find someone
so filled with the power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh He
can hardly contain it, you will know Him for One who
will immerse with the cleansing power of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh.’ I have experienced this power and
testify that this Man is the true Bĕn of Elohim, the
Enlightener and Deliverer.”
18 Yoḥanan left {vWHY on the mountainside, where
He stayed three days fasting and communicating with
the powers above. Then He went back to the
riverside. Yoḥanan was standing with two of his
talmidim, {vWHY sitting apart, and Yoḥanan said to
those with him, “There is the One giving Himself as
an offering of Elohim, the Enlightener of the world and
the Deliverer of our people.”
19 Then the two talmidim went to {vWHY and said,
“Tell us about Your teachings. Shall we follow Your
Way or that of Yoḥanan?”
20 {vWHY said, “There is the Way of the Wilderness
and there is My Way, alike in teaching, but calling to
1585

BOOK OF NATSARIM

different men. What Yoḥanan teaches accords with
the Torah even as My teaching; obey either or both,
they are the Torah.”
21 From that day forth, {vWHY had power to heal the
sick and to do many things, but He went out into the
wilderness bordering Yardĕn, uncertain about His
next move. While there, hungry and thirsty, He fought
with the flesh, resisting the temptation to go down
among the habitations of men and use His powers for
selfish ends.
22 The same Ruaḥ of HWHY which overshadowed
{vWHY overshadowed the creation. It enlightens outer
darkness and bestows ḥai and is eternal.
23 Yoḥanan was one of those who can see the
Ruaḥoth of men, and so he knew the nature of
{vWHY. These things took place at Betharaba, which
means the place of crossing.

3 Coming from the wilderness, {vWHY still retained the
full power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh. Having it on
trusteeship from Elohim, He would not use it
unworthily. At night it shone around Him like a pale
blue haze; and though many have it, never has
another manifested it in such strength.
2 Two followers of Yoḥanan the Forerunner - one
being Andri the brother of Shim’on - were sent by him
to be with {vWHY and accompanied Him to the Sea of
Galil of the Nations. Early in the morning Andri sought
out his brother and said, “We have found the
Deliverer,” but at the time Shim’on thought another
was meant.
3 When {vWHY had known Shim’on for two days, He
said, “You are strong, silent and steady, one likely to
be ever steadfast in conflict; therefore you shall be
called Kĕpha,” this meaning “the Rock” in the tongue
of the Nations. And from that day Kĕpha became a
follower of {vWHY.
4 Passing along the shore, they came upon the
Tower of Fishermen, and a boat was being unloaded
by its owners. One who accompanied {vWHY said,
1586

BOOK OF KAILEDY

“Those are good men known to me.”
5 Then {vWHY spoke to them while sharing a meal
and later said, “Fishing is a good life, but there is a
better one. Follow Me and you will become fishers of
men.” So, placing their boat in the keeping of others,
they followed {vWHY.
6 At this time, {vWHY spoke with caution, for the
people still recalled Yahuḏah from Galil who had
smitten the Romans in battle. {vWHY was a Man of
long silences, and many thought Him strange. But He
taught all along the shore of the Sea of Galil and
called others to follow Him. They worked wherever
they could, for {vWHY said, “What We offer is not to
be sold like a common chattel, and We will not take
anything without giving value in return.”
7 He healed many, saying, “It is not I but the power
from above with Me.”
8 Some of the talmidim said, “It is truly He who
heals.”
9 But He did not cure all, for in some it created a
disturbance, while many were not cured because this
would have done them more harm than good.
10 When asked, “How do You heal?” {vWHY replied,
“By the finger of Elohim.” This is what the neḇi’im had
said regarding these things: “These are the words of
HWHY: ‘I will restore you to health and heal your
wounds. Be strong of heart and courageous, neither
afraid nor dismayed, for I am with you always.’ ”
11 About this time, the talmidim questioned {vWHY
concerning the world of Ruaḥoth wherein lay the
Reign of the shamayim, and He said, “It is like a flight
of stairs leading from cellar to roof. They who enter
the house are given a place on the stairs and may
step downwards and back, but never up, though the
stair above is not unknown to them. Those on the top
stair are in glorious sunshine, while those at the
bottom are in darkness and gloom.”
12 A talmid said, “Many who do not come mock Your
words.” {vWHY replied, “Dogs bite stones, not those
1587

BOOK OF NATSARIM

who throw them.”
13 Someone asked, “Are You the Hammer of
Elohim? For all yearn for Elohim’s intervention and
when that comes will rejoice, saying, ‘This is the day
of HWHY for which we have long waited.’ ”
14 {vWHY answered, “There is a time for sowing and
a time for reaping, everything to its appointed time.”
15 {vWHY gathered His followers around Him and
taught as follows: “These days are a night of
ignorance when all is dark, but I am the Light which
will dispel the darkness. My Light will light your lamps,
and you too will become bearers of the Light. I am the
Light to point the Way, and none can find the way to
HWHY except by the Light.”
16 “I come to testify concerning the Father, for those
following My Way see Elohim in the Light of the
Father. Does not a father chastise in love and punish
with affection? Does he not give you tasks only just
within your power of accomplishment? Even as with
an earthly father, so with the Father of the shamayim,
who is infinitely greater. Being flesh, we understand
earthly ways, but the ways of HWHY may also be
known and understood, for His Ruaḥ resides in all
men.”
17 “Be upright in faith yourselves and teach
uprightness and Truth. Fear no man, especially the
rich and powerful, for they live in servitude to their
possessions and position. You must carry the Light to
many, but few will be those who light the lamp of their
lives from it.”
18 “Do not covet riches, for though few men possess
them, all who do are not free but are themselves
possessed by their wealth. Because riches are the
possession of a few, all seek them. Even so are My
words; were they possessed by all; none would value
them.”
19 One said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, we are not all like
Yoḥanan who could surely eat bread made with sand.
Is there no easy way?” {vWHY said, “The only easy
1588

BOOK OF KAILEDY

paths in life lead nowhere, or are cut by others. But
the path I point can be cut by none but yourselves.”
20 “A peddler going from place to place is willing to
undergo the hardships incurred through his
wandering, in order to earn his livelihood. Even so
should you be prepared to cheerfully accept the
hardships imposed by life, in order to gain glory in the
life which follows.”
21 “If a child is not raised with austerity, can it enjoy
the pleasures of later life? Only the foolish parent
overindulges the child, and if it is done in the name of
affection, the parent is either a hypocrite or
irresponsible.”
22 Now, close by there was a well, and the talmidim
were drawing water for drinking. {vWHY called them
over and said, “Do you find the water refreshing?”
They replied, “Yes, we have drunk our fill and are
refreshed.” {vWHY said, “Does any water remain in
the well?” They replied, “Aḏonai, this well is
inexhaustible and cannot be drunk dry by any number
of men.”
23 Then {vWHY said, “It is even so with My teachings.
What I have revealed so far is but a small portion of
the whole, yet it suffices for the present needs. The
people among whom we go are perverse and
headstrong and, like a thirsting donkey, can be given
only sufficient to ease their pressing need. If they say
to you, ‘This is beyond our understanding’ or ‘You
have told us only in part,’ recall this well and the
refreshing water you obtained from it.”
24 One of the talmidim asked, “How shall we judge
what people do, whether it be good or whether it be
bad?”
25 {vWHY said, “If you are unsure whether a person’s
actions be good or bad, incline in his favor. If anything
may be interpreted favorably or otherwise, then
interpret favorably. Do not seek for wrongdoing, like
dogs chasing a foul smell. If a good man does
something appearing to be bad, then withhold
1589

BOOK OF NATSARIM

judgment, wondering whether there be some good
motive behind it. Yet do not be easily hoodwinked. If
one with a bad reputation does something seemingly
good, question his motives, but bear in mind that no
man is either wholly good or wholly evil.”
26 {vWHY
said, “Fortify yourselves with the
knowledge of Truth as I have imparted it to you.
Rejoice in the knowledge that you stand within its
everlasting light.”
27 The talmidim said, “Aḏonai, we are grateful for
what You give us. We know each of us is a part of the
everlasting Ruaḥ. We have truly found Truth and see
it more clearly than others. We are children of the
Light and of the Ruaḥ, even as we are children of the
Father. None of us can ever repay You, for we have
been given treasure beyond riches. Only the Father
of the shamayim can provide proper recompense for
Your labors among men.”
28 At this time, {vWHY was teaching His talmidim at
a place apart, for He was still wary of the people, but
He and the talmidim went among them to earn their
bread.
29 {vWHY healed many, but to His talmidim He said,
“I have not come to strengthen the bodies of men but
their Ruaḥoth. For if man is wholesome in ruaḥ, he is
wholesome in body. It is better to treat the man than
the disease.”
30 One day, a talmid returning from his labor said to
{vWHY, “Aḏonai, we work all day and scarcely sleep
at night, yet when we tell of Your teachings we are
abused and mocked by the people. Where is the
benefit in this? Should we not be treated otherwise?”
31 {vWHY said, “When I was a boy, the poor would
gather about My mother’s door, for she always had
an extra loaf in the oven for them. One day, a beggar,
having been fed often and now perhaps considering
it his entitlement, found fit to scold her, for this day
she was not well, and therefore slow. She, not being
used to this, began to weep.”
1590

BOOK OF KAILEDY

“So I say unto you, do not let the talk of
thoughtless tongue perturb you, for this is only a
foretaste of what is to come. These things are refining
processes of the ruaḥ, therefore rejoice for the benefit
rather than sorrow for the hurt.”
33 “For when My mother cried, I said to her, ‘Dry your
eyes and be happy, for now you can perform your
charitable acts to perfection. Had those who stood
about the door praised you, the deed would have
been less worthy, having been done for their praise
and therefore not entirely out of charity. Many do
good works because it increases their self-esteem,
but charity is not giving the bone to a hungry dog, but
giving the meat when hungry yourself.’ ”
34 Andri said to {vWHY, “If we give all we have to the
poor, they will grow fat and slothful, preferring a life of
beggary to one of toil.”
35 {vWHY said, “Charity is giving a hand to a blind
man or soothing the wounds of those smitten by the
ruaḥ-strengthening sword of ḥai. It is good to help
those in distress or those who cannot help
themselves, but sometimes giving does more harm
than good. Many give because it eases their
conscience or raises their self-esteem. Such giving is
not goodness. But when giving entails self-sacrifice,
then it is better to give than to receive, for the benefit
lies in the sacrifice made and not in the thing
bestowed.”
36 “A rich man was going away, so he gave a purse
of silver to each of his two servants so they could
keep themselves while he was away. One servant
spent the money on merchandise which he hawked
around the city and, by being thrifty, was able to
recover the silver with sufficient over to buy a stall and
then a shop. When the master returned, he said to
this man, ‘Such efforts should not go unrewarded,’
and made him a gift of the silver.”
37 “The other servant, having the purse of silver,
began to spend it on pleasure and a life of ease, so
32

1591

BOOK OF NATSARIM

when the master returned, there was nothing left. This
angered the master after seeing how hard the other
had toiled, so he demanded repayment of the silver
and, when this could not be done, enslaved the man.”
38 “The
improvident servant was unable to
understand why the other has been given a gift and
freedom, while he was enslaved for being unable to
repay - why he who had money was given more. Yet
I say to you, this is the Way of the Father who gives
trusteeship of Earth’s bounty to His children.
Likewise, they are given talents of spiritual gold which
are greater than any earthly silver, but these many
choose to bury in the ground. For them the day of
accounting must surely come.”
39 {vWHY tarried long beside the waters, moving from
place to place and teaching His talmidim according to
their understanding. Some were like strong, wellplastered cisterns holding water without leaking a
drop; others could not retain all that was poured into
them. {vWHY taught each only in accordance with his
capacity, and some carried much more of His
teachings than others.
40 One day, at eventide, {vWHY said, “Because you
are wearied and your task seems endless, do not
despair. What you do may be likened to a man down
by the shore whose master has set him the task of
carrying water from the sea to fill a hole in the sand.
The sea flows no less, neither does the land become
flooded. When the master comes, the man says to
him, ‘This is a fruitless task to which I can see no end,’
and the master replies, ‘It is one which grows easier
with time, and each day you are paid.’ ”
41 “Two men, finding favor in the eyes of a sovereign,
were promised high positions in a distant city, but had
to find their own way. They set off together and stayed
the first night at an inn where there were many
attractions. One man spent the night in drinking and
merriment; the other, finding an experienced traveler
who knew the road, kept the night in his company.
1592

BOOK OF KAILEDY

This second man learned that by going a particular
way he would avoid a thick forest full of wild beasts;
a turning would lead him away from a swamp, and
others from a precipice and thorny thickets. He went
to bed and awoke early, feeling refreshed, and went
his way. The other man, being heavy-headed and
sluggish, started late in the day.”
42 “The early starter, heeding all he had been told,
came quickly to the city and enjoyed his rewards. The
other became lost in the forest and was wounded by
wild beasts. He wandered through swamps and fell
down the precipice to die of weariness among the
thickets.”
43 “Now, the thick forest is ignorance, the swamps
are delusions, the precipice the carnal desires which
lure men to spiritual disaster, and the thorny thickets
tribulation and suffering, without which development
is impossible. The experienced traveler is a talmid of
the Light, and the man who reaches the city one who
listens to him.”
44 The talmidim said, “Aḏonai, many people hear our
words, but how many take them to heart and benefit?
We are trying to bail out the sea with a shell.”
45 {vWHY said, “Then you are learning patience and
persistence in a good school. If a cloak is placed
around a shivering man, his body becomes warm and
is comforted, but if it is placed around a boulder, there
is neither effect nor response.”
46 “Though I have told you the days fly as though
carried on the wings of swallows, do not act as though
the day’s labor is all important and must be completed
within the day. Doing this you become less able to
perform the task, for he who tries to reach out over
the edge of his limitations falls into a pit and achieves
nothing.”
47 Ya’aqoḇ, the talmid, said, “If a man of unlimited
wealth says, ‘Come and count silver pieces from
sunrise to sunrise, and all the pieces counted will be
yours,’ could the man counting be expected to sleep
1593

BOOK OF NATSARIM

during the night?”
48 {vWHY replied, “A man having much wealth is
unlikely to do anything without purpose, and this
would be in the counting. Could you count silver
pieces from sunrise to sunrise and not make an
error?”
49 {vWHY said, “Let none among you take the
handgrips of My plow unless he is prepared to grasp
them firmly and cut a deep furrow. Let none of you
walk behind it unless prepared for weariness and
sweat. There is no easy way for the plowman. The
field is there, and he must cultivate it furrow by furrow.
If he is careless, the grain yield will be poor.”
50 “Water drawn from the ground or falling from the
sky will produce burning weeds and grass, but to
produce bread to eat and wine to drink, water from
the brows of men must be added. Yet labor is not
without its own reward, for the man who labors all day
sleeps contentedly even though his pillow be a stone,
while the sluggard sleeps without content even
though he lie on a pillow of down.”

4 Leaving the Sea of Galil behind them, {vWHY took
the talmidim up into the mountains, and others went
also. Here there was a house providing warmth and
shelter, so they tarried awhile, it being the time of
preparation for sowing.
2 One cold night, {vWHY went out from the room
where they sat at food to relieve a man guarding the
donkeys, so he might come in and warm himself.
Later, when the man returned to his charges, he
found {vWHY shivering, for He had placed His cloak
around a foal. The man said, “Aḏonai, why do You do
this? But seeing You have done it, why does not our
Father provide a mantle for His Bĕn?”
3 {vWHY said, “The little one is helpless in Our
hands, but We are not helpless in the Father’s hand.
The foal has no choice but to remain in the stall, while
I can choose to go or stay, to keep My covering or
give it to another. If HWHY voided the effects of Our
1594

BOOK OF KAILEDY

good deeds, what merit would they have?”
4 The man said, “I will pray Elohim to make me good
even as You.” {vWHY said, “Pray that your deeds
merit the reward of goodness.”
5 Another night, a journeyman came seeking shelter
and warmth and was given hospitality. He said to
those who made him welcome, “You are baruḵ indeed
to live here in warmth and comfort, while I must ride
the inhospitable roads for my master.”
6 The following morning, having been well provided
with sustenance for the road, he said to {vWHY here
he departed, “Aḏonai, I listened well to Your words
last night. Since I am a poor man, suffering many
hardships, and my life is difficult, am I then assured
of better conditions in the life to come?”
7 {vWHY said, “By what standards do you think
these things are judged? Using yours, the packhorse
accompanying you would be more entitled to this
assurance. For while you ate soup and slept in
comfort and warmth, this uncomplaining beast whose
lot is much harder than yours remained neglected in
the cold.”
8 Towards the end of their stay, a learned man came
to eat with them, one knowing all the Books of
Wisdom and the Torah. While talking with the
talmidim he said, “Because of my knowledge I am a
man of no mean position, and many men are silent
before me when weighty matters are under
discussion.”
9 {vWHY, overhearing this, said, “Take no credit for
yourself concerning your knowledge, but compare
yourself to a borrower who has a debt to repay. Does
the borrower receive credit for repaying what he has
borrowed? Therefore, take no credit for the wisdom
you dispense. And as to the acquisition of knowledge,
is this not the end for which you were created?”
10 When this man had departed, {vWHY said to His
talmidim, “The Books of Wisdom should be the
treasure of all men, for they contain the explanations
1595

BOOK OF NATSARIM

and instructions of HWHY. When men say, ‘Woe,
because I am smitten with calamity; why does Elohim
let disaster strike in this manner, or why is my lot in
life unlike that of others?’ be sure they have not
unlocked the door of their treasure-house.
11 “By reading the Books of Wisdom you will be
brought to an understanding of the nature and
intention of Elohim, and life will then have meaning
and purpose. Without them you can be likened to a
man at sea in a fair wind but lacking sail and oars.
Reading
them,
but
lacking
guidance
or
understanding, you could be likened to a man at sea
with sail and oars, but without the ability to utilize
them.”
12 A talmid, one who had been with Yoḥanan, asked,
“Aḏonai, tell us which is true. Yoḥanan taught the
Way of the Wilderness and said, ‘Be the best of men,
and let Elohim take care of His Reign, for you are the
rulers of Earth.’ Yet at other times he told us to await
the coming of One who would deliver us from the evils
of this world and show us the path of righteousness.”
13 {vWHY said, “If you knew a distinguished guest
was coming, would you not make fitting preparations,
doing all things to ensure an appropriate welcome? If
a man has many servants, does he thrash his own
grain?”
14 “The road indicated by Yoḥanan is not My road,
but it leads to the same destination. I bring you the
Way of the Stake, which is the stake of ḥai. Follow
what I teach, and you will be with Me at the end.
Choose your path, for no man can plow two furrows;
neither can the hands of two men hold the reins.”
15 While {vWHY was still in the mountains preparing
His talmidim for the task ahead, two wandering
musicians came by, and one was always laughing,
and the other always melancholy. {vWHY said to
them, “Many men have differing skills, and are you
not skilled with the lute and lyre?” They said, “That is
so.” {vWHY said, “Now, when the strings of your
1596

BOOK OF KAILEDY

instruments are too taut, what happens?” They
replied, “Then there is discord.” And {vWHY said, “Is
it not even so if the strings are too slack?” They
replied, “It is.”
16 {vWHY said, “Sometimes the natures of men need
slackening, for they are too taut, while sometimes
they are too slack. Be like your instruments, always
tuned to the right note, and let there be harmony
between you.”
17 One of the talmidim said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, You
tell us many things, and I cannot retain all Your words.
Surely some are better than others. Which should I
store in my heart?”
18 {vWHY said, “A sovereign had two castles - one at
each end of a wall guarding his reign - and he gave
each of his two sons command over a castle. When
word came that an enemy approached, he ordered
his sons to collect all kinds of provender and store it.
One son collected everything he could, but the other
took only what he considered the best, leaving
everything else. The enemy came, and both castles
were besieged. The castle of one son fell when its
supplies were exhausted, but the other held out by
utilizing what the other had rejected. So it is with My
words - even those which may seem of least value
may one day prove their worth.”
19 The talmid then said, “Tell us where we may find
HWHY and Truth.” {vWHY said, “You have the Qodesh
Books and My words.”
20 Turning to the others, He said, “This man is like a
beggar who all his life stood under a fig tree. More
than anything else, he desired to be rich, but he
remained always poor and dressed in rags. Like all
men, he came to his hour, and those who buried him
dug his grave at the place where he had spent his life.
When the earth under the tree was opened up, it
exposed a treasure of great prize: gold and jewels,
right under the spot where he had been begging. How
easy it would have been for that man to be rich!”
1597

BOOK OF NATSARIM

One of those to whom {vWHY spoke said, “Then
all we have to do is to read and listen, assimilating the
knowledge gained.”
22 {vWHY said, “There is danger even in this.
Consider a snake catcher who, going among the
rocks, sees a snake well worth catching, but in his
haste grabs it by the tail instead of behind the head,
so it turns and bites him, causing his death. Did he
die because of his calling or because he grabbed the
snake wrongly? Was he not wrong in his approach,
rather than in what he did? It is even so with those
who know the Qodesh Books from end to end but
handle them wrongly.”
23 {vWHY said, “Be humble in your knowledge and
not puffed up; but beware the snare of false humility.”
24 One said to Him, “Aḏonai, what is false humility?”
{vWHY said, “A man was once told that if he could
learn humility, he would become perfect, and,
desiring perfection in himself above all else, he
diligently studied everything relating to humility. Then
there was nothing about it he did not know. However,
one day a man said to him, ‘What has your humility
gained for you? Where have you benefited?’ To which
the supposedly humble man replied, ‘Stupid one,
what is the matter with you? For can you not see that,
having learned humility, I am now a perfect man?’ ”
25 About this time, {vWHY came upon two talmidim
arguing as to which of His teachings should be
retained in their hearts. {vWHY said, “Your argument
can be likened to two wives - one old and one young.
The old one kept pulling out the dark hairs on her
husband’s head, while the young one kept pulling out
the white hairs. So, he became bald, having no hair
at all. Then both women said, ‘Behold, we have a
baldheaded husband.’ ”
26 One day, a talmid who had been to buy provisions
returned, saying, “I took down a diligently prepared
book of sayings, delightful to the ear, but men took it
from me and tore it apart. Surely the wrath of HWHY
21

1598

BOOK OF KAILEDY

will strike them.”
27 Hearing this, {vWHY called the man to Him and
said, “A girl once diligently collected colorful seeds
and threaded them into a necklace. But when she put
it on, a youth came along and pulled it, scattering the
carefully gathered seeds. She ran to her father,
expecting him to chase the youth and chastise him,
but the father did nothing. Later that evening, he gave
her a beautiful necklace of rare gems which he had
bought earlier, intending to surprise her. Then she
knew why he had not bothered with the youth or been
concerned about the necklace of seeds.”
28 {vWHY said to those about Him, “Many things
befall you, and life is difficult, but so life is meant to
be. Only timber well-seasoned is fit for the carver’s
hand.”
29 “A carpenter once sent his two sons to the forest
to cut timber, and they came upon a mighty tree - one
without branches, going straight up, with sound, wellgrained wood. One son said, ‘This tree is too big, the
task of cutting it too difficult. Let us find another which
is easier to deal with.’ The other said, ‘No, let us take
only the best.’ But the first one goes further into the
forest and comes upon a tree partly rotten and soft.
Now, he with the rotten timber returns first, while the
other comes two days later.”
30 “If the carpenter be wise, he rejects the timber
brought in first and chastises his son, rewarding the
other when he returns. But if the carpenter be pleased
with the first son’s early return, accepting the timber
and building with it, placing it as a beam support, so
the upright post breaks and the beam falls, killing a
man, how shall the blame be apportioned? The easy
way is rarely the best.”
31 {vWHY said, “Fear not the hostility of men, nor the
wiles of the world. Rise above your conditions. Be like
the water lily, which rises out of the mud, up through
the murky waters, into the sunlight above. Strive
always to rise above your circumstances, for in
1599

BOOK OF NATSARIM

striving you gain strength. The man whose path
through life has been easy is never as good as one
whose path has been difficult. Life has two purposes
only: to test and teach; and for that, Earth is perfect.”
32 “Regard each other as brothers, cherishing in
sickness and supporting in trouble. Never praise
yourself; and if you have virtues, let others discover
them. Be careful with whom you associate, for if a
man enters a tannery, though he carry nothing away,
a bad smell will accompany him.”
33 “No man is so important that he is above the need
to work. If it becomes necessary to dress hides in the
marketplace, then undertake it with a cheerful heart.
Even the rich must do something, for idleness is the
rust of time.”
34 “Judge no man otherwise than you would wish to
be judged. Once, a young woman was carried off and
placed in a whorehouse in another country. Her father
sent two men to ransom her, and when they came to
the whorehouse, one remained outside, while the
other went in. When he who went in came out, he said
to the other, ‘What do you think I was doing in there?’
The other replied, ‘Why, negotiating the woman’s
ransom.’ Even so should you judge with the scales
weighed down favorably.”
35 {vWHY taught His talmidim thus: “All things a man
possesses, his talents and his skills, are gifts
bestowed by the grace of HWHY. The inheritance
received by anyone should be regarded as something
received in trust, and it is true that if they deal with it
wrongfully or selfishly, payment will be required. One
of the greatest of life’s tests is the challenge of wealth
or position, and few are those who successfully meet
it. Therefore, do not envy those with wealth and
position unless they deal with them wisely; otherwise,
pity them, for they have failed to rise above their test.”
36 “A wayfarer once came to an inn and, finding no
one there, went into the eating hall, where he found a
table set with all good things - many kinds of food and
1600

BOOK OF KAILEDY

drink. So, he sat down and helped himself, thinking,
‘No one else is here, so all this must be mine; and if
mine, I can do with it as I please.’ However, when the
innkeeper returned from where he had been, the
wayfarer could not escape the accounting.”
37 “The rich are responsible for providing the needs
of the poor, whether by work or food. This, above all,
is the prime responsibility of wealth. And if a rich man
says this he cannot do, then his riches witness
against him. For if a poor man has a loaf of bread, he
will share it with he who has none; and a beggar at
the door of a poor man receives better treatment than
he does at the doors of the rich, yet the rich have the
most to give. And this is the sin of the wealthy.”
38 “Riches, of themselves, are not sinful; it is what
they make of men that brings them into ill repute. If
they were properly regarded as something permitting
the possessor to study the Books of Wisdom and to
redress the wrongs of the poor, then they would serve
a good end. Let the rich ask themselves with sincerity,
‘Am I not wealthy because of my lack of charity and
the exploitation of others? Is it not because I love
myself more than my neighbors?’ ”
39 “It is dangerous to be near a man without wisdom.
He is like a tree with many fine branches, but few
roots; the winds of adversity blow, and he is uprooted.
Choose your friends with great care, measuring them
against the words of wisdom. The man who is himself
a good friend will never lack friends, but those who
think they have many friends have none. The loneliest
person is one living for himself alone, but it is better
to be lonely than to be in bad company.”
40 {vWHY said, “It is not unseemly to glory in your
strength, but never become vain, for in strength you
are not superior to the beasts. If the standard is to be
the ability to bear a heavy burden, a donkey can carry
more than any of you. An elephant is mightier than a
score of men, while a camel has more stamina than
any man. Strength and stamina are goodly things,
1601

BOOK OF NATSARIM

seen in their right perspective, but they can be a
heavy handicap on the path of spiritual development
- particularly if they lead to arrogance and
inconsideration for others. Strength, like riches and
knowledge, is a goodly thing of itself if properly
utilized; but for most the test is too great.”
41 Some talmidim came to {vWHY and asked whether
they should not withdraw into the wilderness, where
they would dedicate their lives to HWHY.
42 {vWHY said, “Of what use would My teachings be
in the wilderness? Are you going to save rocks from
sin, or convert camels? Will you enlighten the wind,
or give wisdom to mirages? Where is the benefit if
what you learn cannot be put into practice? Learning
and good conduct must go hand in hand, and the
greatest wisdom is that which teaches men to live in
harmony. They who seek to escape the tests and
trials of life are cowards. Are you going to withdraw
from the conflict through lack of courage, standing
silently by while the wicked swallow up the good?”
43 The talmidim said, “Aḏonai, are You bringing strife
or shalom? Do you prepare us for battle? Are we to
rally the people?”
44 {vWHY said, “Do you still not understand? I am a
Man of shalom, and I unsheathe only the sword of the
Ruaḥ. This is not the easy way, for it is less difficult to
change things with the sword than with soft words;
and those who oppose Us understand that better. But
let only those who would use weapons with courage
talk about soft words and shalom, otherwise better
men will justifiably scorn them as cowards. Cowards
talk about shalom, and brave men about war. But I tell
you that when brave men talk shalom and cowards
are sent to war, there will be no more strife, and a new
day will dawn.”
45 A talmid named Maciah said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai,
teach us how to love one another without malice or
envy, with goodwill and forbearance.”
46 {vWHY said, “The first step is to love yourself less,
1602

BOOK OF KAILEDY

and by doing this you will find more love to give. If any
say, ‘I like being loved,’ that person is wrong, for
rather you should say, ‘I like loving.’ Do not seek to
take love, but to give it; for have I not said it is better
to give than to receive?”
47 Another talmid who had believed in bodily
resurrection said, “Aḏonai, what proof can be given
that there is a life beyond the grave?”
48 {vWHY answered, “There is proof to those worthy
of it. But if it were a manifest certainty as a reward for
a good life, how would the hypocrites and those who
would do nothing without payment be discovered? If
uncertainty and doubt were removed from life, then it
would be of less value for its purpose. Things are as
they are because so they must be. If you want proof,
become worthy of it; you will not be denied it even
here. But you must seek diligently. Nothing comes
easily, and this least of all.”
49 Before they departed from that place, a talmid said
to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, now that we go to take up our
burdens, tell us how to avoid wrongdoing.”
50 {vWHY said, “Were you able to avoid all
wrongdoing and sins, such is the known frailty of men
that I fear you would fall into another one - that of false
pride. Look at the falsely pious ones who glory in their
righteousness, and this is not the least of sins.”
51 Having taught in this manner and said these and
many other things, {vWHY departed from that place
on the mountainside and went down to carry the
tidings concerning the coming Rule of Elohim to the
people.

5 {vWHY went with His talmidim into Yahuḏah and
taught there. At this time, Yoḥanan of the Wilderness,
who heralded the coming of {vWHY, was immersing at
Ainum, not far from Salem, because there was a
plentiful supply of water in that place. A great number
of people came to be cleansed in the waters, for
Yoḥanan was still free.
2 At this time, there was much disturbance in
1603

BOOK OF NATSARIM

Shomeron, and many soldiers were coming and
going, for a false deliverer had arisen and proclaimed
himself as HWHY’s Anointed. The people were
restless, and there were many rumors, but Yoḥanan
had no dealings with any of these things. Yet some
said the false deliverer was a follower of Yoḥanan, but
this was untrue.
3 The talmidim of Yoḥanan came to him and said,
“Respected teacher, some time ago you testified
concerning a Man who came to you on the other side
of the river. Now He has started to immerse, and His
teachings gather many men to Him.”
4 Yoḥanan said, “No man can speak with authority
concerning HWHY without His sanction, but this Man I
know to be a True Messenger and the Worthy Bĕn.”
5 They said, “He also heals.” Yoḥanan replied, “No
man can heal, except through the power of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh; and this Man has that power.
6 “I have said I am not ha’Mashiaḥ; neither am I any
other whom men seek; I am the forerunner sent to
herald His coming. The bride belongs to the
bridegroom, but he who stands at the bridegroom’s
right hand to support Him is pleased when he hears
the words spoken by the bridegroom. That pleasure
is now mine, but not for long; for as my star declines,
so His waxes brighter.”
7 Yoḥanan feared no man and condemned
hypocrisy and indifference to the Torah wherever he
found it. He was the rod of the poor and unlearned,
and a staff to the weak and oppressed. He was
incorruptible and spoke forthrightly, never hiding
anything within his heart, and condemned
wrongdoing wherever it occurred.
8 Now, Yoḥanan immersed with water, and because
of this the kohenim were against him; but on this
matter they could do nothing. However, Yoḥanan had
condemned the actions of Hĕrodĕs, who had sinned
against his blood and the Torah. And because of this,
the people murmured against Hĕrodĕs. Therefore, as
1604

BOOK OF KAILEDY

these were restless times, and the people were in a
mood for revolt, he had Yoḥanan taken and
imprisoned. For had there been a rising against
Hĕrodĕs at this time, Rome could not have come to
his aid.
9 Yoḥanan was imprisoned in a fortress, and this
pleased Hĕrodias, for she had long borne ill will
towards him. Though Hĕrodĕs had no lawful right to
take his brother’s wife, the fault was not his alone.
Hĕrodias wished with all her heart to rid herself of the
condemnations of Yoḥanan but could not accomplish
this because Hĕrodĕs held Yoḥanan in awe. For he
was a truly qodesh man, much beloved by the people.
Though Yoḥanan was kept in confinement, Hĕrodĕs
often spoke with him and listened to his words. But
though they stirred the heart of Hĕrodĕs, he found
them difficult to understand.
10 While in prison, doubt stirred in the heart of
Yoḥanan, and he sent talmidim to {vWHY, enquiring
whether he felt he was truly HWHY’s Anointed; for at
this time there was much confusion on the matters.
When the talmidim returned, their reply puzzled
Yoḥanan, for they reported {vWHY as saying, “I am
not He whom you expected, or the Deliverer of these
people, but the Deliverer of all men. Nevertheless, if
only another will change the hearts of the people, I
shall not be found wanting.” But Yoḥanan received
wisdom and knew he had not erred.
11 Now, a certain feast day came, and Hĕrodĕs
entertained his officials and the leading men of Galil.
And during the course of the entertainment, his
daughter danced for the guests. She so charmed and
delighted them that Hĕrodĕs, while under the
influence of wine and the urgings of others, being also
full of pride at their applause, swore to grant her any
boon, whatever it entailed.
12 The girl withdrew to consult her mother, who told
her to request the head of Yoḥanan. Though the
request greatly upset Hĕrodĕs and sobered him
1605

BOOK OF NATSARIM

because he realized the extent of his folly, he himself
could not break an oath of this sort made in the
presence of his guests.
13 The oath sworn was a sovereignly one, but
Hĕrodĕs was not a sovereign. Therefore, he put it to
one of the guests - a learned man - as to whether
anything he wished to do would have force within the
Torah, or whether he could only be bound by an oath
made within the Torah. The man replied that even
sovereigns were bound by the Torah, and though
Hĕrodĕs was less than a sovereign, he had sworn a
sovereignly oath which, if broken, would confirm his
lack of sovereignly authority. However, he said that
Yoḥanan, being a lawbreaker, could not be protected
by the Torah, and so the oath made by Hĕrodĕs
stood.
14 So on the morrow the head of Yoḥanan was struck
off and displayed at the gate. So it was that Yoḥanan
was put to death because Hĕrodĕs feared his
influence over the people; for he declared the coming
of a new reign, and Hĕrodĕs feared the day of
deliverance.
15 Yoḥanan had said, “I have been sent with many
powers. I am with you to point out the Way of the
Torah. I herald the Deliverer and the Rule of Elohim.”
16 Yoḥanan had taught his talmidim to pray in this
manner: “Qadosh be the name of HWHY in the places
He created to serve His will. Let the coming of the
new reign under the Rule of Elohim not be delayed
beyond our days, but come in the time which is at
hand.”
17 When the followers of Yoḥanan heard what had
happened, they took charge of the body of Yoḥanan
and laid it in a tomb by the river. There was a loud
outcry from the people, who said, “Why should our
neḇi’im be treated in this manner? Where is the
Deliverer?”
18 Later, when {vWHY returned to the river, He found
two followers of Yoḥanan and took them to a place of
1606

BOOK OF KAILEDY

safety.

6 Before going out among the people to declare
Himself, {vWHY returned to Genesareth - the town of
His upbringing - accompanied by His talmidim. He
went first to the place where His mother was staying,
and though she greeted Him warmly because she
loved her eldest son, Miryam did not fully understand
{vWHY. She always knew He would grow up to be
different and would become a Man of Elohim
because, when carrying Him, she dreamed that a
bright flaming star had come down from the
shamayim and entered her womb.
2 His own kinsmen had once thought Him mad and
sought to take control of Him. But now, His brothers
and sisters having grown up, they no longer troubled
Him. They had said, “He has lost His father and seeks
another. For is it not written, ‘I will be His Father, and
He will be my Bĕn’?”
3 When younger, {vWHY had been overawed by the
prospects of the future, and often fearful that He might
not fulfill the promise. But He overcame this, and any
fears of His inability. It is in this, and His dedication,
that His greatness was revealed.
4 Though {vWHY wielded the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh of
HWHY, and in Him it was stored up as in a water tank,
He still had to overcome the weaknesses of men. For
without so doing, His greatness could not be made
manifest. Those who say He was something other
than man detract from His greatness, for then the
things He had to do would have been easier to
accomplish. Perhaps they cannot comprehend the
heights to which men can rise when inspired by HWHY,
the Father of all men.
5 Going into the Hĕyḵal, {vWHY stood up to read, as
He had often done in qodesh days. He read out a
passage from the scroll of a naḇi to the Yahuḏim,
called Yeshayahu in the tongue of His fathers and,
having done so, returned it to the scroll keeper and
sat down.
1607

BOOK OF NATSARIM

After others had performed their duties, {vWHY
had a chance to speak. And with all eyes upon Him
He did so, and the people were astonished.
7 For He said, “Behold, you are witnessing the
fulfillment of the Qodesh Writ, and the
accomplishment of HWHY’s design. I am chosen to be
the tongue of the Father, speaking His words to you,
His people. I am the Light shining in the midst of
darkness. And even as a shepherd separates the
sheep from the goats, so do I come to show how the
good are to be separated from the wicked.”
8 {vWHY spoke with knowledgeable authority,
bringing a new message which gladdened the hearts
of those who heard Him. The people marveled and
whispered among themselves, “Where has He
gained all this knowledge? How has He become so
learned? Is this not the Son of Yosĕph, the carpenter
who is now dead, and of Miryam? And do not His
sisters live here still? Yet they say He has healed the
incurable.” But not all received His words in this
manner, and many were offended.
9 Noticing the murmuring among these, {vWHY
addressed them, saying, “Do you hold it against Me
that I left? If a man has two duties, he must make a
choice - not following the inclinations of his heart, but
the course indicated by higher decree. No doubt you
have heard about the things I have done elsewhere
and will say, ‘Let us see You do the same here.’ To
this I can answer with sincerity: a naḇi is
unacceptable in his own neighborhood, and a
physician is not called to cure those who know him.
When I come in friendship and compassion to those
who need My help, they say, ‘Physician, heal Yourself
first,’ thinking Me mad. Why now should I be called
upon to do things Ĕliyahu and Elisha could not do?
The only ones they cured were Arameans.”
10 {vWHY did not heal many here, and He said, “I
heal in accord with the Torah and not against it.”
11 After hearing what He said in the Hĕyḵal, many
6

1608

BOOK OF KAILEDY

people were vexed with Him and sought to hustle Him
out of town. But others said, “Let Him be, for He grew
up here and is only the Son of a carpenter; therefore,
He tries to make Himself important. He has been
away and seeks to impress us.”
12 Being so poorly received in the town where He had
been brought up, {vWHY went out around the villages.
Choosing twelve emissaries from among His
talmidim, He sent them away in pairs to deal with
many things caused by the intrusion of evil.
13 He said to them, “Carry a staff, but take no food,
no money and no change of clothing. When you are
invited to a house, stay there until you leave the
village; but never tarry where you are not welcome.”
14 {vWHY said, “Many will fail to grasp your
meanings, or will interpret your words wrongly. Do not
dispute with them, but put things right with patience.
Never disregard a questioner or abuse him, lest
others think you have no answer. All can only grasp
what you say according to their understanding,
therefore speak plainly and to their hearts.”
15 {vWHY Himself went about proclaiming the advent
of the Rule of Elohim, and He also cured many kinds
of sickness. Then people began to say, “This Man is
great and good even among those dedicated to the
service of Elohim.” And many heeded His teaching
and led a new life.
16 Now, many people believed there would be two
kinds of deliverers, and a man named Yosĕph
Baraban had many followers. {vWHY met him at a
house in Bethgal and said, “Why do you declare
things which stir up the people?” To which the other
replied, “What concern is it of Yours?”
17 {vWHY answered him after this manner: “Several
men were sitting in a boat, and one began boring a
hole beneath his seat. Seeing this, his companions
said, ‘What are you doing here?’ He answered, ‘What
concern is it of yours what I do beneath my own seat?’
And they replied, ‘Surely it is our affair when what you
1609

BOOK OF NATSARIM

do will swamp the boat, and we will all be thrown into
the water.’ ”
18 {vWHY moved to another place, and a crowd
gathered around Him. And while He was speaking,
one of His first followers tried to push through to Him.
Now, this man was deformed and ugly, his eyes
squinted, and he was ungainly. But he walked in the
light of Truth. The crowd jostled him, shouting, “Look
at the ugly man; push him back or he will scare the
Teacher away.”
19 Then {vWHY stepped down from where He stood
and, pushing through to the man, put an arm around
his shoulders, greeting him affectionately. {vWHY said
to the people, “Why mock someone in whom the light
of goodness shines? What matters the appearance of
the body when the ruaḥ within is bright? None among
you has a ruaḥ such as this man’s, beautifully glowing
with goodness.”
20 “This I say to you: the body is of little importance,
for it perishes at its hour; but the ruaḥ never dies. Why
do you treasure that which you can keep but a short
while? For soon it will be cast off like a worn-out tunic.
Surely it is better to treasure more lasting things. The
shell of a pearl is ugly and rough, but men do not seek
it out for itself, wanting only what it contains; and this
becomes the cherished treasure of a beautiful
woman. Never heed the external ugliness; seek for
the beauty within.”
21 In the crowd there was a man who employed many
others, and he said, “Aḏonai, I am so stirred up by
Your words that I will give up everything I have and
follow You.”
22 {vWHY said, “How many look to you for food and
employment?” The man replied, “My children are
numerous, and I have many servants, and there is my
father who is old.”
23 {vWHY said, “The lives of no two men are alike,
and all require the labors of many to support them.
Even the greatest teachings cannot satisfy empty
1610

BOOK OF KAILEDY

stomachs. Therefore, return to the place of your
appointed labors and remain constant in your
responsibilities. Give all you make over your modest
requirements to HWHY and study the Qodesh Books
daily.”
24 {vWHY said, “A man without the Light places his
faith in gold, burying it in the ground so it will support
him in adversity. Yet what benefit does it bestow if he
never needs it? He worries continually and must be
constantly on guard, lest he be robbed. And when he
dies, his inheritors spend it. Yet by charitable deeds
and self-restraint, a greater treasure which cannot be
taken by robbers or dissipated by others can be laid
up openly and without fear.”
25 Someone in the crowd said, “Great Teacher, to
some You say, ‘Give up all,’ while others You tell to
continue in their ways. I have many responsibilities
and a moderate surplus over my requirements. What
should I do?”
26 {vWHY said, “Do what is right and just. Study the
Books of Wisdom and live according to their
teachings. Exploit no one, and work for the Rule of
Elohim.”
27 A man said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, I know the
problems of the rich, for I have sons and many
friends. But how can I know whether they love me or
my wealth?”
28 {vWHY said, “A rich man owned a large
warehouse, but one night this burned down,
consuming all his wealth. And though he had given
other warehouses to each of his two sons, when he
lost his own, they would not help him. While poor, he
met a beggar boy whom he adopted to fill the empty
places in his heart. And, going to a distant city, by
hard work, he established another warehouse,
becoming rich again. When the adopted boy grew up,
the man gave him a warehouse, but one much
smaller than those he had previously given to his
sons.”
1611

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“The two sons heard about their father’s new
wealth and sent word that they wanted to combine
their warehouses with his, so that by trading together
they could all get richer. The man then sent
messengers to all three of those he had helped,
saying his business had declined, and he was in the
hands of moneylenders and required a hundred
pieces of gold to continue. The two sons returned
excuses, saying they could not help; but the adopted
son sent two hundred pieces of gold, saying he had
pledged himself to obtain it. Thus, the man found out
who loved him and left all his estate to the one he had
adopted.”
30 Speaking to the people about Him, {vWHY said,
“So long as the great sun never shone upon Earth,
there was darkness; and had it not come to shine,
there would be darkness still. Without the sun, men
would not have known day from night; but when it
came, both were made distinguishable. These times
are a night of ignorance, wherein wrongdoing and
bewilderment prevail; but a Light has come to dispel
the darkness and make right distinguishable from
wrong.”
31 After these things had been done and said, it was
the time of a festival of the Yahuḏim, and {vWHY
returned to where there was a place of assembly. On
the way, He passed through the market where sheep
were sold, beside which was a salt pool having a
covered entrance to shelter the sick and maimed.
32 A man was lying nearby, and {vWHY said to him,
“How long have you been here?” The man replied, “I
have been here a long time, having no one to put me
into the water at the proper times.” {vWHY took pity
on the man and taking him by the hand, raised him
up, saying, “You are cured; arise, take your bed and
depart.”
33 This happened on the Shabbat, and when some
pious Yahuḏim saw the man carrying a burden, they
rebuked him. But he answered, “The Healer who
29

1612

BOOK OF KAILEDY

came and cured me said I should take up my bed, so
where am I in the wrong?”
34 The pious Yahuḏim enquired regarding the
Healer, but the man said he did not know Him, having
never seen Him before. Later, when the man who had
been cured saw {vWHY outside the place of
assembly, he learned His Name and told the
Yahuḏim.
35 Before this, the pious ones who were separated
out from the people had ignored {vWHY, but now,
because He did such things on the Shabbat, they
turned against Him. For {vWHY said, “If My Father
does not rest, why should I?” They thought He
claimed closer kinship with Elohim than ordinary men,
but He meant to show that all men are brothers.
36 The next day, when {vWHY commenced speaking
to the people, many sought to do Him harm. And He
said, “You have the teachings of the Torah and the
Neḇi’im. Why do you seek to do Me harm?” Then they
shouted back at Him, “Because You are possessed
by demons. You tell us we are wrong, but we are
content with our ways. Leave us to go our way, and
You go Yours.”
37 After this, {vWHY went away, because of the
hostility towards Him. But when it came close to
harvesting time, His brothers sent a messenger,
saying, “Come back now. The people are busy at
work. Let Your followers here see for themselves the
things You do, for if Your message is important, the
bearer should not remain hidden.”
38 On His way back, {vWHY and the talmidim with
Him passed through Shomeron, where there was a
place called Ya’aqoḇ’s Well, five furlongs from
Sheḵem. The sun being at its height, they decided to
rest there. After refreshing themselves, the talmidim
went into the town to buy food, leaving {vWHY
reclining not far from the well.
39 Now, while {vWHY rested there, woman of
Shomeron came to draw water. And {vWHY, not
1613

BOOK OF NATSARIM

having a vessel, asked her for a drink. This surprised
the woman, for the Yahuḏim regarded anything
handled by the Shomeronite as being defiled. She
said, “How can You ask this of me?”
40 {vWHY replied, “If you knew what Elohim gives
through Me, you would have requested a drink from
the waters of ḥai.”
41 The woman said, “What is this water of ḥai? Surely
it cannot bestow greater benefit than this well, the gift
of our forefather, which provided water for him, his
household and his flocks.”
42 {vWHY said, “This water, originating on Earth, can
satisfy only body; and the drinker will thirst again. But
the water I can provide, springing from an eternal
source, satisfies any who drink, so they need never
thirst again for things not of this world, and it grants
everlasting ḥai in glory.”
43 The woman said to {vWHY, “Let me have this
water You talk about, so I am freed from the necessity
for drawing water.”
44 {vWHY said, “It would be best if you went and
brought your husband, for two may understand better
than one.”
45 She answered, “But I have no husband.” {vWHY
said, “In this you have at any rate spoken true, for
though married five times, you now live with one who
is not your husband.”
46 The Shomeronite woman said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai,
I can see You are one of those special people who
know all things. Now tell me, is it true what Your
people tell us, that we should worship in the Hĕyḵal
at Yerushalayim to reach the ear of Elohim, for He is
only there and not on Mount Gerazim?”
47 {vWHY told her, “Be assured, the time is coming
when the place of worship is unimportant. For though
your people worship without understanding the
nature of worship, while the Yahuḏim worship with
this knowledge, neither know the true nature of
worship. The time is coming when all who understand
1614

BOOK OF KAILEDY

the nature of worship will do so in Ruaḥ and in the
Light of Truth.”
48 “For HWHY is the greatest of Ruaḥoth, and His
worshippers must therefore bring something of the
Ruaḥ. This - and labor in His service - is the only
acceptable kind of worship. The smoke of flesh and
fowl are not acceptable offerings.”
49 The woman heard without understanding, but one
with {vWHY stored these things in his heart. The
woman said, “Someday an Enlightener will come and
explain these things to us.” {vWHY replied, “My words
may have come from the Enlightener Himself.”
50 The woman said, “I must go, for You frighten me.”
Just as she was preparing to go, the talmidim
returned and were surprised to find {vWHY had been
talking to a Shomeronite woman in this manner, but
they said nothing. Leaving her pitcher, the woman
hastened away to spread word around that there was
a Man out at Ya’aqoḇ’s Well who could read the past
and might be the Enlightener, for the Shomeronites
did not await the Deliverer as did the Yahuḏim.
51 When the woman had gone, the talmidim showed
the things they had brought to {vWHY. But He was
disinclined to eat, saying to them, “Doing the Will of
HWHY sustains Me, and the inflowing power of His
Ruaḥ quenches My thirst.”
52 One of the talmidim said, “It is well to eat now, for
the harvest is ripening over there, and the harvesters
need strength.”
53 {vWHY said, “The reapers cannot expect their pay
until the crop is gathered into the storehouse. Let Us
wait to measure the fruits of Our labor before
celebrating. Is it not written, ‘Where one man sows,
another reaps’? You will be reapers in fields sown by
others. Many have toiled in the preparation of the
ground and have sown good seed. You must be no
less diligent in reaping the harvest, gathering it in
carefully so not a grain is lost.”
54 The one who had remained with {vWHY said,
1615

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“Aḏonai, I am puzzled. This woman had many
husbands; tell us which one will be her husband in the
shamayim.”
55 {vWHY said, “In the shamayim there is neither
marriage nor giving in marriage, for there the
promises of marriage are fulfilled. To one she must
incline more than towards the others; and if he
inclines likewise, there is union of the ruaḥ. But
unions of the ruaḥ may be either weak or strong.”
56 Another talmid said, “What of he who is not her
husband?”
57 {vWHY answered him, “Marriage is not of the flesh,
nor made by the words of men. It is of the ruaḥ, and
they who are joined in ruaḥ and flesh in the sight of
HWHY let no man seek to lightly put apart. A marriage
wholly of the flesh is fornication, though it be baraḵ by
many kohenim.”
58 “Yet marriage is the measure of value. A thing
possessed by many is of little consequence. The
worth of a coin lacking inscription is unestablished,
and the possessor carries it without faith, doubting its
ability to buy bread. A woman may be reserved for
marriage or give herself freely for love. She knows her
own worth best. But if she gives herself to several,
then it is not love, but fornication.”
59 “A union is baraḵ before a kohĕn and sanctified in
the eyes of the people. But I tell you, unless the bond
is forged on the anvil of adversity and wrought under
the hammers of stress and struggle, it is a thing of
little spiritual substance.”
60 “Love is not like the thistle seed, blown this way or
that according to the prevailing winds of desire and
inclination. It is not the offspring of flesh, but the
progeny of the ruaḥ. It can be proven and established
only under difficulties and tribulations, and it is
because of the known frailties of men under trial and
test that marriage has been ordained to enshrine it.”
61 Now, after these things were said, many
Shomeronites came and heard the words of {vWHY
1616

BOOK OF KAILEDY

and invited Him to stay among them. And He
remained three days.

7 {vWHY then went by boat, and where He landed
there was a man who lived in a deserted tomb,
because he was tormented by an intrusion from the
reign of dark ruaḥoth. Attempts had been made to
confine him in fetters, but because of the strength
unnaturally given, he easily escaped. Day and night he
would shriek among the tombs and upon the hillside,
terrifying people and often injuring himself by falling.
2 {vWHY knew the nature of the tormenting thing
and called upon the power within Him, so it entered
the body of the possessed man, wrestling with the evil
thing inside him. Then the man ran screaming among
a herd of swine, and two fell into a ravine, but shortly
the man became calm, for the evil intruder had
departed from him.
3 The swineherds ran away to carry the tale of these
events to people round about who came to see for
themselves what had happened. When they saw the
mad man was rational, they became afraid and asked
{vWHY to go away.
4 When {vWHY was preparing to depart, the man
who had been cured begged to go along with Him.
But {vWHY said, “No, you remain here and bear
witness for Me.” The man spread the tale of what had
been done for him through all the free cities, for he
received much silver in the marketplaces.
5 Coming close to another town on the seashore
where a crowd was gathered to hear Him, {vWHY saw
Mattithyahu seated where dues were collected, and
He said unto him, “Are you ready to follow Me?” For
He had spoken with Mattithyahu before. Mattithyahu
replied, “I am ready, but first come and eat with me.”
6 When {vWHY arrived at Mattithyahu’s house, He
found other tax gatherers had assembled there, with
many others who did not observe the Torah of
Mosheh which are in the Qodesh Books of the
Yahuḏim.
1617

BOOK OF NATSARIM

While eating, {vWHY said, “No man of himself can
know right from wrong. For what is right in one man’s
eyes may be wrong in another’s, therefore strife
arises among them. Only when men accept a single
standard of judgment and abide by it can there be
shalom. When men live together without the Light of
the Torah, they are like a house built with unmortared
bricks, or like men trying to tow a boat but all pulling
in different directions.”
8 “There are two laws - the law of men and the Torah
of the Father who is in the shamayim. When I speak
of the Torah, I do not mean the law of men. I am the
Light illuminating HWHY’s Torah so men see it more
clearly, and though I fulfill the Torah, I do not change
it. Never say ‘this is right’ or ‘that is wrong,’ but only
‘this is right or wrong according to the Torah, and in
the Light of {vWHY.’ ”
9 “I bring new oil for the lamp of the Torah, for that
within it is now impure, and the light produces too
much obscuring smoke. For I am the Bĕn of Aḏam
and bear the sufferings of men, coming to fulfill their
hopes even as it has been foretold. Is it not said
among the Yesseneth that the Bĕn of Aḏam is the
perfected Man who will set the standard for those who
wish to be true sons of Elohim?”
10 Later, when {vWHY went outside, He found some
Parashyim standing apart, as was their custom, and
one put the question to {vWHY, “How can You claim
to be a teacher, interpreting the Torah of Elohim,
when You associate with tax gatherers and
lawbreakers?”
11 {vWHY replied, “It is not the healthy who need the
attentions of a physician, but those who are ill. It is the
tree growing out of the sand which requires watering,
not the one growing by the river. I come to minister to
the spiritually sick, not to the righteous who have their
consolation.”
12 A man in the crowd said, “This is a day of fasting,
kept by all who are truly religious. Yet here are You
7

1618

BOOK OF KAILEDY

and Your talmidim eating and drinking.”
13 {vWHY said, “Is it usual for attendants at the bridal
shower to deprive themselves of pleasure while the
bridegroom is with them? Soon He will depart, and
that is the time for hearts to be heavy. A heart
weighed down without cause is an unnecessary
burden, adding neither joy nor benefit to the lives of
men. Fasting is good, but when it becomes a routine
religious rite, it is no more than a purposeless
vexation.”
14 A soldier in the crowd asked {vWHY, “Do You
uphold the teachings of Yoḥanan of the Wilderness?
For there was a man I can understand.”
15 {vWHY replied, “Yoḥanan sent men to Me
enquiring whether I was the Promised One or should
they look for another. I said, ‘Go back and inform
Yoḥanan of all the things you have heard and seen
here, and how the poor are learning about the coming
of the Rule of Elohim and the disinherited told when
justice will reign.’
16 “People went out into the wilderness, expecting to
find a great man, but what had they in mind? A man
speaking like the neḇi’im of old or a nobleman clad in
garments of fine linen? Yoḥanan dressed in a manner
fit for the place and purpose, and he spoke in
accordance with the message he had to convey. He
was the man of whom the Qodesh Books speak - a
voice of one crying in the wilderness, preparing the
path for One who follows.”
17 “I tell you with all sincerity, no mother ever gave
birth to a better man than Yoḥanan, yet when the Rule
of Elohim comes, everyone living will have to exceed
him. Ever since Yoḥanan declared these things he
was harried with violence, even though all the neḇi’im
before him foretold present events. He spoke with the
voice of Ĕliyahu, and if any of you have the
understanding, you will know what I mean.”
18 “Concerning this generation, which is wrapped up
within itself and blind to all going on about it, there is
1619

BOOK OF NATSARIM

little to say. It is like children at play calling out to one
another, ‘We play the pipes, but you refuse to dance;
we raise a lament, but you will not mourn.’ Like all
good men, Yoḥanan was misunderstood; for few
knew the measure of greatness. He lived simply,
neither eating nor drinking to excess. And because of
his way of life, men called him ‘crazy.’ ”
19 “The Servant of Man comes along and goes
among the people, eating and drinking with them, and
He is accused of gluttony, loose living and
drunkenness. What must a man do to prove himself
in the eyes of the people? Whatever he does is
wrong.”
20 One of the Parashyim who was nearby said to
{vWHY, “We understand Your meaning, but where do
You stand in relation to the Torah? Have You come
to take it away or declare it obsolete?”
21 {vWHY replied, “No one patches an old cloak with
new fabric, for this shows up its age without
strengthening it. Likewise, no sensible person puts
new wine into old wineskins, for this causes them to
split, the wine pouring out so neither the wine nor the
wineskins have any value. Is it not much wiser to put
new wine into new wineskins? I have come to place
something beside that which is already there, to hold
a mirror to the Torah and to man, so both may be
seen with greater clarity.”
22 A poor man standing nearby said, “What use is the
wisdom of the Qodesh Books? Will it provide our
bread?”
23 {vWHY replied, “What use is a lamp at night? Will
its light appease hunger? Is it worthless because it
cannot do so? Each thing has its appointed use. The
foot should not be called upon to do the work of the
arm, nor the ear the work of the eyes.”
24 “A carpenter does not do the work of a potter, nor
does a weaver make plows. A pupil may not be a
good teacher, nor a servant a good master. Each
must seek only to excel in the position he has, and
1620

BOOK OF KAILEDY

not to be better than others at their own task.
Whoever supports Me, that person will I support; and
I will strive with those who are against Me.”
25 “I have not come to bring shalom but to put a
sword into the hands of men, setting sons against
their fathers and daughters against their mothers. For
nothing is worthy if a man will not fight for it. Anyone
following Me will find enemies among his own
kindred, and though he love his parents above all
else, I will give him a cause which is greater. My
burden is not light and must be shouldered with
fortitude and courage. Those finding it too heavy must
go elsewhere.”
26 “The man who seeks to preserve his life through
cowardice will be deprived of its benefits, and he who
is prepared to make sacrifices for the cause of man
will surely gain the crown of life. Whoever receives a
good and just man openly, giving him his due, shall in
turn be given the reward of his merit. But those who
expect to receive rewards bestowable only by One
greater than a naḇi will be disappointed.”
27 It was after this that {vWHY said to His talmidim,
“When the task is difficult, a man seeks consolation
from his father. A man may be lonely among many,
but no one need be lonely in the ruaḥ, for this is never
shut off from communication with a source of
comfort.”
28 Then {vWHY prayed, “Oh Father above the
shamayim and Earth, Your Bĕn submits to Your Will.
And if things declared in Your Name remain mysteries
to the learned but are revelations to the simplehearted, You know best, My Father. You have placed
a great responsibility on Your Bĕn, but few heed Him.
The Father’s words, spoken through the mouth of His
Bĕn, are not highly regarded.”
29 Later, at another place, {vWHY said to the people
gathered there, “Follow Me, all those who are
overburdened and weary, and I will help you. Take
the yoke of My cause upon you, and learn from Me,
1621

BOOK OF NATSARIM

for this will ease and not add to your load. I am
understanding and compassionate, not expecting
anyone to bear a load too heavy for them. The heavyladen shall know the Light and be moved from the
darkness, but they who cast aside their burden and
go astray are lost forever in darkness. Life loads each
according to his capacity, and no two bear a similar
burden.”
30 At this time, {vWHY always kept some talmidim
with Him when He walked about, and one Shabbat
He and two of them were following a small pathway
leading past uncut corn ripening in the husk. The
talmidim plucked a handful - for the Torah permitted
them to do this, providing they did not enter the field
or take any away - and, rubbing the ears between
their fingers, ate the grains. Three Parashyim were
passing by, and they rebuked the talmidim and said
to {vWHY, “Why do You allow Your followers to do
things not permitted on the Shabbat?”
31 {vWHY answered, “Does the deed affect the day?
Have you not read that, when driven by hunger,
Dawiḏ went into the House of HWHY and took the
sanctified loaves to eat, sharing them with his men?
Though these loaves were reserved for fare of the
kohĕn, did he not justify himself by saying all
produced by the Earth were for the use of men?
Surely the Shabbat was made for the sake of man,
and not man for the sake of the Shabbat! As man
bows to the needs of life, so the Shabbat must bow to
the needs of men.”
32 Towards evening, as they returned, {vWHY saw a
man working in the fields and said to him, “If your
labors are dedicated to the service of Elohim, you are
baruḵ; but if it is otherwise, you are a lawbreaker.”
33 The talmidim, hearing this, said, “Aḏonai, is there
so much difference between the things of the morning
and the things of the evening?” {vWHY said, “The
same difference as between an empty stomach and
a full one; the same thing may be forgiven one man
1622

BOOK OF KAILEDY

but not another.”
34 On another Shabbat, {vWHY came out of the
Hĕyḵal to be accosted by a man with a paralyzed arm
who said, “Aḏonai, I am a mason who can no longer
be useful and must humiliate myself by begging for
food to feed my family. Let me become a whole man
again, not for my sake but for the sake of those
depending upon me.”
35 Nearby stood some self-righteous members of the
congregation who watched closely to see what
{vWHY would do. But He, knowing their thoughts,
called them over and said, “Let Me know your views
concerning the keeping of the Shabbat. Should good
be done when it would be uncharitable to leave it
undone?” They said, “We abide by the Torah as it is
interpreted for us by those knowing better than we.”
36 {vWHY became angry and was hurt in His heart,
for their hard-heartedness and wrongful interpretation
of the Torah were indications of their spiritual apathy.
So, He healed the man’s arm. The self-righteous see
no wrong in themselves, only in others. And they
interpret all things to accord with their own
convenience.
37 Then the self-righteous ones left, plotting among
themselves, and they decided to become supporters
of Hĕrodĕs, who was against {vWHY. They said, “Let
us set a trap for this troublemaker who condemns our
ways. He reproaches us for wrongdoing when we
simply obey the Torah, and accuses us of things
which He declares to be sinful, but which are not more
than natural weaknesses of men.
38 “He proclaims Himself to be the mouthpiece of
Elohim, so let us test Him and see. Let us find out
whether He speaks true or false. We will send men to
beat Him up, and see then whether Elohim comes to
His aid. Let other men abuse Him and hurl insults at
Him, heaping every kind of indignity upon Him,
treating Him roughly to test His gentleness. We will
heckle Him and cause commotion whenever He
1623

BOOK OF NATSARIM

speaks, and see whether He abides by His own
teachings under provocation.”
39 They laid their plans. However, there were others
who came to {vWHY and asked Him how they would
recognize the Deliverer when He appeared among
them.
40 {vWHY said, “Is it not written, ‘He will judge the
disinherited and lowly who trust in Him. He will smite
the Earth with the rod of His tongue and destroy
wickedness. He will be girdled with integrity and
belted with trustworthiness’?”
41 Then some said, “Surely this Man is HWHY’s
Anointed.”
42 Someone said, “Aḏonai, how do we know the
Deliverer will come to us?”
43 {vWHY said, “Is it not written, ‘He will come to the
worthy and just, but to the people He will be like a
winnowing fan, ensuring only the best are gathered
in’? It is also said, ‘He will baraḵ those who follow Him
with wisdom and gladness. He will be sinless,
gathering together a dedicated people whom He will
lead in righteousness as an example to all nations.
They will cast out the Beliya’al from their midst. Those
born in the days of the Deliverer will witness the
things He will do for the generations which follow.’ ”
44 “Is it not also written, ‘The words of His mouth will
smite the Earth forever, and, for the chosen among
men, there will be a guiding Light for the rest of their
days’?

8 Kĕpha, who had been called Shim’on, owned a
house beside an olive garden, and his brother, his wife
and his mother-in-law lived there with children and
servants. These did not welcome {vWHY, while
Kĕpha’s mother-in-law kept to her bed, for she was
down with fever. {vWHY, finding her in this condition,
sat down beside her and, taking her hand, stroked it so
she soon slept. When she awoke, she got up and
attended to the guests, for the fever had gone.
2 The brother of Kĕpha said to {vWHY, “This place
1624

BOOK OF KAILEDY

already supports sufficient kohenim and expounders
of religion, and You bring others with You to swell
their numbers. How will You all live?”
3 {vWHY said, “I will tell you a parable. An
inconsiderate man once owned a cat, which he
sometimes neglected to feed. One day, he came
home with a dog found wandering and lost. The cat
said to the dog, ‘Now I shall surely starve, for you are
much bigger than I am, and the food for you will be
often forgotten, so you will devour mine.’ The dog
said, ‘This will not be so, for when we are hungry, I
can bark and whine, which you cannot do. This will
show the master we are hungry, and we will both be
fed.’ ”
4 Later, while they were dining, {vWHY said, “Men
say I am the scourge of the Parashyim, but this is
untrue, for many of these are reverent men whom it
would be unworthy to lash with the tongue. It is the
painted Parashyim, the hypocrites pretending to be
what they are not, whom I criticize.”
5 “There are those who carry their goodness on their
shoulders for all to see; those who say, ‘Tell me my
duty and I will do it, show me my obligations and I will
carry them out’; those who bow to the ground so their
eyes may not look on passing women; those who trip
over their feet with excessive humility; and those who
do good out of fear. I bring their faults into the light of
day, so they may benefit from their own shame.”
6 The brother of Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, we are
respectable people and live among our own kind, for
a man who works among goats always carries some
of their smell. Why do You associate with
wrongdoers?”
7 {vWHY said, “I prefer the wrongdoer who is aware
of his deficiencies to the good man who is overly
aware of his goodness. Is the starving and desperate
man who steals to feed his hungry children bad, while
the overfed respectable man protected from
temptation by wealth ill earned is good? Which of the
1625

BOOK OF NATSARIM

two needs compassion?”
8 “Going to the Hĕyḵal makes no one good unless
goodness is already established in their hearts. No
truly good man could serve the Father devotedly for
an hour and then turn his back on Him for the rest of
the day.”
9 {vWHY went outside to where there was an open
space surrounded by trees, and here a crowd started
to gather around Him. While He was speaking, a man
pushed through in distress and, coming close to
{vWHY, begged Him to come and save his young
daughter. {vWHY said, “I will go to her immediately
after I leave here.”
10 Now, a leper stood apart from the crowd, and
{vWHY went over to him, saying, “Do you want to be
made well?” The man answered, “O Aḏonai, You
could make me a new man if You would only will it to
be so.”
11 {vWHY touched him, and the man’s affliction
began to depart. {vWHY said to him, “Go to a kohĕn,
taking the prescribed offering of your cleansing, and
he will testify to the cure.”
12 Those about said among themselves, “He heals
unlike other qodesh men, for those He cures seem to
be filled with a strange form of vigor.”
13 As {vWHY went back into the gathering, a
centurion came up to Him and said, “I have heard of
Your powers from many people, and my son is at
home and in great pain. Will You kindly heal him? And
for this I will be forever grateful.”
14 {vWHY said, “I will come and heal him.” But the
centurion replied, “My house is a very humble place
and hardly fit for You to enter. Just command it and I
know the boy will be cured, for I trust You. I who give
and take orders know the power of command.”
15 {vWHY was surprised to hear these words and,
turning to those who followed Him, said, “Nowhere in
the land have I seen faith such as this. Believe Me,
many will come from East and West, thinking to sit
1626

BOOK OF KAILEDY

among Our forefathers in the Reign of the Ruaḥ, but
many who are heirs to this Reign, having forfeited
their heritage, will be found outside the gates, and
there will be weeping and wailing.”
16 Then {vWHY said to the centurion, “Go home, My
friend. Because of your faith, I will not disappoint you.”
Then {vWHY gave the centurion a piece of metal,
saying, “Place this beside the boy.” And from that
time, the boy began to recover.
17 In the crowd which pressed around {vWHY was a
woman who had suffered from bleeding for twelve
years, whom no one had been able to cure. Coming
up behind {vWHY, she prayed silently to herself and
touched Him on the back. At once, the woman began
to feel comfortable and relieved.
18 But {vWHY knew the healing power had been
drawn from Him in an unexpected out surge. Turning
to the talmidim in the crowd, who stood guard, He
asked who had touched Him. Kĕpha, who was there,
said, “How can we know? The crowd presses so
close we can hardly control them.”
19 The woman, hearing this, and fearful for what she
had done, came forward and fell on her knees before
{vWHY, confessing her guilt. He raised her up gently,
saying, “My daughter, it is not the power in Me alone,
but your faith has opened a door whereby it poured
out to effect a cure. Be at peace in your heart, for the
complaint will trouble you no more.”
20 After this, {vWHY needed a rest, and while doing
so a servant came bearing a message to the man
whose daughter had been ill, telling him she had died.
{vWHY, overhearing what was said, called the man to
Him and said, “Do not upset yourself; just trust Me
and wait awhile, and we will go together.”
21 {vWHY then bid the crowd remain where it was and
went with the father and his servant, accompanied by
three talmidim. When they arrived at the man’s
house, mourners had already started the wailing of
the laments, and {vWHY rebuked them for making
1627

BOOK OF NATSARIM

such a noise when the girl was only sleeping, for He
had sent His Ruaḥ before Him. The mourners said,
“What kind of a fool is this?”
22 Ordering them outside, {vWHY, accompanied by
the parents and two talmidim, entered the room
where the child was lying. Taking her hands, {vWHY
said, “Wake up, My little one.” And after a while she
gave a great breath. Later, opening her eyes, she
smiled and soon got up. The parents were overcome,
but when they recovered, {vWHY told them to keep
their own counsel and attend to the child.
23 When they had left, Ya’aqoḇ, one of the talmidim,
asked, “Why are some brought back to life and others
not?”
24 {vWHY answered, “Did I not say this one only
slept? There is a time appointed for dying, and the
ruaḥoth of men keep their appointments. I work with
the Torah of ḥai, not against it.”
25 When they arrived back at the place where the
crowd was gathered, there was a man lying in their
midst, with a greatly swollen leg which had crippled
him for many years. He said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, I
have been a sinful man and have been punished.”
26 {vWHY said, “Be of good heart, for your suffering
has compensated for your misdeeds.”
27 Some nearby who were hostile towards {vWHY,
hearing this, said, “This is blasphemous talk.”
Overhearing what was said, {vWHY turned to them
and replied, “Talk such as this is cheap and serves no
end. It takes more than a wagging tongue to effect
cures.”
28 Then {vWHY said to the man on the ground, “Arise
and go your way.” Thereupon he got up and walked,
the people being amazed and giving thanks that such
powers could be manifested among them.
29 {vWHY then left and returned to the house of
Kĕpha and, when He arrived, found several
Parashyim waiting outside. They said, “We hear You
have much wisdom. What is the basis of Your
1628

BOOK OF KAILEDY

teaching? What sign can You give of Your authority,
or what proof, so we can believe? Mosheh provided
bread from the shamayim when our people starved in
the wilderness, and by his deeds we know him for a
true naḇi.”
30 A talmid said, “He has just healed four people.” But
the Parashyim replied, “There are others who heal.
This power is not unique in Him.”
31 Then {vWHY said, “Must you have proof and be
given signs to believe? Surely this would take all merit
from belief. As for Mosheh, I assure you he did not
provide bread from the shamayim when he fed those
who starved in the wilderness. Through Me, HWHY will
send down the bread of the shamayim, which
nourishes the world.”
32 “Therefore, when working to support yourselves,
do not overlook the need for the bread of the
shamayim which nourishes the ruaḥ, for man cannot
live by mortal bread alone. Strive less for perishable
food and more for the food of eternal life.”
33 The crowd answered, “O Aḏonai, never fail to
provide us with this bread.”
34 {vWHY said, “I bring the bread of ḥai; whoever
partakes of it will never hunger. I bring the water of
eternity, and whoever drinks of it will never thirst. All I
am intended to receive from above I will share with
everyone who comes to Me.”
35 “The power I have comes from the shamayim and
is used not for My own ends, but to serve the purpose
of He who gave it. His Will is that I should waste no
particle of what I have been given, but must account
for it when My work is ended. For it is the Will of He
who invested Me with authority and power that
whoever has faith in Me and believes in My cause,
putting My teachings into practice, will enjoy
immortality in glory.”
36 One of the Parashyim said to {vWHY, “Why do so
many flock to hear You speak instead of going to the
Hĕyḵal and places of assembly? Why do they have to
1629

BOOK OF NATSARIM

listen to someone speaking on the streets and
hillsides when they could listen to those fully armed
with knowledge of the Torah?”
37 {vWHY answered, “I too am surprised so many
seek to learn righteousness from Me. Maybe they
come because I am among those disinherited. But
before telling them what to do, put yourselves in their
place. Can it be they find My teachings more
sustaining and closer to their hearts?”
38 Many of the Yahuḏim were angry at the teachings
of {vWHY, for He said, “I have the true bread of ḥai
and of the shamayim.” They said, “Is this not the
{vWHY we know, Son of Yosĕph and Miryam who are
just ordinary people?”
39 {vWHY once said to them, “Do not say things
behind My back when you can say them to My face. I
will draw no one away from your own teachings
unless something greater inclines them towards Me.
But if it does, they are on the way to immortality. The
neḇi’im promised your forefathers that their
descendants would receive instructions from Elohim.
So can you not believe these things? Therefore,
anyone HWHY inclines towards Me hears Me speak
with His voice.”
40 The people who joined the crowds about {vWHY
filled Him with compassion, for they were so anxious
to find the Deliverer. They seemed pathetically
helpless and lost, like sheep without a shepherd.
41 {vWHY said to His talmidim, “The seed planted
was good, and there is a rich harvest ready for the
cutting. But alas, the harvesters are few; therefore,
the overseer must be requested to send more men.”
42 The following day, {vWHY was seated among the
trees near the house of Kĕpha, and with Him were
many talmidim. And one said to Him, “Aḏonai, since
the days of our fathers, many slaves have come into
the land - great numbers having no slaves, being
forced into brigandage, for otherwise they would
starve. Are these men evildoers?”
1630

BOOK OF KAILEDY

{vWHY replied, “What they do is not good and
therefore must be evil. But though their wrongdoing
may be great in the eyes of men, it is small in the eyes
of Elohim compared with the evil done by those who
stand behind the deed. Many, blameless in the eyes
of men, will not escape the judgment of eternity.”
44 “The disinherited say, ‘All things will change when
HWHY wills it,’ but I tell you the Father will not do the
work of His sons. The Deliverer comes to take men to
their places of labor and will ease their burdens there,
but He cannot undertake the whole of the task. He will
initiate the Rule of Elohim, but cannot force it upon
men. He will teach them to judge the underprivileged
justly and to deal harshly with the arrogant. The rich
will be less rich and the poor less poor. He will point
the feet of men towards the path of perfection, but
cannot carry them along it. Earthly sovereigns can
drive men to fulfill their tasks, but no one can be
driven along the path to glory. Only those who guide
and lead can take men this way.”
45 “I bring the Light, and the Light is a good tree
bearing beneficial fruit. But fruit on the tree of
darkness is consistent with conditions about its roots.
For all trees are rooted in darkness, but the good tree
transmutes the things of darkness into things of light.”
46 A talmid said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, You say harsh
things about the rulers and those in high places but
do not seek to arm us against them. Surely the day of
arming comes soon.”
47 {vWHY answered, “A physician is called to treat
the sickness, and a healthy man does not require his
attentions. The good in men I strengthen but leave
untouched; it is the evil I seek out to destroy. Were it
not for the strength of those who govern, there would
be no shalom in the land. Man would strive with man,
and there would be murder and pillage everywhere. It
would be like the sea, where big fish feed on the
small, and nothing is there to prevent it. Therefore, if
murder and robbery are kept from your door, pay due
43

1631

BOOK OF NATSARIM

homage to those who stand guard.”
48 “If an evil sovereign be guarded by a thousand
good men, should these be slain to kill the sovereign?
Is it not best to first take the good men away from
service with the sovereign, bringing them into your
own ranks? Those who serve evil, though powerful
and wily, are cowards and hide behind the arms of
better men. Therefore, by killing the brave men are
you not adding evil to evil? No, first bring the good
and brave men to your side, and then let events
happen as they will.”
49 A young talmid who became an emissary said,
“You speak about bread unlike other bread, but the
meaning is not clear to me. Tell me again about it.”
50 {vWHY said, “I will tell you with certainty, he who
follows My cause wholeheartedly will gain eternal ḥai,
for I have the bread of immortality. The bread I give
forms part of My being, and I share it for the good of
the world. Many have the grains, but these are yet to
be ground and baked. Unless, therefore, you can
partake of My substance and become like Me, you
cannot gain immortality in glory.”
51 “Yet what I can do, you can do also; what I have
become, you can become. I do not ask men to follow
a path I would not travel Myself. Neither is there
anything in Me not inherent in you. As I am, I am the
true food of men, and the power of ḥai flowing in Me
is their true drink. I come with special gifts and
authority from above, clothed with the living Ruaḥ,
and I express ḥai as I do because of the powers within
Me. So it will be with those who partake of My bread.”
52 Many of those with {vWHY could not hold these
things in their hearts, for they were not easily
understood. But one recorded them. Some, hearing
these teachings, said, “These words are not easy to
understand and difficult to accept.”
53 {vWHY said, “So you find difficulty in accepting
what I say. Suppose you could see Me
communicating with My place of origin - would you
1632

BOOK OF KAILEDY

believe then? But the eyes of the flesh cannot see
things intended only for the eyes of the ruaḥ.”
54 “Only the ruaḥ contains the power of ḥai, and the
flesh of itself can see or do nothing. The words I have
spoken concern only the life-holding ruaḥ, and I have
not referred to worldly matters. But still, you do not
understand. I know you are perplexed and confused
by My teachings. That is why I said something greater
must speak internally to incline you toward Me.”
55 From this day, many talmidim and followers no
longer heeded Him.
56 It is written in the Qodesh Books of the Yahuḏim,
“In the days of unrighteousness, I will send forth a
firebrand to consume the world with fire.” Also, “Then
each man shall know the fullness of his own nature,
and his reward shall be according to his measure.”

9 {vWHY went from there to the house of His mother,
for Miryam had a small inheritance. She was a careful
woman; for once, when her children were young,
having lost a small silver coin, she swept the floor
carefully, sifting until she found it.
2 Leaving there, He withdrew to the sea, for {vWHY
liked to swim and be among the boats. Now while He
was there, a great number came from Galil, from all
of Yahuḏah and from Yerushalayim, some even from
beyond Yardĕn and from the coast of the Western
Sea where He was known.
3 {vWHY bid His followers prepare a small ship as
quickly as possible to take Him away from the great
crowd pressing about Him. As He had cured so many
who were afflicted, those still uncured tried to touch
Him, and there was a constant shoving and scuffling
to get nearer.
4 Escaping the boat, He went with it a short distance
to where a path led up a hillside. Climbing this to a
small mount, He sat down with His talmidim. The time
for celebrating the great festival was approaching,
and {vWHY had sent out many emissaries and
heralds.
1633

BOOK OF NATSARIM

Seeing that a large crowd had gathered on the
hillside, {vWHY stood up and addressed the people,
after they were seated, in this manner: “This is a night
of ignorance when men wander, lost in the darkness
of worldly conditions. I am the Light and hope of men.”
6 “These are the people I support and accept, and
this is the message I give to them. For I have come to
unsheathe the sword of the Ruaḥ among men and to
lead them forth to fight the battles of Elohim. The
sword is the Ruaḥ, even as the body is the sheath.
Let your swords be bright and keen for the fray. Be
staunch and resolute, and the Rule of Elohim will
surely sweep all wickedness and evil, all pain and
distress from the face of the Earth.”
7 “I accept the oppressed and dispirited, for they
shall inherit glory in the Reign of the Ruaḥ.”
8 “I accept those who grieve, for they should not be
without a comforter. Is it not written, ‘Let the words of
HWHY be an unquenchable light within you, and they
will shorten your days of sorrow’?”
9 “I accept the disinherited, for they shall inherit the
Earth. Is it not written, ‘The disinherited shall be joyful
amid bounty and shalom?”
10 “I accept those who hunger after enlightenment,
for they shall be satisfied. Is it not written, ‘The
pleasures of the food table sit heavily on the stomach,
but wisdom fills the heart with satisfaction and
content’?”
11 “I accept the compassionate, for they shall be
compensated. Is it not written, ‘He who has
compassion builds a fountain of consolation for His
time of need’?”
12 “I accept the pure-hearted, for their nature draws
them closer to Elohim. Is it not written, ‘He whose
hands and heart are clean receives the fullest
measure of the power of the ruaḥ’?”
13 “I accept the peacemakers, for they are truly the
heirs of Elohim. Is it not written, ‘Listen, My children,
and I will teach you the ways that are good, causing
5

1634

BOOK OF KAILEDY

you to seek for shalom and maintain it’?”
14 “I accept those who suffer in the cause of mankind,
for on them shall fall the mantle of glory in the Reign
of the Ruaḥ. Is it not written, ‘When they scorned and
abused Me, I was strengthened by the Ruaḥ of HWHY,
and nothing can now dismay Me’?”
15 “I accept those whose motives, when seeking to
do good, are misunderstood, for their place in glory is
established. Is it not written, ‘Because they have
reviled and slandered You, eternal glory will be
granted’?”
16 “You whom I accept are the salt of the Earth, but if
the savor of the salt disappears, it is useless. As salt
without any flavor would be good for nothing, so those
without goodness in their hearts serve no purpose. As
salt adds flavor to food, so do good men make life
more acceptable.”
17 “I am your Light, but you are the light of the world.
Therefore, build a strong city set on a hill, for a light
shining from a hilltop cannot be hidden. I have given
you the Light so it may be put to use, for men do not
put a lighted candle under a grain basket but in a
candlestick where it can light up the room.”
18 “Let your lights shine before men, so they see the
path clearly. Join your lights together, so they
combine to form an unquenchable flame. For while a
candle is easily snuffed out, it takes many men to
subdue a forest fire.”
19 “Be stouthearted and resolute, for the struggle will
be grim. The foe is wily and well entrenched behind
thick walls. Those who have lived with poverty and
misery, maintaining a cheerful heart in tribulation, will
arise to glory. Those who are broken serving the
cause of HWHY will receive a mantle of splendor.
Those whose proper desires remain unfulfilled on
Earth will find fulfillment in the shamayim. Those who
have cheerfully borne affliction or deformity will
radiate strength. And those who die for the cause of
justice and shalom will inherit life in glory.”
1635

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“I reject those who oppose the Rule of Elohim. I
herald a reborn world, even as I was heralded; but
while such as these encumber the Earth, it will not be
reborn. I assure you of this: Unless the world be
reborn, it cannot know the Rule of Elohim. The
upheaval of the labor pains will be great. For though
many will say, ‘Speed the day’ with their lips, in their
hearts they will be saying, ‘The cost is too great;
spare the coming.’ By their fruits shall they be known,
and by their deeds shall they be judged.”
21 “I reject the rich who live with their riches, or those
who live beyond the bounds of moderation, for they
shall be humbled in outer darkness. Is it not written,
‘Those in houses of comfort, where they sit at ease
listening to instruments of music and sleep on soft
beds of ivory, shall not survive’?”
22 “I reject those who gorge themselves with
refinements of food while others hunger, for they shall
hunger in the Reign of the Ruaḥ. Is it not written,
‘They who serve HWHY will be filled, but those who do
not will want’?”
23 “I reject those who scorn the way of wisdom,
seeking vain pleasures which dull the ruaḥ, for they
shall be sorrowful in their proper place. Is it not
written, ‘The ruaḥoth of those who serve HWHY shall
be joyful, but the ruaḥoth of those who reject Him
shall weep in sorrow and regret’?”
24 “I reject the arrogant and selfish and those mainly
concerned with themselves, for they will be friendless
in their place. Is it not written, ‘The things built of
selfishness and false pride will be broken’?”
25 “I reject the liars and deceivers, for their abode is
a place of darkness. Is it not written, ‘The deceitful
shall not know the presence of HWHY’?”
26 “I reject those who encourage ignorance, walking
stiff-necked, their hearts an unopened book, for they
shall not be enlightened. Is it not written, ‘Those who
shower scorn on the words of others and close their
eyes to righteousness shall not receive a righteous
20

1636

BOOK OF KAILEDY

reward in their place’?”
27 “I reject the fornicators and adulterers and those
who seek after lewd pleasures, for they shall go to a
place of uncleanness. Is it not written, ‘Only they who
are clean can come into the presence of HWHY’?”
28 “I reject those who in any way cause needless
suffering, for they shall go to a place of pain. Is it not
written, ‘He who causes distress, though it be done in
secret, yet he is seen and will repay’?”
29 “I reject the hypocrites and self-deceivers, for their
loathsomeness will be properly purged. Is it not
written, ‘Words not written in the heart should never
issue from the mouth’?”
30 “Woe to all who hear My words but twist their
meaning to suit their convenience. If a man says he
is with Me but does not abide by My teachings, then
he is a hypocrite. If he says, ‘But I live in
circumstances where this does not apply,’ he is a liar.
Far better that such as these say, ‘We are against
You,’ for until they do, the world will not be reborn.”
31 “I bring light to the threshing floor of ḥai, where
suffering and misfortune are the flails, tribulation and
distress the winnowing fan and the wisdom of HWHY
the winnowing shovel. Here the wheat is separated
from the husks, the chaff is thrown out, and the good
grains gathered up.”
32 “I come to build a new Hĕyḵal, and if you say,
‘These are good teachings,’ and take them to your
heart but tomorrow revile your neighbor and deceive
your kinsmen, you are an unstable brick. If the Hĕyḵal
be built with such material, surely it will collapse, and
those within will perish. Is it not better if it were never
built? If you say, ‘But I am weak,’ then examine your
defects and take the first step to stability; but
examination is a waste of time unless leading to
rectification.”
33 “I call you to serve no mean cause, but to stand
beside Me and claim your inheritance. Those who
dispute the claim are the ones I reject, and you must
1637

BOOK OF NATSARIM

set your faces against them, even as I do. Come and
inherit the incorruptible glory, which is in the
shamayim, even as flesh is on Earth. The way is
narrow and difficult, for no one who has not been
tempted and tried can attain his reward.”
34 “He that is near Me is close to a blazing fire and
may get burned, but he who withdraws from the heat
withdraws from the shamayim. Some have said, ‘The
yoke of the Torah sits heavy on our shoulders,’ but I
tell you, I come not to lighten but to magnify the
responsibility. Mosheh brought the Torah which says
not to kill, but I say, any who releases anger on his
brother without just cause shall not escape
judgment.”
35 “The Torah you have condemns adultery, but I tell
you that if any man looks upon a woman with
fornication in mind, he is no less guilty. For it is what
a man thinks that will lead him to glory or decay. He
who is pure in love does not defile his heart by looking
at another woman with fornication in view.”
36 “The Torah you have says, ‘No man shall put his
wife away unless he give her a bill of divorcement,’
but I tell you that whosoever seeks to put his wife
away, except for adultery or she is found unchaste,
places her on the path of adultery and is therefore not
guiltless. What HWHY has blended in ruaḥ let no man
seek to sever, but those joined in body and not in ruaḥ
are not sanctified.”
37 “The Torah you have says, ‘You shall not swear
falsely or break an oath, though if you vow something
to the service of HWHY, the pledge must be kept.’ I tell
you never to swear any oath, but confine yourself to
a straightforward ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ It is needless to say
more, for the word of a reverent man is more binding
than the most solemn oath sworn by another. If you
are not a reverent man, then doubtless, your word
and oath would be worthless anyway.”
38 “If your eye give cause for complaint, leading you
towards lewdness or obscenity, pluck it out. It is of
1638

BOOK OF KAILEDY

greater advantage to suffer disfigurement on Earth
than to be cast into the depths to suffer it there. If your
right hand give cause for complaint, cut it off, for if
your body be maimed on Earth, you bear it a little
time; but surely do nothing to prevent it remaining
intact in the place of glory.”
39 “The Torah you have says, ‘Love your neighbors
and hate your enemies,’ but I tell you to love your
enemies, do good to those who hate you, and pray
for those who deceive or persecute you. For if you
only give love for love, this cannot be claimed as a
meritorious thing, when even criminals return the love
of those who love them. If you only repay good with
good, dealing fairly only with those who treat you
likewise, how can merit be claimed for this, which is
no more than criminals do? It is the same if you give
only to those who give to you, for criminals give to
their own kind. Can you stand by and let it be said that
criminals treat each other better than do reverent
men?”
40 “Love your enemies, but not their faults. Love
those who hate you, but concede nothing to their
wickedness. Give without expectation of return; then
only can you lay claim to goodness and be called a
Servant of HWHY.”
41 “I have not come to abolish the Torah or to change
the teachings of the neḇi’im, but to complete them,
adding any necessary clarification and interpreting
them to the understanding of men. But the time has
come to ask: When will they be put into practice?
When will men bring HWHY out of the Hĕyḵal and
make Him a participant in their daily lives? When will
men carry these things in their hearts and stop paying
them lip service?”
42 “I say with certainty, so long as Earth and the
shamayim above it remain, not even the smallest
particle shall be deducted from the Torah until the
purpose it serves has been completed. Therefore, if
anyone try to avoid even the least obligation imposed
1639

BOOK OF NATSARIM

by the Torah, or to set aside the slightest of its
restrictions, or teach others to do the same, he will be
an insignificant thing in the life to come. But whoever
lives by them, leading others to do likewise, will
achieve the greatest heights of glory.”
43 “Do all charitable acts privately, not displaying
your righteousness to catch the eyes of others, for by
so doing you void their benefits. Only those seeking
public acclaim and hypocrites do these things
ostentatiously. Never seek publicity for your deeds or
goodness nor let it be forced on you. I assure you that
those who do these things have their reward on Earth,
and nothing awaits them elsewhere. When setting out
on an errand of goodness, keep your right hand in
ignorance of the left hand’s deeds. Do your good
deeds in secret, knowing they are not overlooked and
will be duly rewarded, but do them without thought of
reward, or they will lose their merit.”
44 “Do not be like the hypocrites who pray in the sight
of everyone; they are being rewarded now. Pray in
solitude, for your Father can be contacted from
anywhere and is everywhere. Never use needless
repetition or ramble on in the mistaken belief that the
more you say, the more likely you are to be heard. Do
not be a mere babbler of words, for prayer is not
formed by words alone. Remember, your every need
is known, so whatever is withheld may be for your
own good. Prayer is contact between ruaḥ and Ruaḥ,
and should seek only to reinforce the strength of the
ruaḥ.”
45 “This is a pattern for prayer: ‘Our Father in Ruaḥ,
may Your nature become known among men and
Your Rule established on Earth, according to the plan
of the shamayim. May Your design be completed.
Give us the sustenance we need and overlook our
transgressions as we overlook the transgressions of
others. Do not test us too severely and strengthen us
against the servants of evil.’ ”
46 “If you overlook the failings of others and forgive
1640

BOOK OF KAILEDY

people for the wrongs they have done to you, then the
burden of your own will be alleviated. Also, when you
fast or undertake an obligation, do not be like the
hypocrites who lengthen their faces, going about it
self-righteously, bringing themselves to the attention
of others.”
47 “Hoard no earthly treasures which can be
destroyed by moths and decay, or may be stolen by
thieves. It is far better to establish a storehouse in the
shamayim, for there you can accumulate treasures
beyond reach of these things. A man’s heart is never
far from the place where he establishes his credit.”
48 “Providing you view everything optimistically,
maintaining a cheerful and confident outlook, you will
radiate assurance. If you do not, you will shed
despondency and gloom wherever you go. No man
has ever succeeded in serving two masters, for his
loyalties must lie with one or the other. Neither can a
man have two prime objectives; he must aim for an
earthly goal or a spiritual one.”
49 “I advise you not to worry unduly about the future
needs of the body, how it will be nourished and
clothed. There is more to life than eating and comfort,
while overdone pleasure soon palls. Keep this one
fact constantly in mind: The soul is of more
importance than the body.”
50 “Think about the birds of the air; they neither sow
nor reap or gather in a harvest, yet provision has been
made for their needs. Do you think any less
consideration has been given to your welfare? Trust
in the powers above, and when things go wrong, try
to understand the reason. When you are being tried
by tribulation, try and see the objective of the test.”
51 “Is there anyone among you who, by thought
alone, can add an arm’s length to his height? Worry
is a useless activity of the mind, so why worry about
food and clothing? Look how the wildflowers grow in
the meadows: they do not toil or spin, yet Shelomoh
in full regalia was not attired so attractively as one of
1641

BOOK OF NATSARIM

these. If such beauty is bestowed on wildflowers,
which can display it for only a few days before being
consumed, shall HWHY not give much more attention
to you, His children? Or have you no faith in
anything?”
52 “Therefore, worry less about material things, and
concentrate more on the spiritual, making the cause
of Elohim your main concern. Do this, and all other
things will come within your reach. Do not worry about
tomorrow, for it will look after itself. Each day will bring
you sufficient problems without the need to worry
about those of other days.”
53 “There is no reason why hypocrisy, the disease of
the day, should come so naturally to men. But which
of you is not contaminated by it? How many of you
are self-deceivers, making excuses for these things?
How is it you can readily detect the small faults in
others while being absolutely blind to your own much
greater ones? How can you say to another, ‘Let me
help you see more clearly,’ when you are practically
blind yourself? You, hypocrites and self-deceivers,
first examine your own faults and failings before
criticizing those of others.”
54 “Never be afraid to voice your needs, and if you
have a friend, turn to him whenever you require help,
for this is the nature of friendship. Ask, and you will
receive; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door
will be opened. These things are the Torah of ḥai, for
at the end it will be said to you, ‘As you sought, so
have you found; and according to the manner of
asking have you received.’ It is not what you seek, but
how you seek; not what you request, but the manner
of requesting.”
55 “Is there any man among you who, if his son ask
for bread, will give him a stone, or a snake if he ask
for a fish? If, then, you, with all your mortal faults and
ignorance, know how to give the right things to your
children, how much more able is HWHY to give what is
right for His.”
1642

BOOK OF KAILEDY

“The things you surely do not need are comfort
and content, while assurance and security open the
gates to spiritual apathy. Enter by the narrow,
unpretentious gate, for the road leading to the dark
abyss has a wide road and attractive entrance, while
the gate leading to immortality is austere, and the
road fraught with difficulties.”
57 “Beware of false neḇi’im and those who would
mislead you, for many seeking to promote their own
ends walk the ways of righteousness, clothed in
sheepskins, but are hypocrites, being ravening
wolves within. Those who indicate an easy path are
false guides. And those who say another can absolve
them from the effects of their misdeeds expound an
error.”
58 “You will know them by the effects of their
teachings, just as a good tree is recognized through
the fruit it bears. Can the wildthorn produce grapes,
or are figs found growing on thistles? If a tree fails to
produce good fruit, it is cut down and burned, for it
can serve no better purpose. Therefore, I say, judge
men by the fruits of their labors.”
59 “Some hail Me as their leader, thinking this will
help them in the life to come, but it will not. Only those
who wholeheartedly serve the cause and purpose of
HWHY will enjoy this in full glory. Many who do things
in My Name will expect Me to intercede for them, but
to these I will say, I did not know you, or authorize the
statements you made; by your deeds shall you be
judged.”
60 “This does not apply to those who, hearing My
words, put them into practice, for they are like the
sensible man who built his house on a foundation of
rock. The rain poured down and the floods rose; the
wind howled above and beat against the house. But
it did not collapse because it was set firmly.”
61 “But there will be many who, hearing these words
of Mine, will ignore them. And these may be likened
to a foolish man who built his house on sand. The rain
56

1643

BOOK OF NATSARIM

poured down, the floods rose, the wind howled and
beat against the walls, and the whole house
collapsed.”
62 “I herald the coming of the Rule of Elohim and a
reborn world. I accept those who follow My Way, and
I will lead them into their reign. I reject all those who
are against My Way.”
63 “I call upon men of good will to follow Us - men
who wholeheartedly desire the Light and oppose the
way of darkness. But the road may be long and beset
by many foes. Yet have no fear of those who come
with swords and fiery words; their danger is apparent.
Those who will be Our undoing are the hypocrites and
self-deceivers who pay lip service only and
manipulate the words of the Torah to accord with their
convenience. I tell you this: Many will come, but few
will be selected.”
64 “Mosheh viewed the promised land only from
Pisgah. Let this not be your fate. Face the difficulties
ahead, overcome the evildoers who maintain the rule
of evil, and claim your reward. The sword is drawn,
but the battle has yet to be won.”
65 “In the reborn world, the wolf shall lay down with
the lamb, and the lion with the kid, and a little child
shall play with them. Surely, because of their
goodness and goodwill, even the wild beasts will
submit themselves to the will of those who participate
in the Rule of Elohim.”
66 When {vWHY finished speaking, the great
assembly of people was silent. For, unlike other
teachers, He appeared inspired by divine authority.
But within moments they were excitedly discussing
the words among themselves.
67 Then a talmid who stood beside {vWHY shouted,
“All who serve HWHY, praise Him. For He has sent the
true Enlightener and the Deliverer, and will Himself
reign over us through the Ruaḥ which fills His Bĕn.
Heed these things, follow The Way of {vWHY, take up
the stake of life and the Rule of Elohim is at hand.”
1644

BOOK OF KAILEDY

There were many among the crowd who said,
“Surely this is HWHY’s Anointed for whom we have
long awaited. Now we will be delivered according to
the promises of the neḇi’im.”
69 Hearing the things said by the people among
themselves, {vWHY was saddened and said to
Bartholomi, who stood near Him, “Tomorrow they will
revert to their old way of life and permit evil to reign
through hypocrites and self-deceivers. How can they
be brought to understand that should HWHY intervene
to bring about the Rule of Elohim, Earth and mankind
will have failed Him and be unworthy of His Rule?
Life’s purpose is to produce shepherds, not sheep.
But the lives of the people are turned inwards upon
themselves.”
70 It was now late in the day, but many people still
lingered. And a talmid said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, the
crowd was very large, and many did not hear all Your
words. Could You not speak to these? For, though
hungry, they would rather listen to You.”
71 {vWHY said, “My throat aches, but I have bread
more satisfying than that which fills the stomach, and
meat more satisfying than worldly meat. My supply is
inexhaustible. I have multiplied this through you, so
now you go among the people and provide what they
need.”
68

10 Some days later, {vWHY was in another place
with about sixty talmidim, one of whom said to Him,
“There is Yahoshua the Faster, who claims to be
ha’Mashiaḥ of Elohim, and Yosĕph, who proclaims
deliverance by the sword, while many say the
Enlightener and Deliverer are two men. The gale of
words makes it difficult to get a bearing on the harbor
entrance.”
2 {vWHY said, “Things are changing, and many alive
today will live to see a different world. I come to set
men free by removing the shackles of ignorance and
to deliver them from evil and from themselves.”
3 Hearing this, many of the talmidim left, and {vWHY
1645

BOOK OF NATSARIM

said to those who remained beside Him, “Do you also
wish to go your way?”
4 Kĕpha answered for all, “Aḏonai, Your teachings
excel those of others, for they carry the hope of
eternal ḥai. We believe You to be the chosen
Messenger of HWHY who speaks with His voice. We
accept what You say because it responds to the
yearnings of our hearts.”
5 {vWHY said, “We all make mistakes, and though I
have chosen unwisely with others, I have not been
mistaken with you.”
6 {vWHY did not proclaim Himself to the people
according to their understanding and devoted much
time to the teaching of talmidim. This concerned
mainly the coming Rule of Elohim, but to the twelve
He taught many hidden things, for there was
knowledge suitable only for a few.
7 He said to them, “You are among those entitled to
know secrets concerning the Rule of Elohim, but to
those who are not numbered among the elect,
everything should be explained simply and in
parables. It is truly written in the Sacred Books, ‘They
may see with the eyes and be deceived, and hear
without understanding, but if they would only turn to
HWHY, their ignorance would be wiped away.’ ”
8 Then {vWHY appointed the twelve as emissaries
to go out among the people and proclaim the things
He had said. The twelve were: Shim’on, renamed
Kĕpha; Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan, sons of Thunder;
Andri Saronides; Philippos Bardrush; Bartholomi the
Stranger; Mattithyahu the Lĕwite; T’oma, son of
Yonas; Thaddeus, called Lebios before he came;
Ya’aqoḇ, son of Alfeous; Yahuḏah of Qeriyoth; and
Shim’on of Kena'an, the zealot.
9 {vWHY sent them out with these instructions:
“Avoid Shomeron towns. Keep away from places
where the people are being stirred up for strife, but go
to the Yahuḏim wherever they are to be found. When
entering a dwelling, give the greeting, ‘Shalom be on
1646

BOOK OF KAILEDY

this house.’ ”
10 “I know that you are being sent like sheep
delivered to the wolves, for you do not bear the
message expected by the people. So be careful,
always alert, cunning as serpents and harmless as
doves. Beware of those who would bring you before
their courts, and do not concern yourselves about
what to say, for when it becomes necessary, you will
receive inspiration from the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh, and
words will come.”
11 “I can assure you of this: Whoever stands by Me,
upholding My cause before men, him I will stand
beside before the Council of the shamayim. Give no
heed to what is said about Me - it is already forgiven.
But slander against the powers of the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh, which is the Hand of HWHY, is
unforgivable.”
12 One of the twelve said, “We will meet other
teachers, whose words will not be the same as those
spoken by You.”
13 {vWHY said, “This will certainly be so, for to each
man his own road and his own light; but Truth is Truth
whoever proclaims it and must be obeyed. However,
Truth is something rarely seen clearly, and even
many who see it have difficulty in describing it to
others. Speak about the good and evil which are
manifest in the lives of men and tell them each shall
be judged according to his works.”
14 {vWHY said, “Men will always go astray, but those
who lead them astray cannot shun responsibility.
Remember what I have said about those who stand
behind the wrongdoings and foolishness of others,
hidden from sight and untouchable by men. It would
be better for them to have a millstone hung about their
necks and be thrown into the sea than to suffer what
they will for leading innocents astray.”
15 “Be on guard against undutiful inclinations, and
work in harmony one with another. If your companion
offends you, rebuke him without anger; and if he
1647

BOOK OF NATSARIM

indicates regret, forgive him wholeheartedly. Even
though he offend you many times, and is contrite,
forgive him.”
16 Some of the twelve said, “These things are difficult
to understand, and we have the natural failings of
men. Give us courage and strengthen us in the
cause.”
17 {vWHY replied, “Have faith in what you do, for with
faith you could move mountains or cause uprooted
trees to replant themselves. All things are possible to
those who believe them possible.”
18 Nevertheless, He strengthened them by a transfer
of Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh so they had the power of healing.
19 {vWHY said, “Those who do not build with Me are
destroyers of My works, and those who pay lip service
only are useless tools. Never judge any man by the
words of his mouth, and keep away from those who
pour them out in a torrent. Have no dealings with
those who do their good deeds in public, and shun
those who push themselves forward for attention. A
man whose problems are small will readily come to
be eased of his burden, while he who carries a heavy
load is often inconspicuous.”
20 “What you do pays no earthly reward; though the
reward elsewhere may be great, it is useless claiming
one here. If one of you had a man out plowing, would
you say to him on his return, ‘Come, sit down and
rest’? Is it not more likely you would say, ‘Go and
clean yourself. Get my meal ready. And after you
have finished, go and eat yourself. Then go to rest’?
Is any employer grateful because those who work for
him do the things for which he pays them? So it
should be with you. Having carried out your orders
and done your duty, you should simply say, ‘We have
only done the things we were supposed to do.’ ”
21 “Many will seek to snare you in a net of words, but
avoid the meshes spun by their wiles. Never talk
about anything not thoroughly and honestly believed.
The blind cannot lead the blind, and if they do, fall into
1648

BOOK OF KAILEDY

a ditch. No man can walk confidently in darkness
without a light. The eye is the lamp of the body; and if
the lamp is defective, the whole body is in gloom. The
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh is the lamp of the soul, but if it
remains unlit, it serves no purpose.”
22 “Many will mock and scorn you, saying, ‘Fools, we
have full stomachs and soft beds; we have everything
for our comfort and needs. What have you?’ There is
little to be said in reply, for wise men do not mock,
knowing that gems of wisdom often fall from the lips
of fools. Take no heed of these, for they suffer from a
spiritual defect - an ailment blinding them to their own
deficiencies while exaggerating the failings of others.”
23 “Do not offer bright jewels to dogs nor place a
string of pearls around the necks of swine, or they will
be trampled into the ground. The beasts will turn and
rend you for not providing bones or husks.”
24 Philippos said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, You caution us
against anger, yet were You not angry when a man
beat his donkey with a rod?”
25 {vWHY said, “I warn you against anger among
brothers, or anger relating to yourself. There is a
righteous anger which is justified. In all things there
are balances and limitations, and to know these you
have the Books of Wisdom. If a man comes against
you, threatening harm, he is more dangerous if he is
calm and silent than if he is unsteady with anger. The
silent biting dog is more to be feared than the barking
one. Therefore, is it not in your own interests that I
teach you self-control?”
26 Then Yahuḏah asked concerning the coming Rule
of Elohim, and {vWHY answered, “It is like this: A man
scatters seed on the ground. Day follows day until the
grain sprouts and grows. But what goes on in the
ground to bring this about is beyond his knowledge.
The soil produces the crop by its own methods,
nourishing the crop until it ripens. When the corn is
ripe at harvesting time, the man reaps and gathers
in.”
1649

BOOK OF NATSARIM

{vWHY then said, “To know the nature of the Rule
of Elohim is important but difficult for Me to explain to
your understanding. It is like the small seed which,
once planted, shoots up into a great plant, providing
shade for many forms of life. These are able to see
and know both the seed and the plant but have no
knowledge how one became the other.”
28 “Know that, though I am here with you, I am not
apart from He who inspires Me. That which is in Me
is not separate from the Ruaḥ of the Father, and that
Ruaḥ is wholly in Me. I express the likeness of the
Father and contain His power and substance to the
full measure. I am the Ruaḥ outflowing from HWHY,
given voice and form. I am the voice and Word of that
Ruaḥ. I am of that Ruaḥ but not that Ruaḥ.”
29 “I am the fulfillment of men’s hopes and the
fulfillment of the Father’s desire. As I am, so is the
Ruaḥ. As I am, so shall all His children be, for I am
the pattern for all men. I am emptied of worldliness in
order to hold the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh. And I am an
answer to the Father’s creative Word.”
30 “A pitcher half filled with water would hold less oil
than an empty one. If wine is poured into a jar
containing water, the wine is diluted. So, when men
say, ‘What purpose does it serve to forgo worldly
pleasures?’ tell these things to them. If they will not
listen, then on their own heads be the illnesses and
pains from which they will surely suffer.”
31 The twelve said, “Great is the hope You have
given us, and great is the inspiration of Your words.”
32 {vWHY said, “I do not do this of Myself, for I have
been filled with the power of the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh,
which is part of HWHY. With this He created all things.
I come that I may bring Light to those who dwell in
darkness, to bring to those who are on the brink of
death a knowledge of life, and to bring consolation to
those who suffer. I am the hope of those who despair,
the helper of those who have no guide, the treasure
of the poor, and the healer of the sick. I am the Light
27

1650

BOOK OF KAILEDY

of Eternal Ḥai for all who die. And as I am, so must
you be.”
33 “Go, carry the good tidings without trepidation or
fear, without respect for persons, calling all who listen
to follow a path which is direct, narrow and stern. Call
them, whatever their circumstances, for each one will
have something to contribute.”
34 Then Yoḥanan said, “Aḏonai, You have taught us
many things and armed our wits. You have taught us
how to act towards those who believe in Your cause
and those who do not. Yet even among those who
most conscientiously follow Your Way, even among
those who should be brothers, is found jealousy,
pettiness, envy and selfishness.”
35 {vWHY said, “These things are the challenge of
life, and inseparable from the present rule of man.
The test is your ability to change them. The corn will
be gathered into the storehouse of the Ruaḥ, and the
chaff cast into the fires of transmutation.”
36 {vWHY taught these things to the twelve in a
manner different from His other teachings. There
were many other things which may be told, but not all
were heard with understanding.
37 Kĕpha said, “Let us partake of Your strength, so
we can withstand whatever is sent to test us.”
38 {vWHY said, “When the test comes, it is never as
expected.”
39 He also said, “The man who says, ‘I may be
wrong,’ is always right; the man who says, ‘I am
certainly right,’ is always wrong. To avoid a fight is not
cowardice, and to fight with the assurance of victory
is not courage. Weak men often fight, and strong men
often run; motive is all that matters. To judge anyone
by their -former - actions is to judge unfairly.”
40 Then, while they were gathered about Him, {vWHY
said, “Now, who do you think I am?” Shim’on Kĕpha
answered, “You are surely HWHY’s Anointed.”
41 {vWHY said, “You are rather rash but, as no mortal
disclosure was made to you, wise also. Since your
1651

BOOK OF NATSARIM

name means a rock, and you live up to it, I will
establish foundations for the city of My cause upon
you. And neither death nor evil shall overthrow it. To
you I give the keys of this city, and the reign to which
it is the gateway shall welcome you as a prince.”
42 “In as much as I am the Way, the Truth and the
Light, I bring you deliverance from ignorance. I am the
Savior of all who wander in darkness, but who, seeing
My Light, follow My lead.”
43 One of the twelve said, “Aḏonai, You are truly our
deliverance, our hope and our Ḥai.”
44 {vWHY said, “Many will flock to My cause, but few
will be chosen to serve; many will follow My Way, but
turn aside at the obstacles. For if any man believes
but fails to put his belief into practice, it will be
profitless to him. If anyone take one part of My
teachings, shunning the sterner and more
inconvenient, the rest will serve no purpose. For it is
in the nature of men to accept the easy path and turn
aside from the harder one. But there is something in
each which tells him this is wrong. Everyone has a
spark within which, fanned by the wind of dedication,
will kindle the flame of glory.”
45 One of the twelve said, “Shall we confine our
mission to the Yahuḏim?” {vWHY replied,
“Enlightenment is the inheritance of all men. Carry the
message to all the seventy nations of the Earth.”
46 Another asked, “Should we take it to the young
and to the old as well? For the thoughts of the young
change with every wind, while the old are like
seasoned timber into which it is difficult to drive a
nail.”
47 {vWHY said, “Teach each according to his
understanding and capacity.”
48 {vWHY then said, “Always treat those you meet as
you would have them treat you; act towards others as
you would have them act towards you. For this is the
essence of the Torah.”
49 When {vWHY had given these instructions to the
1652

BOOK OF KAILEDY

emissaries, they left. And {vWHY went with four
talmidim to carry the message to other towns.

11 {vWHY came to a place where He had a kinsman
and stayed with him, but on the second day a large
crowd gathered outside so it was impossible to remain
at shalom. These kinsmen were quiet people whose
lives followed a tranquil course, for they conformed to
the pattern of life imposed upon them. Hearing the
clamor of the crowd, they became agitated and said,
“Surely {vWHY must be out of His mind and we should
put restraint upon Him, otherwise we will be ridiculed.”
2 Just then, some important men from Yerushalayim
spoke to them, and they said among themselves,
“This thing is now beyond our control, but surely we
shall never live normal lives again.”
3 The men from Yerushalayim said to some people
standing outside the doorway, “Go away. This Man is
possessed by the sovereign of evil ruaḥ and calls on
him for help when casting out his subjects.”
4 Hearing this, {vWHY called to the men from
Yerushalayim, asking them to come outside to where
He was. He then asked them, “Can evil cast out evil?”
They said, “On this point we have no clear guidance.”
5 {vWHY then said, “Surely, if a reign is divided
against itself, it must collapse. Likewise, a household
split internally soon falls apart. If evil powers
counteract each other, are they not like men in an
army who fall upon each other with swords, thereby
rendering the army ineffective? Set evil in action
against evil and nothing except good can result.”
6 {vWHY then went into the house and told those
inside He was going to the Hĕyḵal in that place. And
one said, “The clothes You wear are travel-stained.
Will You enter the House of Elohim in these?”
7 {vWHY replied, “When guests call upon a
nobleman in his house, they must be fittingly attired.
But when workmen call to make repairs, they enter in
the clothes of their trade.”
8 {vWHY spoke to the people in the Hĕyḵal, saying,
1653

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“The Parashyim occupy the seats of the neḇi’im and
should therefore be obeyed. In general, they live good
lives, and you would do well to follow their example.
But with many the goodness is only on the outside,
and they are rotten within. Therefore, by exposing
these I serve those who are really good.”
9 “I tell you to beware of hypocrites, self-deceivers
and liars, and to be constantly on guard against those
who, in the name of righteousness, would mislead
you. When inspired to become the voice of Elohim,
the naḇi spoke of these. For he said, ‘They praise Me
with their mouth and give homage with their lips, but
I am not in their hearts. They worship only because
this has been their upbringing. Such as these do not
worship HWHY because they are good, but for the
sake of reward and through fear of the unknown.’
These are people against whom I have set My face,
for their goodness is fair outside but rotten at the
core.”
10 “There are others who dig in the darkness, hoping
their thoughts are unknown. They delve around in the
filth within themselves and say, ‘This is pleasant, and
none sees what we do,’ but the record of their
thoughts is never lost. Yet these, concealing what lies
within, set themselves up as leaders of the people
who, finding their troubles multiplied, look vainly for
the cause. Yet the people only get the leaders they
deserve, for those who will only serve goodness
cannot be misled by evil.”
11 “There are deceivers who lead the people along
devious paths which can never end in contentment.
They produce doves’ eggs to the people, but when
hatched in secret, these produce vipers. They fawn
upon the rich and notorious, a smile on their faces
and a dagger in their hearts, but to the
underprivileged they turn a face of harshness.”
12 “The hypocrites, the self-deceivers and the selfcentered are the minions of evil on Earth and are the
true enemy opposing the coming of the Rule of
1654

BOOK OF KAILEDY

Elohim. Let them maintain the upper hand and you
will never know the joys of a reborn world. Turn your
backs on these wherever you find them, so your
contempt is made manifest. But remember, they will
be found in the most unexpected places.”
13 “Beware of the self-seekers, whose path is over
the bodies of those they drag down. If you associate
with them, you may become a cobblestone for their
feet. Avoid the tangled thickets of money dealing, lest
the spiders therein lure you into their webs and suck
you dry. The self-seekers are blind to the obligations
of life, supposing these to be a profitless burden. But
I tell you that anyone who shoulders them
courageously and cheerfully will be duly rewarded.”
14 “The stake of ḥai is not easy to bear, for it chafes
and weighs down heavily. But unless a man sacrifice
himself upon it, he shall not rise to glory. Do not seek
directions for an easy path, for this is not difficult to
find though it has no destination. Follow the harder
one. The directions are given in the Qodesh Books,
and at the end you will find sunlit meadows and a
region of liveliness.”
15 “I say to you, come, take up My stake and bear it
manfully, and I will not leave you unsupported. I teach
the strengthening of the ruaḥ in men through
purification, repentance and good deeds. The trials of
life are many and take numerous forms, some being
easily understood for what they are; but others,
coming in the guise of gifts, are not so readily
detected. This is what the naḇi said about those who
failed to rise above the tests of life: ‘Their cuttings will
not take root; the winds of HWHY will blow upon them,
and they will wither, to be borne away by the
whirlwind.’ ”
16 “A coward lies to those who trust him, for he fears
the anger of others. A liar is also a coward, for he
follows a path better men would scorn. I have come
to winnow the grain from the chaff. And those who
follow Me, bearing the burden of My stake, must not
1655

BOOK OF NATSARIM

be halfhearted in the cause. I separate the sheep
from the goats, accepting one and rejecting the other;
and a sheep does not mate with a goat. I accept the
truthful man; he is peaceful within himself, for
whatever is sown in truthfulness will be reaped in
content.”
17 “I have not come to point out the place where a
treasure trove is hidden, but to tell of its existence; the
search remains with you. Nevertheless, I give
directions, which, if followed, cannot fail to uncover it.
For is it not written, ‘If you desire wisdom as men
desire gold, and seek Truth with the diligence men
display when seeking treasure, you will not be denied
knowledge of Elohim’?”
18 “Lay up treasures in the storehouse of eternity and
enjoy them forever. Hoarded silver can buy only
pleasure which quickly palls, or things which endure
a little while before falling apart or decaying. Only the
treasures laid up in the shamayim will ensure
everlasting glory.”
19 “Keep these things always in mind, for if My words
have fallen on barren ground they are wasted. Spread
out your roots in the sustaining soil of the new light I
bring you. And when the plant of faith grows, do not
let it be smothered by worldly weeds. Maintain
cheerfulness in your heart, and its reflection will
lighten your countenance; and, smiling, you will be
welcome wherever you go.”
20 “Go your ways, but beware of those who speak
fairly but hold deceit in their hearts. Beware of
hypocrites and deceivers. It is no sin to be blind, but
to disguise the blindness and say, ‘We see; follow us,’
is one of the greatest evils.”

12 After being away some time, the twelve
emissaries rejoined {vWHY and gave their reports. And
when they had finished, He said, “You have done well.
Let us go away to a secluded place where we can be
alone.”
2 Andri said, “Spare me time to visit my womenfolk,
1656

BOOK OF KAILEDY

so I can be assured they do not lack food or suffer.”
3 {vWHY said, “HWHY will provide for those who
serve Him faithfully, but men are not always suitable
tools in His Hand. Go and do whatever has to be
done.”
4 The rest set out in a boat, but when they reached
their destination, a crowd had already assembled.
{vWHY spoke to the people, teaching in parables, and
when at length He wearied, dismissed them and went
to sit alone on a small hill.
5 Meanwhile, the talmidim had put to sea in a boat,
and, as darkness fell, tried to row back, but the wind
was against them. {vWHY, therefore, waded out to
them in the darkness. Then, the wind being in their
faces, they quickly crossed the sea to a village where
many sick and lunatics were brought to be healed.
6 Going to the place where they were staying, it was
then the cool of the evening. Some of the talmidim
started quarreling, but soon quieted down. When they
were all in the house, {vWHY asked what the
argument had been about. But they were silent before
Him, not knowing what to say; for they had been
disputing among themselves as to who was the
greatest among them next to {vWHY.
7 {vWHY then said, “Whoever wants to lead must
know how to serve, and the humble-hearted serve
best. A great man is not one who has sought
greatness, but one whom the need has found great.”
8 {vWHY then took the arm of a young child
belonging to the house, who had been standing
behind Him, and, drawing the boy forward, said,
“Whoever accepts responsibility for a little child such
as this accepts Me, and whoever accepts Me accepts
My cause. For it is profitless to discuss greatness
apart from responsibility. Let the one who can accept
the most responsibility be the greatest.”
9 After they had eaten, two followers of {vWHY came
into the house and approached Him, saying, “Aḏonai,
we have robbed a rich man. Have we not done a good
1657

BOOK OF NATSARIM

deed? For this gives him a better chance in the life to
come.”
10 {vWHY said, “Even though he used riches wrongly,
you have done no more than add wrong to wrong. Evil
cannot be rectified by evil, no matter what the
circumstances.”
11 One of the men said, “Aḏonai, I gave all the
proceeds to the disinherited, gaining nothing for
myself except the fear of death, while the other with
me gave only some silver, keeping the rest.”
12 {vWHY said, “Then your crime was the lesser one,
but a crime nevertheless.”
13 {vWHY dismissed the man and said to the
talmidim, “No man can push another into goodness,
or force spiritual credits upon him. Men are brought to
goodness by guidance and example.”
14 Mattithyahu said, “These men have sons - what of
them? For is it not in the Torah that sons shall suffer
for the misdeeds of their fathers? Where is the justice
in this?”
15 {vWHY said, “The sense of words changes with
their transmission. And have I not told you that taking
one part of the Torah and setting it apart from the rest
leads to error? Only by diligently reading the whole,
word by word, can it be understood.”
16 “Given a single thread from a carpet, could any
one of you know the pattern? It is the transgressions
of the fathers which cause the children to suffer. For
not only are there things which must not be done, but
there are things which are to be done. Also, things
which must be guarded against.”
17 “If a man fails to instruct his children, or permit
them to grow up unruly, he is a transgressor against
the Torah. And is it not obvious this affects the
children? If a man chooses his wife for her beauty and
charm - because she pleases him - and not for her
wifely and motherly attributes, he transgresses
against the Torah. Does not the effect of this fall upon
his children? If a man steal, Elohim will not chastise
1658

BOOK OF KAILEDY

the children. But if that man be caught and crucified,
his wife sold into bondage, will not his children
suffer?”
18 “The Torah of HWHY, as given in the Books of
Wisdom, is unlike the laws of men. A man is
responsible not only for what he does, but for what he
fails to do. And though he spends his whole life in
prayer, at places of righteousness, but overlooks his
obligations under the greater Torah, he is not free of
transgression.”
19 “The deeds of men are like pebbles thrown into a
pool, sending out ever widening ripples; and I assure
you that all harm done by the ripples shall be
accounted against he who caused them, no matter
how far distant it occurs.”
20 “This is the Torah: Whatever a man transmits to
his children, even down to the tenth generation, that
shall be accounted against him. Likewise, if a man
fails to do things he should for his children, that too
will not be overlooked.”
21 “When the Day of Assessment comes, it will be
like a net cast into the sea, which gathers up every
kind of fish - some wholesome and others not. When
full, it is drawn ashore, and the wholesome fish are
placed in baskets, while the unwholesome are thrown
aside. So it is at the time of assessment - the good go
in one direction, and the transgressors in another.”
22 One of the talmidim said, “Aḏonai, it is easier for
some than for others. The rich are not tempted to
steal, but many a poor man must steal, or see his
children starve.”
23 {vWHY said, “The transgressions of the rich lie
mainly with the things they fail to do, those of the poor
in things they find it difficult to avoid. The justice of
HWHY takes all things into account.”
24 “Is it not written, ‘Toil not to lay up riches which
make eagle’s wings for themselves and fly away’?
And it is also stated, ‘Some are truly rich though they
dwell in poverty, while others are poor amid their
1659

BOOK OF NATSARIM

riches.’ Those who wallow in their wealth, enjoying it
as pigs enjoy mud, are like sheep which, buried in
darkness, never live again in the light. The man who
gains privileges and wealth in this world but lacks
wisdom to utilize them to his true benefit, suffers a
fate no better than the beasts which perish.”
“True wisdom is filling your lives with things
conferring a lasting benefit, and the goodness of life
cannot be assessed according to abundance of
possessions. There is nothing whatsoever in this
world which cannot be used as a stepping stone to a
life of glory, and riches are no exception, but few men
are wise enough to overcome the test they present.”
25

“There was once a rich man who was always
robed in purple and fine linen, whose days were spent
in entertaining and feasting. Outside his gate sat a
beggar so hungry he would have been satisfied with
the scraps of food thrown aside from the rich man’s
table. The beggar died at his hour, and his soul found
itself in the company of the qodeshim fathers of his
race. The rich man also died and, after his
assessment, found himself in the company of those
who suffered. Filled with misery, he raised his eyes to
the glorious place beyond his reach. And there,
bathed in bright light, he recognized the beggar he
had spurned, in the company of a Great Soul.”
26

“The rich man cried out, ‘My Father, send a word
of comfort; for here I suffer in filth and squalor.’ The
Great One answered him with compassion in His
voice, ‘My son, recall your life on Earth, when you
enjoyed all the good things it were possible to obtain,
and think of the difference between what the beggar
and you had. Now he is the one who is comforted and
surrounded by beauty and cleanliness, while you live
in filth and degradation. But it was you who made the
choice of place for your future. Still, this is not all. For
while you could have reached out a helping hand to
him on Earth, here there is an impassible barrier
between those of you who are in that place and those
27

1660

BOOK OF KAILEDY

in this.’ ”
28 “Then the man who had once been rich said, ‘I beg
you, send messengers to my family and brothers, so
they may be warned of what lies in store for them
before it is too late.’ The Great Soul replied, ‘They
have the teachings of the Torah which carry sufficient
message and warning. Let them take heed of this.’ ”
29 “He who suffered replied, ‘No, this they will not
heed any more than I did, for their days are filled with
worldly distractions. But if someone were to return
from the dead, it would bring these things to their
attention, and they would definitely take notice.’ ”
30 “The Great Soul answered, ‘Nothing can serve
them better than the teachings of the Torah, not even
one returning from the dead. In fact, this would serve
them ill. For if their goodness stemmed only from
proofs such as this, it would be devoid of merit, and
therefore worthless at the assessment.’ ”
31 {vWHY said, “This is the manner whereby you will
teach the people, but do this according to their
understanding. In one place you will tell the parable
in a certain manner, and in another place, you will tell
it differently, making sure the message never varies.
The design inscribed on the outside of a pitcher
makes it attractive to some, but not to others. This is
unimportant, for it does not affect the contents.”
32 After this, {vWHY took His talmidim to Tiberias.
From there, He and the twelve went through Zeḇulun
to Tyre on the Western Sea, where they stayed
among fishermen in a village by the narrow waters.

13 {vWHY and the twelve worked with the fishermen
and on ships bringing goods from all parts of the world,
even from the cities beyond. And during this time, He
did not draw attention to Himself.
2 Then one day, while in the part of Tyre called “The
Place of Purple,” He came upon two men in argument
among several others.
3 He said to them, “No disagreement can be settled
justly by blows, while loud words confuse the issue. If
1661

BOOK OF NATSARIM

your brother does wrong, reprove him quietly, but let
it be between you two alone. If the matter cannot be
settled between you, then seek two men acceptable
to both, and let them decide the issue.”
4 By the time {vWHY had dealt with this matter, a
crowd had gathered, and someone in it called out,
“Aḏonai, come with me to my brother, and tell him that
the estate left by our father should be shared with
me.”
5 {vWHY called him forward and said, “I am a
Teacher. No man has given Me authority to decide
such matters. When things are done properly, there
is less likelihood of repercussions.”
6 Then {vWHY turned to the gathering and said,
“Take care always to guard against all kinds of greed
and acquisitiveness, for no man’s happiness can be
assured by his possessions. In fact, much wealth is
the father of sleepless nights.”
7 “There was a certain rich man whose fields were
fertile, yielding heavy crops. Seeing the bounty of the
land, he decided there was insufficient space to store
it and had his barns and storehouses pulled down so
bigger ones could be erected. Into these he stacked
everything until the new buildings were packed full.
When this was completed, he relaxed, saying to
himself, ‘Now I have ample laid up for all my future
needs and can eat, drink and enjoy my good fortune.’
But that night he was called to his accounting in
another life, and no part of his worldly goods could be
taken. Now, who benefited by all he had
accumulated? This is how it is with those who
accumulate worldly wealth but remain spiritual
paupers.”
8 {vWHY then turned to two of the twelve who stood
beside Him and said, “This is why I tell you not to
unduly concern yourselves with food and clothing.
There is so much more to life than eating, and the
body requires more than clothes. Look at the wild
birds, which live happily from day to day, and learn
1662

BOOK OF KAILEDY

from them. Have no doubts, My friends, for you are
certainly heirs to glory, with an unassailable treasurehouse in the shamayim.”
9 “Be prepared for whatever comes, your clothes
fitting the occasion and your lamp lit, like servants
awaiting the master’s return from visiting, ready to
open the door immediately. The master is gratified on
finding his servants anticipating his arrival and does
not fail to reward them. Thieves keep clear of houses
where the owners have made provision for their
coming, but go in search of those unguarded or where
the occupants sleep. Therefore, always hold yourself
in readiness, for you never know from day to day what
will eventuate.”
10 Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, is this meant for us, or does
it apply to everyone?”
11 {vWHY answered, “Who does the master choose
to fill a position of trust? Is it not the man who works
diligently though not under the eye of the master? I
can assure you this is the man who will be promoted.
If, however, the man in whom trust is vested thinks, ‘I
am not being observed by the master,’ and gets
drunk, or is careless about what is done, be sure the
master will catch him out.”
12 “Any servant who knows what to do but fails to do
it should not go unchastised; but those who do not
know what is expected of them cannot be justly
criticized. From the man who is given much
responsibility, much will be expected; for the greater
the trust placed in a man, the greater should be the
return.”
13 A man in the crowd said to {vWHY, “We have
heard of Your teachings and that You herald the Rule
of Elohim. Tell us about this.”
14 {vWHY said, “There is the reign of the Ruaḥ and
the reign of the flesh. HWHY rules the first Himself, but
the second He rules through His viceroy - man. But
man tries to set himself up as an independent ruler,
making his own laws and setting aside those of his
1663

BOOK OF NATSARIM

sovereign. When the viceroy ceases to rebel and
governs in accord with the decrees of the sovereign,
that will be the Rule of Elohim.”
15 The man said, “This teaching is beyond our
understanding. We have the Torah which comes from
the mouthpieces of Elohim.”
16 {vWHY said, “Of course you have the Torah, but it
is either disobeyed, ignored or circumvented.
Therefore, it is nullified and rendered ineffective.”
17 “I have come to gather the lost sheep, bringing
them back into the fold, which is the Will of HWHY. I
have come to cleanse the Earth with purifying fire. But
though I have struck the sparks, the tinder is not yet
ignited. I travel a stony road, but the greatest ordeal
lies ahead.”
18 “You may think in your hearts that I come to bring
shalom to the Earth and concord among men, and
this is true, for such will be under the Rule of Elohim.
However, before this comes about, those who oppose
it must be defeated. Therefore, I come to arm those
who are loyal to the cause, to put a sword into the
hands of men and stinging words on the tongues of
women. Henceforth, families will be divided against
themselves, and brother will be separated from
brother, and father set against son.”
19 Some in the crowd said among themselves,
“These words we can understand. Truly this is the
One promised who will deliver us from our
oppressors.”
20 {vWHY said, “Bide your time, and all things will be
made clear.”
21 A scribe in the crowd said, “It seems You speak
with hidden meanings. How are we to interpret these
teachings?”
22 {vWHY said, “You are so accustomed to devious
thinking, trying to make a ‘yes’ into a ‘no’ to suit your
convenience, that when given Truth you pull it apart,
seeking to find something else behind it. Unless you
accept these things as would a child, you cannot hope
1664

BOOK OF KAILEDY

to enter the Reign of HWHY.”
23 “When you see clouds coming in from the West,
you say, ‘Soon there will be rain,’ and this forecast
proves to be correct. When the South wind blows, you
say, ‘It will be extremely hot,’ and again your
prediction is right. What hypocrites you are, so quick
to interpret some signs while closing your eyes to
others less to your liking. You can interpret the signs
on the Earth and sky, but close your eyes to those
indicating present trends.”
24 Someone in the crowd said, “We have the failings
of men. Should we be condemned for these?”
25 {vWHY replied, “As sons of HWHY, you inherit His
substance and are heirs to glory. Think less of earthly
weaknesses and more of reverent strength.”
26 Another in the crowd asked {vWHY about
unjustified suffering, and might not His cause bring
this upon the heads of His followers? Someone else
said, “What about the people of Galil who died in
resisting the efforts of Pilatus to appropriate the
Hĕyḵal offerings so he could bring water to the city of
Yerushalayim?”
27 {vWHY said, “The people of Galil and the Governor
did right in their own eyes, the former seeking to serve
Elohim, and the latter, men. But these things are not
matters to be placed at issue, for whoever serves one
serves the other, and there is no clash of interests.
Can you believe that the people of Galil who suffered
as they did were worse than others in Galil? This is
not so; they suffered for no wrongdoing, but through
misguidance.”
28 “Calamity strikes capriciously. Do you think those
who died when the tower fell on them at Siloam
deserved death more than the others? Life is full of
uncertainties, so men must be made aware of the
need for repentance, knowing the Day of Assessment
may be near or far. Be sure of one thing: There will
be no discrimination among you on the assessment
day; all will get their fitting reward.”
1665

BOOK OF NATSARIM

Then one in the crowd shouted, “Tell us about the
Reign of the shamayim, for surely if we are going
there, it is well to know what it is like.”
30 {vWHY said, “If you were going to a distant city,
which would be most beneficial - a description of it, or
details concerning the route? Then too, is it not
important to prepare for your reception? For if a man
residing in a palace describe the place, this serves no
purpose to one who will have to beg for scraps and
sleep in the gutters.”
31 “The road to the shamayim may be likened to ten
young women who, taking lamps, went out to meet a
bridegroom - five being irresponsible, and five reliable
by nature. The irresponsible ones left everything to
the last minute and snatched up their lamps forgetting
the oil containers were not filled. Because the
bridegroom was delayed, all the young women lay
down to sleep. But at midnight there was a shout to
say the bridegroom was coming and to go out and
meet him.”
32 “The young women all arose and trimmed their
lamps, but the irresponsible ones, finding theirs going
out, said to the others, ‘Let us have some of your oil,
for we forgot to fill the containers.’ The others replied,
‘We cannot do this, for we do not have enough oil for
all. And if we share with you, there will be insufficient
to light the way. It is better we provide light all the way
with five lamps than we all provide light for just a short
distance.’ ”
33 “The irresponsible ones hastened to the oil
vendor, but he would not serve them. And while they
were away, the bridegroom arrived. And those who
were ready lighted his way and joined the guests at
the wedding, the doors then being closed. Later,
when the irresponsible ones returned and stood
outside shouting to be let in, the doorkeeper said,
‘Who are you? What purpose do you serve? Go
away.’ Therefore, I say to you, be always alert, your
spiritual lamps trimmed and filled with the oil which
29

1666

BOOK OF KAILEDY

gives eternal light. For you never know the hour when
you will be called.”
34 They who stood about {vWHY asked, “Who is
chosen to enter the shamayim? And how is the
selection made?”
35 {vWHY explained in this manner: “A sovereign
decided to collect all debts due and ordered those
who owed money to come before him. One of these
was so heavily indebted that he was in no position to
repay, so the sovereign ordered that he be sold into
slavery to satisfy the debt. The debtor begged the
sovereign to be patient, saying that, given time, every
last farthing would be paid. The sovereign, taking pity
on him, released the debtor from his obligations.”
36 “A few days afterwards, the sovereign’s debtor
met a poor man who owed him just a small amount.
And the sovereign’s debtor took hold of him and said,
‘Repay the money due to me at once, for I have no
patience with defaulters.’ The poor man begged him
to be patient, saying that, given time, he would repay
in full. But the other would not have it, and had the
poor man committed to prison.”
37 “The poor man’s friends reported the matter to the
sovereign, who had his debtor brought before him.
And he said, ‘You villain, because you pleaded with
me to have pity, I released you from the whole of your
debt. Had I not done so, you would have thought me
harsh. Yet what consideration have you shown?’
Then the sovereign condemned the man to severe
punishment until the whole of the debt was paid. In
this manner men are chosen for the shamayim.”
38 “And therefore I say very earnestly, deal with
others as you would be dealt with, not holding one
Torah in your heart for yourself and letting another
issue from your lips for others. Prepare yourselves for
entry into the shamayim, for this can only be done
here and is the purpose of Earth. Do not think that,
because you are not immediately chastised, your
iniquities are overlooked.”
1667

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“A sower went out into his grainfield and sowed
with good seed, but during the night, an enemy came
and strewed wheat-like weeds over the ground and
went away. After the wheat blades had sprouted and
the stalks began to form wheatheads, the weeds
among them were revealed. Then the field laborer
went to the landholder and said, ‘The field was sown
with good seed, and yet it is now full of weeds. Shall
we go and pull them up?’ ”
40 “The landholder answered, ‘Someone who wishes
to harm me has done this. But in pulling up the weeds
you may do more damage. Let both grow together
until harvesting time. Then the reapers can separate
the weeds from the wheat, stacking the weeds for
burning, and gathering the wheat into the granary.’ ”
41 “Therefore, because transgressors go unpunished
here, do not think they are overlooked or that there is
not a Day of Accounting. Not a single deed or thought
- whether it be good or bad - is overlooked.”
42 One in the crowd said, “But our thoughts harm no
one.”
43 {vWHY replied, “Only yourself, for thoughts mold,
strengthening or weakening the ruaḥ. Is it not written,
‘The nature of man is formed according to his
thoughts’?”
44 {vWHY was asked, “What then is the ruaḥ? For the
Qodesh Books do not make this clear.”
45 He replied, “The ruaḥ of man may be likened to a
date seed planted in the darkness of the ground,
giving no indication to anyone not knowing its nature
of what it will become. When the tree springing from
it is full grown, it spreads out in the sunshine - a haven
for birds and a source of pleasure for men. Or it may
be likened to leaven which a woman places in a
bushel of flour; there it spreads throughout the whole
to change its nature.”
46 “It is like a treasure buried in waste ground. The
plot had no value until it was rumored that a treasure
was there. Then men bid against each other to obtain
39

1668

BOOK OF KAILEDY

it. While within the egg, a chick is self-sustaining; but
once the shell is broken, it must be fed. So it is with
the ruaḥ of man and the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh. I assure
you that every plant not nourished by the waters of
life will wither and die.”
47 Several in the crowd said, “Tell us again about
those who enter the Reign of the shamayim.”
48 {vWHY replied with these parables: “Admittance
may be likened to a wedding feast prepared by a
sovereign for his son. He dispatched servants,
inviting many guests. But though each was told, ‘The
feast is preparing even now, the geese and beasts
are being roasted, the bread is in the ovens, and there
is wine on the tables,’ yet those invited ignored the
messengers, saying they were too busy with their
own affairs, while they abused or even ill-treated
them. When this came to the ears of the sovereign,
he sent soldiers to take those who had ill-treated his
messengers and confined them in dismal dungeons.”
49 “The sovereign then said to his servants, ‘Though
I prepared a sumptuous feast, those I invited were
unworthy of the honor I paid them. Go out again and
invite any who will come.’ The servants went out into
the streets, returning with many persons. However,
while they were all seated at the table, the sovereign
noticed one who behaved badly, using lewd language
to those beside him. The sovereign called two
servants and bid them take the man and throw him
into the dungeons with the others. But to make sure,
he went to one where there was the most filth so he
would be in his own element. I have said before,
though many are invited, few are chosen. Now I say,
many choose not to come.”
50 “There is another way for separating the wheat
from the chaff, illustrated by this parable. A man left
for a distant country, but before departing he called
his servants to him and entrusted them with his store
of gold. To one he gave three bars of gold, to another
two bars, and to another one bar, each receiving gold
1669

BOOK OF NATSARIM

in accordance with his capabilities.”
51 “The servant who received three bars of gold went
and exchanged these for silver, spending this in
pleasure and high living, thinking that with all this
silver he could have a really good time. The servant
who received two bars was a cautious man, and he
buried his gold in a safe place, for he thought it best
not to take chances with it. The servant who had
received one bar went and bought goods which he
resold, and by this and other efforts he obtained
another gold bar, for he thought to himself, ‘As the
master did not think me as capable as the others, I
must prove I am.’ ”
52 “When the master returned, he called his servants
for an accounting. And the one who had received
three bars of gold said, ‘Good master, with so much
wealth I could not resist temptation and spent it
enjoying myself, never thinking about the Day of
Accounting.’ The master said, ‘You are an
untrustworthy scoundrel,’ and he placed him in
bondage until the whole of the value was repaid. The
man who had received two bars of gold said, ‘Master,
I knew you were a hard man and was afraid to take
any risks, so I safeguarded the gold; here it is.’ The
master said, ‘You have been neither good nor bad,
but took your ease while I was away; go about your
job, but expect no promotion.’ The man who received
one bar of gold said, ‘Having only one bar, I increased
it to two, for I knew you would need gold on your
return and have been a good master.’ To this one the
man said, ‘Well done. You have proved worthy of my
trust. I will now place you in charge of my treasury.’ ”
53 One of the people gathered about {vWHY said,
“How should I treat my servants? For I have one who
is troublesome - though perhaps it is his youth.”
54 {vWHY then told this parable: “A man had a garden
plot set aside for vines, but a self-planted fig tree grew
among them. In the fruiting season, the man came to
this plot accompanied by his gardener, who said,
1670

BOOK OF KAILEDY

‘This fig tree is interfering with the vines. If it fruited, it
might not matter; but as it does not, would it be best
to cut it down? For it is only taking goodness from the
soil, which could be used more profitably by the
vines.’ The man said, ‘Leave it for another season,
but give it a little attention. Then if it fails to fruit next
season, cut it down. I like figs, but a new cutting might
take a long time to mature. And this tree, having
chosen its own situation, may yet prove more
profitable in this plot than the vines.’ ”
55 {vWHY said, “If a fig tree grows among vines, it can
be left, for both produce good fruit. But if it grows
among thorns, then these are cut down and the fig
tree left on its own.”
56 “If a man hires three laborers for his vineyard and
there is work only for two, he dismisses the one least
worthy of his hire. Yet everyone who labors must be
paid his due. But if one pour less than full measure
into the task, he cheats no less than one who
deceives at the weighing.”
57 Some self-righteous people who picked pieces out
of the Torah to suit their convenience - as a child picks
segments from a pomegranate - and lived by these
ridiculed {vWHY.
58 But He said to them, “You who try to impress
others with your righteousness are hypocrites, but
what goes on in your minds is not overlooked.
Admiration and popularity may benefit you in this
world but count for nothing in the world to come,
unless worthily earned. I come to herald the Rule of
Elohim when such as you will be swept aside by those
who serve His cause.”
59 Some in the crowd shouted, “Who will You take to
serve it?”
60 {vWHY replied, “When the trumpets sound the
rallying call and two men are reaping in a field, one
will be taken and the other ignored. Two scribes will
be writing in a room, one will be taken and the other
ignored. Two women will be grinding corn, one will be
1671

BOOK OF NATSARIM

taken and the other ignored.”
61 Someone said, “Where will they be taken?”
62 {vWHY answered, “Vultures gather where the
carcass lies and bees where the flowers grow. Flies
are drawn to stinking meat. Brave men converge on
the battlefield, while cowards seek their hideouts. The
Day of Decision will come like a roll of thunder, and
on that day, those serving the cause of HWHY will be
separated from those who serve the powers of
darkness.”
63 There were many other parables which {vWHY
used in this place, to bring understanding to the
people. He taught simply so all could grasp what He
said, but afterwards, when alone with the twelve, He
explained things differently, revealing a deeper
meaning.

14 {vWHY and the twelve left the shores of the
Western Sea and, after preaching in many places,
came to the Sea of Galil, where {vWHY and seven of
the apostles took ship with Nethan’ĕl’s brother and
passed over into Dalmantha.
2 About this time, Hĕrodĕs Antipas heard about the
activities of {vWHY, whose fame had spread, for He
was unlike the other teachers. A rumor had started
that He was Yoḥanan of the Wilderness raised to life,
and this explained His powers; for only in one able to
come back from the dead could such an abundance
of power manifest. Most thought He was one of the
old neḇi’im returned, but were unable to explain His
powers. Though these things brought fear to
Hĕrodĕs’s heart, he took no action.
3 Others said, “The same is {vWHY who was born
Yĕshua, Son of Yosĕph and Miryam, claiming to be a
naḇi dedicating people to serve the cause of Elohim,
that a Reign under His rule may come to Earth.”
4 When the boat carrying {vWHY and the seven with
Him came to the shore, it was drawn up near to some
women who were washing. And one shouted, “Glory
to HWHY, and baruḵ be the One through whom He
1672

BOOK OF KAILEDY

manifests.”
5 {vWHY said, “Glory is not yours to give, neither
does the Sovereign of Glory need it. Therefore, your
words are empty of meaning. Give service instead.”
6 Another woman cried out, “Baruḵ are the breasts
that suckled you.”
7 {vWHY answered, “The baruḵ are those who hear
the words of HWHY’s messengers and obey them.”
8 Passing along the beach, {vWHY and three
talmidim came to where a group of people stood. And
they were of those who walked in the light of the
Torah, but they were self-deceivers who trimmed the
lamp to suit their convenience. One said, “If You are
really sent from Elohim, show us some sign as proof.
Then we can believe what You say.”
9 {vWHY said, “Why are you always demanding
proof? Certainly, this generation is undeserving of
proof. If you are invited to dine with a man, do you ask
him to prove his food is good? If you were genuine,
My words would strike a responsive chord in your
heart, and you would know. If I drew aside the
curtains to reveal the glory that is the shamayim and
you believed, would your belief bear the fruit of
goodness? It would be like unseasoned timber or
untempered iron.”
10 A crowd started to gather, and {vWHY returned to
the boat. And as people began to jostle Him, He
ordered it to be taken out a little way. As He was
getting into it, a scribe pushed forward, saying, “Let
me join You, and I will follow wherever You go.”
11 {vWHY said, “Foxes have holes, and birds have
nests, but the Servant of Man has nowhere to lay His
head. Not even a board is offered to Him here. If you
are sincere in your offer, let this be the place of your
labors; for you are not a hardy man.”
12 Another man with Him said, “Then let me come.
But may I first have time to bury my father?”
13 {vWHY answered, “What service can the living
render the dead? Leave the dead to their own kind.”
1673

BOOK OF NATSARIM

The boat was taken to another place, then it was
discovered that, as no bread had been obtained
previously, there was insufficient to provide a good
meal for everyone. While they were arguing about
how it should be distributed, {vWHY said, “Let those
who get some take care their piece does not contain
the leaven of the Parashyim or of Hĕrodĕs.”
14

{vWHY, seeing they looked blankly at Him, said,
“Do you not understand? When wholesome, even a
morsel of bread will nourish. But if it contains bad
leaven to turn it sour, it will be bitter in the mouth and
nourish no one. Eleven out of twelve among the
Parashyim are good, but it is the bad who
contaminate the whole and leave a bitter taste in the
mouth.”
15

When the boat drew into the shallows, some of
those with {vWHY went to get food. And a crowd
gathered about Him, so {vWHY told a parable often
repeated. “A sower went into his cornfield carrying
seed in his apron, and he scattered it about so some
fell in the open and was eaten by the birds. Other
seed fell on stony ground and sprouted quickly, but
as it could not put down roots, it quickly withered.
Some fell among thistles, where it was smothered
before reaching maturity. Still others fell on good
ground and having ripened, produced a bountiful
harvest.”
16

“This parable is simple to understand, and I will
explain it to you. I am the Sower, and the seeds are
My words. Some of you standing here in the open
listen but close your hearts to the message. With you,
My words are like the seed eaten by the birds. With
others My words are like the seed falling on stony
ground, for though they receive them hopefully, they
are weak-willed and shallow-minded. Thus, when
their belief is tested, they give way immediately. Still
others receive the words, but the message is like the
seed sown among thistles; they hear and understand,
but because of their daily cares or a craving for
17

1674

BOOK OF KAILEDY

worldly things, the words of the message become
overgrown and perish. Lastly, there are those who
hear the words of the message and welcome them. It
is in these that the bountiful harvest is produced.”
18 A man nearby in the crowd said, “No doubt You
are a worthy Teacher, but we have the teachings of
the neḇi’im and the Torah of Mosheh. Are these not
good?”
19 {vWHY answered him, “Certainly these are good,
but what too many make of them is not good. There
are many among you who know the teachings of the
great ones, but though words issue from your mouths,
your hearts are evil. Yet you cannot hide the
underlying impurity, for whatever is stored in the heart
colors that which issues from the mouth. Words from
a pure heart are good, but words from a befouled one
are evil. I tell you that not one reckless or
inconsiderate word is spoken which does not enter
into the accounting. Out of your own mouths will come
the words assigning you to the place of glory or to the
place of purification.”
20 Now, those who had gone to obtain food having
returned, {vWHY and those with Him sat around and
began to eat. One of the Parashyim who stood nearby
expressed surprise that He let His talmidim eat
without first washing their hands, though there was
plenty of water beside them.
21 {vWHY said, “This is typical of many today - you
carefully clean your eating utensils and choose the
best food. But these are external things and obvious;
inside you are filled with greed and deceit. Never
mind outward appearances, but make sure you are
clean all the way through.”
22 “I assure you of this: Everything that is hidden will
one day be revealed, and every secret thing will be
made known. The words spoken in darkness will be
heard in the light of day, and what has been
whispered behind closed doors will be shouted from
the housetops.”
1675

BOOK OF NATSARIM

Turning to His talmidim sitting about Him, {vWHY
said, “Do not be afraid of these people, for the worst
they can do is to drive the life from the body. If you
must be afraid of anything, let it be your own frailties;
for if you give in to these, you suffer for it long after
the body has fallen apart.”
24 “Are not five sparrows sold for a single coin? Yet
each one is known to HWHY, for nothing living does
not participate in life, and this is maintained by the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh. For just as fish live in the waters of
the sea, so are men maintained in the Living Ruaḥ.”
25 Speaking to those who had spoken previously,
{vWHY said, “Woe to you self-deceivers, who are
false interpreters of the Torah. You are like unmarked
graves which men walk over in innocence; unaware
they are being defiled. Yet nothing from outside can
ever enter into a man and sully his soul; it is what
festers within him which comes out to reveal his
uncleanness.”
26 “The things which defile a man - such as
fornication, malice, envy, obscenity, and adultery come from a weeping ulcer within the mind. The
uncleanness within a man is like a stone dropped in
water, the ripples going out from him to contaminate
others.”
27 “To all outward appearances, many of you live
good lives; but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and
deceit. You erect memorials over the graves of those
who spoke with the voice of HWHY and decorate the
monuments to the martyrs who died unjustly. You
say, ‘Had we lived in those times, we would never
have done the things our forefathers did.’ But do you
take care to ensure your children never have cause
to say the same about you? Therefore, do not set
your standards by those days, but according to the
better ones in the days of your children.”
28 One of the people who were there said, “We have
heard that You teach the coming Rule of Elohim and
claim knowledge of the Reign of the shamayim. Tell
23

1676

BOOK OF KAILEDY

us about these things.”
29 {vWHY said, “The Rule of Elohim is not something
which will come suddenly, nor will it bring about a
violent change. It is not a change of surroundings, but
a change of heart. The changed conditions will be
brought about by changes in the heart. No man can
say, ‘It is here’ or ‘It is there.’ It is here but waiting
recognition. Just as others have heralded My coming,
so do I herald the coming Rule of Elohim. But its
establishment does not depend on anything done by
Elohim, but on the actions of men.”
30 “The Reign of the shamayim is where HWHY rules
in Ruaḥ, but there is that within each man which can
extend the Reign of the shamayim. When this is
drawn out of men while they are on Earth and
established here, then the Reign of the shamayim will
embrace the Earth. When the Rule of Elohim is
established on Earth, then will the Reign of the
shamayim come down so the shamayim and Earth
are united in one.”
31 A rich man standing by said, “We cannot
understand these things, and they confuse us. Just
tell me what I must do to enjoy eternal ḥai.”
32 {vWHY said, “By your attire, you are among those
privileged to enjoy wealth. What do you do with it?”
33 The man replied, “I do as others, getting the most
out of it and enjoying life to the full.”
34 {vWHY said, “You would be better off selling all you
possess and giving the proceeds to the poor. Only
thus can you discover yourself and benefit from
eternal ḥai.”
35 The rich man’s companion said, “Wise Teacher,
what of me? I conform to every verse of the Torah. I
pray every day and give generously to the poor.”
36 {vWHY said, “Have you ever been hungry or slept
on the street or gone unclothed?”
37 The man said, “No, why should I?”
38 {vWHY said, “You deceive yourself and are a
hypocrite besides. How can you say you comply with
1677

BOOK OF NATSARIM

the Torah and teachings of the neḇi’im? Is it not
stated in the Torah that you should love your neighbor
as yourself? Yet all about you there are people who
are hungry, clothed in rags and homeless. Your
house is filled with good things far exceeding your
moderate needs, and all you hand out are a few coins
and a morsel of food. It is the duty and obligation of
such as you to see no man suffers hunger and
privation in your neighborhood.”
39 Turning to a talmid sitting at His side, {vWHY said,
“Shim’on, son of Yonah, let this be your teaching: It is
easier for a camel to enter into the city by the needle’s
eye than for a rich man to enter into the Glory of the
shamayim.” The rich man turned away and left.
40 And another who was there said, “Aḏonai, just
what is meant by my neighbor?”
41 {vWHY then told this parable: “A man had found it
necessary to travel the road to Yeriḥo going out from
Yerushalayim. Along the way he was attacked by
footpads who stripped him naked, beat him up and,
after taking all he possessed, left him half dead by the
roadside. A short time later, a kohĕn came along the
same road and, seeing the injured man lying there,
passed by on the other side, for he feared defilement.
Another self-righteous man came along but hastened
by, thinking, ‘I would help if I could, but he is nearly
dead, and I am no physician. Better for me to push on
and tell someone.’ A merchant came by alone but,
seeing the man lying there, thought, ‘Perhaps the
robbers are still around and I should not dismount.
Besides, I wear fine clothes which would be spoiled.’
”
42 “Now, a lowly Shomeronite traveling the same
road came upon the man lying there, and his heart
was moved with pity. So, he tore strips off his tunic
and bound the injured man’s wounds. Then, lifting the
man, he set him on his own donkey, bringing him to
an inn and attending to his needs. When departing
the next morning, he said to the innkeeper, ‘Here is
1678

BOOK OF KAILEDY

some silver. Look after this man. And if the payment
is insufficient, I will settle the bill on my way back.’
Which of these four, in your opinion, acted as a
neighbor should towards the helpless man?”
43 The man who had questioned {vWHY said, “Why,
surely the man who took compassion on the stricken
man.”
44 {vWHY said, “Now you know your neighbor. Go
and act likewise towards men.”
45 Leaving that place, {vWHY and those with Him
went by boat to another shore on the Sea of Galil,
arriving on the morning of the Shabbat. As {vWHY
was going into the place of worship, a woman bent
double without the ability to straighten herself came
and begged {vWHY to heal her. He put one hand
under her chin and the other on her back and
straightened her up. She went away filled with
happiness.
46 The Lĕwite who conducted the worship noticed
this and, seeing the woman inside, said to her, “Six
days are set aside for work, but the Shabbat is
sacred, and you should not have sought healing on
that day.”
47 {vWHY, overhearing this, waited outside for the
Lĕwite, and when he came said, “What a hypocrite
you are. What member of your flock does not loose
his cattle or donkey from their stalls and water them
on the Shabbat? Also, are the cows not milked and
the hogs fed? They are not left to suffer, yet you could
deny relief to this poor woman because it is the
Shabbat.”
48 Hearing this, many of the people supported
{vWHY, and He preached to them. A blind man was
brought to {vWHY while He preached. He took the
blind man apart from the crowd and, moistening His
thumbs, drew them across the blind man’s eyes. The
man gave a sudden cry and squinched up his eyes.
49 But {vWHY said, “Open your eyes and tell Me what
you see.”
1679

BOOK OF NATSARIM

The man did so and said, “I can just tell it is light,
but cannot distinguish anything.”
51 {vWHY then covered the man’s eyes with His
hands, and after withdrawing them said, “What do you
see now?”
52 The man replied, “Oh Aḏonai, I can see
everything, though it is not steady.”
53 Sometime later, the emissaries who had been
away rejoined {vWHY, bringing with them a talmid
who had deserted {vWHY in Endor. He was named
Barnaḇah and, seeing him, {vWHY was overcome
with joy and welcomed him warmly, whereupon two
of those who had come with him went aside and were
sullen, for they had not been received in this manner.
54 Calling the twenty-two men who were there with
Him, {vWHY addressed them as follows:
55 “A man had two sons. And one day the youngest
came to him and said, ‘Father, I want to go away from
here. Therefore, give me the inheritance which would
one day be mine so I can take it with me.’ So, the
father divided his estate and gave the youngest son
his portion. This was then sold, and the youngest son
departed to a distant city where he dissipated the
money on women and riotous living. After his money
had gone, he found that no one wanted to know him,
and soon he was completely destitute.”
56 “No work being available for him in the city, he
went outside. But the only job he could obtain was
that of a swineherd. Often, when he saw the pigs
gorging themselves, his own stomach aching with
hunger, he would think, ‘If only I could bring myself to
eat the pigswill, it would ease my hunger. What a fool
I have been, for here I am worse off than any of my
father’s employees. I will go back to him, admitting my
failure as a son; for he never withheld anything from
me and let me go my own way when this was what I
wanted.’ So, he set off and returned to his father’s
estate.”
57 “His father saw him coming while he was still far
50

1680

BOOK OF KAILEDY

off, and, seeing his son footsore and weary, the
father’s heart was filled with compassion. He ran out
to meet him and embraced him warmly. The son was
stricken with remorse and said, ‘Father, I have done
wrong, but will do my best to make amends. I am
unworthy to be treated as a son, but let me work for
you as a servant.’ But the father led him home and
called out to the servants, ‘Here is my son. Bring him
a change of clothing, get a ring for his hand and
sandals for his feet, go and kill the fattening calf and
roast it, for we are going to celebrate his return with a
feast. I thought my son was lost, but he has returned,
and I am happy.’ ”
“Now, the elder son had been out in the fields all
day, and, drawing close to the house at dusk, he was
puzzled to hear the sounds of music and laughter.
Passing one of the servants, he enquired what it was
all about. And the servant replied, ‘Your father has
ordered a celebration for the safe return of your
brother.’ This made the elder son so angry that he
would not go into the house. And when his father
came out to see why, the son said, ‘Over the years I
have served you faithfully, and you know you can rely
upon me. Yet you have never even put on a feast of
goat meat for me and my friends. Now this prodigal
comes running back because he has squandered
everything on harlots and gambling, and you
immediately have a great feast of celebration.’ ”
59 “The father said, ‘My son, you are my right hand,
and I know you have never let me down. I depend
upon you, and all I have is yours. But it is a special
occasion, for the one I thought was lost to me has
returned. This does not lessen my affection and
regard for you. But he is weak and needs support,
while you are strong and do not require such displays
of affection.’ ”
60 {vWHY put His arms around two talmidim and said,
“My friends, when the going gets tough and the road
is long, some collapse by the wayside. It is these who
58

1681

BOOK OF NATSARIM

need encouragement. And it is not always easy to
admit failure. When a sheep becomes separated from
the flock and is lost among the thornbushes, does not
a good shepherd leave the rest and go in search of
the one which has gone astray? This does not mean
he loves it more than the others, nor does it lessen
his love for each of them.”
61 It was some days later, at another place, that a
follower named Yosĕph said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, if a
man cheat another, is he punished for the cheating or
for the harm he has done to the other man?”
62 {vWHY said, “Speak of punishment only to the
people, for this accords with their understanding. On
Earth, men’s deeds are weighed on scales balanced
between reward and punishment, but these work
inaccurately. In the Reign of the Ruaḥ, the measure
of assessment is a man’s earthly life. You are now on
the balances; do not be found wanting.”
63 “A man who can be trusted in small matters can
also be trusted with greater things. The man whose
transgressions are petty would commit much greater
ones if given the opportunity, or if he had greater
courage. The purpose of life is to establish a man’s
credentials. For if he is found unreliable in dealing
with things of this world - which quickly pass on the
wings of days - how can he be trusted with things of
glory in the Reign of the shamayim?”
64 “For glory is the garment with which each one who
comes to the Reign of the shamayim will be clothed,
and each one who comes will be given attire and
station according to the credentials established on
Earth.”
65 These and many other things were taught to the
talmidim by {vWHY, but only one recorded them.

15 Taking only the twelve emissaries and a few
women who were also followers, {vWHY set out for
Kaisarea Philippos, a city renamed by the Tetrarch
Philippos when seeking Roman patronage.
2 One eventide, while on the way, {vWHY said to the
1682

BOOK OF KAILEDY

twelve, “Who do the people in the places we pass
through think I am?” They were not agreed, some
saying the people believed Him to be the Deliverer
and some the Enlightener. Others said the people
believed Him to be ha’Mashiaḥ, while some said that
many thought He was Yoḥanan of the Wilderness, for
sometimes it seemed his ruaḥ had entered {vWHY.
3 {vWHY said, “Who do you think I am?” Again, they
were not agreed.
4 And {vWHY said, “I am He whom all men need,
whomever they seek. Call a thing by a hundred
names and it remains the same. However, each of
you keep your own conception in your own heart and
discuss it with no one.”
5 Later, at a house at Balos, they were discussing
the people’s expectations for ha’Mashiaḥ. And
Yahuḏah said to {vWHY, “If You are truly He, then the
people will believe and follow You, for the neḇuoth in
the Qodesh Books must be fulfilled. He will surely
come, and I believe You are He. I believe the reborn
world is at hand, and the day of the people’s salvation
is near.”
6 Yoḥanan said, “It is foreordained that ha’Mashiaḥ
will suffer death by violence but will rise triumphant
above it, to manifest again as proof that death is not
the destined end.”
7 {vWHY said, “Perhaps I am ha’Mashiaḥ, for will He
not be all things to all men?”
8 Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, we are Your friends, and
You are our Guiding Light, the hope of our lives. Do
not say such things, for we could not bear to lose
You.”
9 {vWHY answered, “I must bear the stake of Ḥai,
and on Me it lies more heavily than on others. Each
must do whatever he may be called upon to do, and
great causes demand great deeds and sacrifices.”
10 Then He said to Kĕpha, “Do not be so blinded by
worldliness that you cannot believe the ruaḥ can rise
above the claims of the flesh. If you are, then it would
1683

BOOK OF NATSARIM

be better for you to come no further.”
11 To the others He said, “Do not view these things
as men do, but see them through the eyes of HWHY.”
12 Coming to a village, {vWHY ate while a small
crowd gathered. And there He addressed the people,
saying, “If any of you intend to become followers of
Mine, you must put aside any thoughts of self and
carry your own burden of suffering without complaint.
If a man worries too much about his own safety and
comfort, he gains nothing. But if he sacrifices these
for the sake of My cause, he will not lose. What profit
can a man make by gaining all that the world has to
offer, in exchange for the welfare of his own soul?
What can he take from his gains to buy back what has
been lost?”
13 “Therefore, take care, for I give fair warning. If
anyone in this adulterous and depraved generation
choose to ignore My teachings, that person may find
himself ignored when seeking entry into the state of
glory. I can also tell you that some are here who will
realize the nature of the shamayim before undergoing
the experience of death.”
14 Someone there said, “Adultery is kept in check by
stoning. How can the punishment be increased to
prevent it?”
15 {vWHY said, “If a tree is cut down, it will spring up
in many places from the root. Evil is overcome by
digging out the root of evil. Adultery has many
causes. But if a man marries a woman who has
fornicated, can he revile her for sorrow he has
brought upon his own head? The dowry of a chaste
woman is so much higher. But if a man accepts what
she brings and revile her for what she has not, surely,
he is mean hearted.”
16 “Before any man cast a stone at an adulteress, let
him search his heart and see whether he be guiltless
before women. I say to those men who have one rule
for their wives and another for the wives of others, set
one standard and abide by it, otherwise be branded
1684

BOOK OF KAILEDY

as hypocrites.”
17 “Men too readily lay blame at the doors of others.
For surely if anyone puts his hand into a snake hole,
he can hardly blame the snake for being bitten. If a
man enters a house of harlotry, who is to blame if he
collects the whore’s dowry?”
18 {vWHY was invited into a house to eat and rest,
and having done so, He sat outside in the courtyard
amusing the children who played there. He told them
stories which were seeds planted in their hearts.
Some women were also listening. And when two of
the twelve came into the courtyard and told the
women to see the children did not bother {vWHY, He
overheard them and said, “Let the children come to
Me, for from such as these will come the Rule of
Elohim.”
19 {vWHY and the twelve entered Kaisarea on the
day before the Shabbat, and on the Shabbat, {vWHY
was invited to dine at the house of a Parashyim, for
He had many friends among them. Seated not far
from {vWHY was a man whose body was swollen by
water, and {vWHY desired to heal him. But being a
guest, He asked whether any there objected to this
being done on the Shabbat. As none did, so {vWHY
laid His hands on the man, who then became excited,
going out and ejecting from all parts of the body so it
became slackened.
20 {vWHY said to those present, “I am sure if any of
you found an ox or donkey fallen into a well on the
Shabbat, you would have no hesitation in rescuing it.”
None disputed with Him.
21 Seeing how those present scrambled for the best
seats, {vWHY said, “When invited to a feast, do not
rush for the best seats, because the host may have
special guests in mind to occupy them. So, if you
have grabbed one of these seats, he will come and
request you to vacate it in favor of another, and you
will then have to take a seat not wanted by anyone
else. When invited as a guest, it is wiser to take one
1685

BOOK OF NATSARIM

of the less desirable places; then your host will come
and escort you to a better seat. Thus, the other guests
will see that the host holds you in high regard. It is a
rule of life that whoever makes himself out to be more
important than he is will be humiliated, while he who
is modest will be exalted.”
22 {vWHY said, “Most of you here give formal feasts;
and all have more food and the good things of life than
they need. Yet because your stomachs have never
been empty, you cannot understand the sufferings of
the underprivileged. But if adversity descend upon
you, the cry goes up, ‘Woe is me. Can there be an
Elohim when I am thus afflicted?’ Do you not
understand that misfortune and tribulation must be
sent to such as you? For in what other way will you
learn compassion?”
23 “When giving a feast, read the intentions of your
heart. Are you giving it solely for love of those invited?
Or do you seek to gain something from it? Are your
motives centered on yourself, or on others? Also, is it
not surely true that if you can afford to give a feast or
indulge in good food, you can afford to provide for
others who are underprivileged? Who is it that feeds
the poor and needy? Is it not the poor themselves?
And do not the rich entertain only the rich? I can
assure you; it will not be so under the Rule of Elohim.”
24 “Many say, ‘But the poor are poor through no fault
of ours.’ But I tell you that if many of you were as good
as some of the poor, you would not be wallowing in
luxury. How many here can truly say, ‘My goodness
has brought me riches’?”
25 After this, {vWHY went and addressed a crowd
near a water fountain where several expressed
intentions of becoming talmidim.
26 {vWHY said, “It is sad that so many desire to
become talmidim without weighing the cost of works
of the talmidim. To follow Me as a talmid means
renouncing all home comforts, and this is not
something to be lightly undertaken. Many have
1686

BOOK OF KAILEDY

responsibilities which cannot be cast onto the
shoulders of others. So, to those who follow Me as
talmidim, burden is added to burden. Apart from
privations and discomforts, talmidim are subject to the
mockery and scorn of men, and unforeseeable
suffering may be in store for them. Those who follow
Me, taking up My cause but not as talmidim, double
the burden of their stake.”
27 “If you wished to erect a house, it would be very
shortsighted to commence the building without
working out the cost and being sure this could be met.
If the cost and money available are not first
calculated, the foundations may be laid but it will be
found impossible to complete the job. Then you will
become the laughingstock of the town, and people
will say, ‘The fool started something he could not
finish.’ ”
28 “What would be your opinion of a sovereign who,
with an army of a thousand men, marched against
another with ten thousand, without carefully weighing
his chances? Would he not do better to remain where
he was and sue for peace?”
29 “So, I say to those who would become talmidim,
weigh the matter in your hearts; then, if still of the
same mind, give up all you hold dear and follow Me.
But do not come if in so doing you cast aside
responsibilities and obligations. For if you do so in
relation to others, you will be no less inclined to do
likewise with Me when the road becomes difficult.”
30 Among the crowd were many self-righteous
people and hypocrites - self-deceivers who,
interpreting the Torah to suit their convenience, saw
no wrong in themselves; who, setting themselves up
as judges, were like blind men trying to sort black
pebbles from white, and had no more success. They
said to {vWHY, “You choose the wrong types. If You
chose differently, we would follow; but sand does not
mix with honey.”
31 {vWHY said, “Let Me tell you a parable. Two men
1687

BOOK OF NATSARIM

went into the Hĕyḵal to pray - one being a selfrighteous man and self-deceiver, the other a man
aware of his failings and shortcomings. The selfrighteous man prayed in this manner: ‘I praise my
Elohim for many blessings, giving thanks that I am not
like the majority of men - avaricious, deceitful,
dishonest, and adulterous. I fast twice weekly, pay all
my subscriptions, and attend every Hĕyḵal gathering.’
The self-righteous man had a specially reserved seat,
so the other was standing apart. And he prayed
differently, saying, ‘My Elohim, do not desert me. I
have many failings and need strengthening so I may
overcome them and be a better man.’ ”
32 {vWHY said, “I assure you of this: The man who
benefited from his prayer was the second one, not the
first. This was because, though the first man had
many virtues, he was unable to recognize his failings.
The second man was reconciled with Elohim, while
the other was not. He who prays must be as one
looking into a mirror - not with the expectation of
seeing a gratifying reflection, but seeking an image
revealing his faults.”
33 “If a man put tinted glass before his eyes to
enhance his image, thus putting out things he does
not wish to see, he is not only a self-deceiver but a
fool unto himself. The charioteer does not overhaul
his chariot to seek the strong points, but to discover
the flaws; and if he did not put these right, he would
risk his life.”
34 When eventide came and {vWHY sat with the
emissaries, one of them said, “Aḏonai, we have given
up all we have to follow You, and sometimes we get
depressed.”
35 {vWHY said, “The blows life delivers are
strengthening ones, and without adversity men would
become weak in ruaḥ. The reward I can offer is small
compared with your rewards in glory, for here you are
small but in the shamayim you will be great. There,
the highest on Earth shall be lowest, and the lowliest
1688

BOOK OF KAILEDY

here shall be the exalted there. This, however, does
not follow as a natural sequence, but only providing
the challenge of life is met as it should be, and
surmounted.”
36 The following day, {vWHY took Kĕpha, Ya’aqoḇ
and Yoḥanan - three of the emissaries - to a cave high
up on the mountainside, where they remained in
meditation for three days. On the third day, while
seated in the cave, the others saw the whole body of
{vWHY exude a light and become radiant, the colors
being blue and white. They were astonished at such
an inflow of power, for no other body could have
contained it. Though manifesting in them also, it was
much weaker. The three with {vWHY covered their
eyes before the brilliance.
37 And Yoḥanan said, “Aḏonai, while the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh manifests in us as no more than a faint
blue glow seen only in total darkness, Your brilliance
is like that of the sun compared with the palest star.”
38 Kĕpha said, “It is good for us to have seen this, for
now we know how poorly we compare with You.”
39 {vWHY said, “I do not teach things without
purpose. The things I do are not beyond the reach of
anyone. But keep these things to yourselves. I shall
truly need all My power and strength to carry out the
task ahead. What must be done will be done, not as I
want it, but as the Father wants it. For now, I know the
path I must follow and the ordeal I must undergo.”
40 Coming down from the mountain, {vWHY saw
some talmidim and two emissaries in the midst of a
crowd which parted to let {vWHY through. He found
the emissaries trying to heal a man who was deaf and
dumb, but they could not, and the crowd was mocking
them.
41 Then {vWHY said, “The man’s ears are not fast,
neither is the tongue without speech, but the ruaḥ
within cannot use them.”
42 Thereupon He strengthened the ruaḥ of the
afflicted man with His, and the man fell to the ground,
1689

BOOK OF NATSARIM

foaming at the mouth and tearing at himself. Then the
crowd drew back from {vWHY in fear, while the man’s
father abused him. But soon the man on the ground
arose and walked away, and he could both hear and
talk.
43 Later, the talmidim asked {vWHY why He had
succeeded when they had failed. And He said,
“These things are done through the power of the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh, which is the Hand of HWHY. Men
have it according to their capacity to hold it. But
before it can come in, evil must be driven out. I do not
teach abstinence from evil for some purposeless end,
but to bring to men the recognition of their heritage.
All men were once sons of Elohim, but they became
illegitimate sons of Elohim without heritage. I come to
men so they may re-inherit and become true sons of
Elohim.”
44 One said, “Aḏonai, while You were away there
was another here who healed and did the same
things as You. But he was not one of us, and we
argued with him. He is a talmid of Shim’on the
Sorcerer, who does many strange things, and the
people listen to his words.”
45 {vWHY said, “Separate the words from the deeds,
but good is good whoever does it. Therefore, never
speak disparagingly of anyone who does good. If he
is not yet against Us, he may be for Us. Therefore, it
is unwise to become angry in haste.”

16 {vWHY departed from where He was and moved
over to the water in Yahuḏah across the Yardĕn. And
here too crowds gathered about Him to hear His
message. Many of the usual questions were asked
and similar answers given.
2 One man put this question to Him: “Great Teacher,
is it lawful according to the great Torah for a man to
put away his wife? For there are other laws
concerning this.”
3 {vWHY said, “What did one of the great lawgivers,
speaking with the authority of Elohim, say about this
1690

BOOK OF KAILEDY

matter?”
4 The man answered, “The Torah he gave permitted
a severance deed to be made, and with this the wife
is divorced.”
5 {vWHY said, “Such laws are needful while men are
without wisdom. I assure you it will not be so when
the Rule of Elohim comes. They are made for those
who cannot overcome differences by compassion
and understanding. Where there is no feeling, there
cannot be love. Divorce is decreed for the failures in
love.”
6 “Since the beginning, there have been male and
female, each needing the other for fulfillment and
spiritual flowering. For this reason, a man leaves his
parents and unites with a woman so the two become
one in flesh and ruaḥ. The flesh is easily parted, but
with the united Ruaḥ it is different. Therefore, when
two are joined together in the union of love, let no act
of man sever them from each other.”
7 “Fornication occurs in marriage as well as outside
it, for marriage is much more than the union of flesh.
And whoever divorces his wife and marries another
commits adultery in ruaḥ against the one who is his
true wife. Should a wife divorce her husband and
marry another, she too commits spiritual adultery.”
8 “Marriage has a much greater significance than
this depraved generation realizes, for it enters into
marriage thoughtlessly and irresponsibly, and then
cries, ‘Loose us from our obligations, for we have
failed and cannot stand the bonds of the covenant.’ ”
9 After this, a talmid came to {vWHY and said,
“Aḏonai, enlighten me. If there can be fornication in a
marriage baraḵ by tradition and kohĕn, do a man and
woman commit greater fornication if not baraḵ?”
10 {vWHY said, “Marriage is the blending of two
Ruaḥ; fornication is the joining of flesh. Nothing done
or not done changes this. But if a man and woman be
married in the sight of HWHY and not before a kohĕn,
let this union not be lightly put apart. For I assure you
1691

BOOK OF NATSARIM

that no future marriage baruḵ by kohĕn or otherwise
will be a marriage in ruaḥ; it will be no more than
fornication.”
11 The following morning, {vWHY and five talmidim
had not gone far along the road when a man came
running after them, saying, “Aḏonai, what must I do to
know the joys of immortality in glory? I know You
teach goodness, but though I do my best, I find it
difficult among so many pleasures.”
12 {vWHY said, “You have the Commandments of
Mosheh; keep these faithfully as interpreted by the
fullness of the Torah. But to these, two more are now
added which shall be just as faithfully obeyed: Act
towards others as you would have them act towards
you and love your neighbor as yourself.”
13 The man said, “If only I could be as good as You.”
14 {vWHY answered, “Do not call Me good, for no
man made in the mold of man is wholly good. If I were
not made in the same mold as man, I would not be
subjected to his tests and trials and, without
overcoming these, could not be wholly good either.”
15 When the man had gone, one of the talmidim who
came from beyond the Western Sea said, “I have
heard that three things only make men wholly good.
But You have many Qodesh Books which I cannot
read. Tell me of the things which are in them.”
16 {vWHY said, “Store these things in your heart, they
are sufficient for the day: Never utter curses against
HWHY or the powers about Him, nor speak immodestly
to exalt yourself. Do not act fraudulently, and never
exaggerate. Always maintain an even temper, and do
not act hastily. Never use violence unnecessarily, nor
do anything causing unnecessary sorrow. Avoid
anything to do with lewdness and obscenity. Commit
no slander and speak no gossip. Never make
mischief so strife is brought into the lives of others.
Tell no lies. Be humble without being servile and be
clean in all ways. Whatever you do to earn your
bread, do to the best of your ability. Fulfill all your daily
1692

BOOK OF KAILEDY

obligations, and in the time left to you, serve a cause
which is good. Add these to the teachings you have
heard, and you will live a good life.”
17 Another talmid said, “A good man soon loses his
friends.”
18 {vWHY replied, “No; goodness - like adversity winnows them.”
19 One of the other talmidim said, “It is very difficult
to live a life which is wholly good.”
20 {vWHY answered, “It is even more difficult to enter
into the greater life of the Ruaḥ.”
21 The words surprised those hearing them, but
{vWHY assured the talmidim about Him that it was
true, adding, “Nothing worthwhile is ever easily
gained.”
22 {vWHY continued, “Let all who can do so empty
themselves of evil. The deeds are outside, but the
thoughts are within. By striving hard and chastening
the flesh, not yielding to the call of its lusts, the soul
is strengthened by an inflow of spiritual food.”
23 Then {vWHY asked the talmidim with Him if all
understood that unless they could pass the tests of
the flesh, they could not know the shamayim. All
replied that they understood.
24 A talmid asked, “How long must men be subject to
death?”
25 {vWHY replied, “So long as women bear children.”
26 Another asked, “What is the food of the ruaḥ?”
27 {vWHY said, “The truly hungry man eats bitter
things and enjoys them; even so does the hungry
ruaḥ thrive on the bitterness of the world. The body is
not nourished by bitterness and therefore enjoys food
supplied by every healthful plant. If the ruaḥ is to be
made healthy, the body must be subdued; for either
the body is master or the ruaḥ is.”
28 One
of the women, Salome, who had
accompanied the talmidim, asked {vWHY, “Is it within
the Torah for a man to marry and yet not lie with his
wife?”
1693

BOOK OF NATSARIM

{vWHY answered, “It is never right to live falsely or
to dishonor a pledge. Always let whatever be done
accord with the intention declared.”
30 Salome said, “Aḏonai, when will the Rule of
Elohim come?”
31 {vWHY replied, “When women place greater value
on the treasures they hold, for men will strive harder
for gold than for brass. When man and woman cease
to pander to the flesh and become truly one in ruaḥ.
For of this I assure you: Unless man and woman exalt
the ruaḥ above the flesh, they will not know life in
glory.”
32 Another woman asked, “Who then shall know
eternal ḥai?”
33 {vWHY said, “All will have eternal life, but not all
will know it, while many will be found in a place of
sorrow.”
34 She said, “No woman can make a man good.”
35 And {vWHY replied, “Any woman can make a man
better.”
36 When they came to a place of rest, Philippos said,
“Aḏonai, teach us to understand our Father in the
shamayim. And if we know His nature, it will suffice.”
37 {vWHY answered, “I have been with you some
time, but still, many of you do not understand. I do not
speak of Myself, but as the mouthpiece of the Father.
Can the nature of a Father be much different from that
of His Bĕn’s?”
38 “I teach you about HWHY the Father, for you have
to carry My words to others, and, spoken thus, they
will understand. But He is not quite like earthly
fathers, for His wisdom is infinitely greater. Think of
an earthly father and magnify his greatness and
goodness, his wisdom and justice, his sense of
discipline and compassion a thousand times, and you
glimpse HWHY the Father hazily.”
39 One of the women, not yet a talmid, approached
the place where {vWHY sat, and said, “I have been
harshly treated by the Torah concerning a daughter’s
29

1694

BOOK OF KAILEDY

inheritance. How do You interpret it?”
40 {vWHY said, “I interpret all laws with mercy and
compassion, but justice must not be put aside in their
favor. It is written that if a man dies without fathering
a son, his inheritance shall become the daughter’s,
but his wife shall not be deprived of her portion. Yet
when there are sons, a daughter is not deprived of
her portion. Therefore, the inheritance should be
divided equally among sons and daughters.”
41 “All women should have a rightful portion at
marriage, but it would be unseemly for any woman to
contend with her kinsmen for it. No woman should
ever seek a husband because of what she may gain
from such marriage, for this makes her a deceiver,
denying him the joy of love. No woman should ever
snare a man into lust or seek a husband so she can
leave her father’s house, for this is a wrong against
the husband.”
42 “No woman having committed fornication should
ever go to a man as wife, for in giving herself cheaply
to one and dearly to another, she shames and insults
her husband. If she loved him, how could she say,
‘Give much for that which I freely bestowed on
another’? Better for her to say, ‘As with him, so with
you.’ ”
43 “A man built a house, taking care with the
decorating and its furnishings. Then, going to a friend,
he said, ‘Because of my affection for you, I will give
this house to you as a gift. I know this is not usual, but
I have so much affection for you that I willingly
disregard the common custom of men.’ Later, he built
another house and, taking the furnishings which were
no longer new from the first house, put them into the
second. Going to another friend, he said, ‘I have a
house which, because of my affection for you, I will
sell at the usual price with a yearly rental for the
furnishings.’ Now, for which of these friends did he
have the greatest affection? Would not the second
man justly feel he had been treated badly in relation
1695

BOOK OF NATSARIM

to the first? Would it not be fairer to have treated both
alike?”
44 “The Torah is to wear the clothes of purity, and to
absorb the words of the Qodesh Books is to be
anointed with wisdom. For the Qodesh Books of
Wisdom are weavers preparing the garments of
eternal life in glory. They are available to all and may
be either accepted or ignored.”
45 “The Reign of the shamayim is like a sovereign
giving a wedding feast, who, moving about among his
guests, notices a man without a wedding garment.
The sovereign says to him, ‘My friend, why did you
come here attired like this, when it makes you
completely out of place?’ The man can make no
answer, so the sovereign calls his servants and says,
‘Turn him out, for he does not fit in here.’ ”
46 “Let all men be just and merciful towards one
another, for all who are will not be overlooked in the
life to come. But those who act otherwise shall surely
suffer. Those who pander to people in high places, or
who distort the Torah of HWHY to suit their own ends
or twist them to serve unintended purposes, shall not
be overlooked at the accounting.”
47 “There are those who interpret the Torah narrowly,
so that, while not taking the clothes from the widow’s
back, they will take her house and milk cow and drive
the fatherless children from their home. They justify
themselves by saying, ‘This is the Torah. And was not
her husband a debtor?’ Many are the devious roads
followed by the hypocrites, for this is a wrongful
interpretation of the Torah.”
48 “The Qodesh Books of the Yahuḏim say that an
eye shall be taken for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, but
the words of the Torah must be interpreted with
justice. For if an eye be taken from he who put out
another’s, or a tooth from someone who has knocked
out the tooth of another, is the loss made good in this
manner? Or if a one-eyed man causes him with two
eyes to lose one, shall he be made blind and so suffer
1696

BOOK OF KAILEDY

a greater loss? Or if a man with two eyes causes a
man with one eye to be made blind, shall he lose
both?”
49 “Henceforth, let the loss be made good in silver or
through labor, for now the law of revenge shall be
overruled by the law of retribution. All laws shall now
be administered under the rule of recompense. All
these things I give you that they may be established
and added to the Torah, so that henceforth they be
used in judgments among the just.”
50 “I come to open the blind eyes of ignorance, to
rescue the captives confined in dungeons of delusion,
and to free men from the shackles of the flesh. I come
to quicken the dead in ruaḥ, to heal the wounds of
worldly woes, and to comfort the despairing.”
51 About this time, some of the Parashyim who
inclined towards {vWHY came to warn Him that
certain men of Hĕrodĕs sought to do Him harm,
advising Him to leave.
52 {vWHY said, “If anyone intends to report My
whereabouts to Hĕrodĕs, let him do so. But I will not
leave until the third day, when My work here will be
complete.”
53 He then went with His talmidim to Allon, where He
rested among the trees for seven days, teaching them
the secrets of hidden things.
54 On the seventh day, men of Qodesh came out of
Yahuḏah, and {vWHY said, “Beware of these, for they
betrayed their own fathers and pollute whatever is
clean.”
55 Then {vWHY and those with Him departed.

17 The talmidim and followers of {vWHY began to
assemble in Kephar Naḥum to make arrangements for
the journey to Yerushalayim. When {vWHY and some
of the twelve who were with Him came to the city, it
was the twelfth month. And the collector of taxes came
to Kĕpha and said, “Is your Aḏonai liable to pay the
dues?”
2 Kĕpha replied, “No, for He pays the tax imposed
1697

BOOK OF NATSARIM

on strangers, but He will not make issue over the
matter.”
3 So, three of the talmidim went down to the waters
and caught several large fish, which they sold in the
market. Then Kĕpha took the money to the collector
of taxes, who tested the pieces and found them good.
4 {vWHY was standing nearby, and, noticing how
adulterated money and coins below weight were
rejected, He said to His talmidim, “Be like the honest
coin testers, though testing men instead of money.
Weigh all things with care, using a fair set of scales.
Reject all which is impure or not what it should be,
keeping only that which is good.”
5 “As there are counterfeit coins, so are there
counterfeit deeds, and they are equally hard to detect.
Take people as you find them, but reserve judgment
until they have been tested. All men are friends in a
boat sailing before a fair wind, but when a squall
comes and it sinks, the true are divided from the
false.”
6 A man stopped {vWHY in the street and said,
“They say You know the Will of Elohim. What does
He require of me?”
7 {vWHY said, “Did not your father Mosheh say,
‘Hear, my people, for this is what your Elohim requires
of you: that you honor Him, following His path and
loving Him, serving Him with all your heart and soul,
and keeping His divine utterances and Torah’?”
8 About this time, Re’uḇĕn, son of Yaros, who had
followed {vWHY since the healing of his sister, came
to Him and said, “Aḏonai, my heart is troubled. For I
wish to marry, and if I do this, I cannot remain with
You.”
9 {vWHY said, “Life is a race where every day the
hurdles of decision have to be jumped. You must
decide one way or the other, and with finality, having
no regrets later. It is well you spoke, for the sun
should never set on an indecision. When marriage
and duty oppose each other, then a man must choose
1698

BOOK OF KAILEDY

duty and a woman marriage. But, when marriage can
be combined with a diminished obligation to duty, this
course is not denied to a man.”
10 “However, marriage is not the least of life’s
crosses, and any who enter it thinking otherwise fall
beneath the unexpected burden. If your wife is
chosen wisely, you will possess a treasure beyond
price, but if foolishly you are condemned to a burden
of sorrow. Go with My bireḵoth. Have many children
and bring them up in the Light. Thus, you will serve
best, and I leave My cause in good hands.”
11 {vWHY said to some talmidim later in the day, “In
the Qodesh Books it is written, ‘Bearer of good
tidings, go into the mountains and lift up your voice
with power, crying through all Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim: Hail your Elohim and your Deliverer.’ ”
12 {vWHY and His followers took a boat and came to
the outlet of the waters, where the others stayed
seven days while {vWHY fasted. After He returned,
the talmidim said, “Aḏonai, we are concerned, for You
spend too much time in solitude and fast too long;
surely this will harm You.”
13 {vWHY
replied, “When fasting is properly
undertaken it can do nothing except good. Also, the
body is like a pitcher which, containing water, must be
emptied before it will hold wine. So it is with the Ruaḥ
Ha’Qodesh. Did not Mosheh fast for forty days, during
which time the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh flowed into him so
his face shone before the people like a great light?
Such is the nature of the power, and because of its
brightness he had to veil it. Likewise with Ĕliyahu,
who fasted forty days. Do you think those two
suffered harm? Or did they benefit through a
strengthening of the ruaḥ?”
14 “This you must always remember: When the corn
is ripe for cutting, the harvesters come, and it is
gathered in; but though it die, many ears have ripened
on the stalk, and from these will spring other plants.
You are the ripening grain; go forth and sow the field
1699

BOOK OF NATSARIM

in which will grow plants bringing the Rule of Elohim
into being. For then men will be ruled with justice and
goodwill, the rich serving according to their
endowments, and no man will be idle or wasteful.”
15 “Now, the wickedness of men is like a canopy over
a garden, shutting out the fertilizing rain so it cannot
nourish the plants beneath; therefore, they wither
away. If the canopy remains, the ground becomes
bare and barren, yet it needs only the removal of the
canopy to make the ground blossom forth into
fruitfulness. Such is the nature of the power of the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh.”
16 One of the talmidim said, “We have seen that the
power is a miraculous thing, but the effort is beyond
many of us.”
17 {vWHY said, “That is the hair in the dough; apathy
must be overcome and effort expended.”
18 Kĕpha said, “We go to Yerushalayim. What if the
people call on You to lead them into battle? Surely
You will not ignore their cry.”
19 {vWHY said, “Oh Kĕpha, so long with Me, yet still
confusing the ways of HWHY with those of men. Taking
up the sword is the easy way, for it is more difficult to
peacefully change the hearts of men than to impose
a change by violence. Those who must resort to
violence are lesser men than those who convert
through example and teaching.”
20 “Is it not written in the Qodesh Books, ‘Those who
seek wisdom as others seek riches will certainly come
to an understanding of the ways of HWHY, and this
knowledge delivers them from the darkness of
ignorance’?”
21 During the heat of the day, {vWHY was invited into
a rich man’s house. And the man of many privileges
asked Him, “Why do You prefer to speak in the
alleyways and among the poor? Surely it would be
better to convert the influential people.”
22 {vWHY said, “I speak to those who listen, and they
are found among the poor. The rich are so busy
1700

BOOK OF KAILEDY

acquiring worldly wealth and chasing fleeting
pleasure that they have no time for more important
things. They are fattening geese waddling through
lush pastures, simply eating and sleeping in content,
unconcerned for the coming day when they
themselves will be consumed.”
23 The rich man said, “Where is the Reign of the
shamayim, and how do I get there?”
24 {vWHY said, “The road starts within yourself, but
to find it you must abide by the Torah as written in the
Books of Wisdom. For knowledge of the Torah
provides a true and clear picture of yourself. Just as
a mirror reflects back a true image, so does the Torah
when studied diligently. Let this be your guiding light:
Take no thought for tomorrow, whether it bring good
or bring evil; the cares of the day are sufficient, and
the Torah will sustain you.”
25 The man said, “Would it not be more profitable if
You showed how to extend our days?”
26 {vWHY said, “What benefit would a longer life
bestow? For the tyrants, it would mean more time to
oppress the weak. For the evildoers, it would mean
more time to indulge their wickedness, while the
hypocrites would spawn more sorrow. The money
seekers would have more time for exploitation, and
the indolent more time to rest. A longer life could only
add to the misery of the world. Life as it is suffices for
those who wish to use it profitably. If men cannot find
the road to righteousness during the time they have,
then they never will.”
27 After this, {vWHY and the talmidim set out for
Yerushalayim, passing through the borders of
Yahuḏah and over the Yardĕn by way of Peria.
{vWHY led the way with six of the twelve, but as they
proceeded, many of those who followed became
afraid and held back.
28 Noticing what was happening, {vWHY called all the
twelve to Him and said, “We will soon be arriving in
Yerushalayim, and there I must undergo the ordeal I
1701

BOOK OF NATSARIM

am taking upon Myself for the sake of mankind. I am
the sacrifice to their apathy, but I depend upon you to
play your parts, spreading the message of hope and
the coming Rule of Elohim among men. For now, I
come as promised; surely the people will no longer
doubt.”
29 Then the brothers Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan
requested a favor of {vWHY, saying, “Permit us to sit
one on either side of You when You reach the state
of glory.”
30 {vWHY said, “You do not understand what you ask,
or the consequences. You cannot drink from My cup
of sorrow or undergo My ordeal. I must carry My stake
alone, for there is none with whom I can share the
burden of My heart.”
31 When they insisted that they would be ready for
anything, {vWHY said to them, “If you remain
steadfast in the cause, you will drink from the same
cup and undergo much suffering. But whether you
share My future state is something over which I have
no control. Not all are drawn into the same
companionship.”
32 As {vWHY approached the city gate at Yeriḥo, a
large crowd gathered, among which was a humble
and honest person named Miḵah, who worked hard
to support a large family. He was anxious to see
{vWHY but being rather short and unable to see over
the heads of the people, he ran ahead and climbed a
sycamore tree along the route.
33 When {vWHY came to the tree, He stopped
underneath and called to Miḵah, “Come down, for
today I will be your guest.”
34 The man climbed hastily down and welcomed
{vWHY with pleasure. But those standing by
expressed disapproval, saying, “We expected this to
be a great and good Man, yet He associates with men
like this who are poor and not notorious for good
deeds.”
35 {vWHY said, “The conscientious physician goes
1702

BOOK OF KAILEDY

among those requiring his care and attention, not
among those who have no need of him. If you ordered
your lives according to this principle, they would be
more beneficial to you in the long run.”
36 After resting in the city during the heat of the day,
{vWHY left Yeriḥo with His talmidim, followed by many
people. Outside the gate of departure, a blind beggar
sat in the dust by the roadside. And hearing the name
{vWHY on the tongues of the people, he cried out as
{vWHY went by, “Bĕn of Dawiḏ, have pity on me.”
Many of the people, hearing this, tried to silence him.
But the beggar would not stop and continued shouting
and oft repeating the words “Bĕn of Dawiḏ.”
37 Though He had passed, {vWHY stopped and sent
a talmid back to bring the beggar to Him. When they
came, the talmid leading the beggar, {vWHY said to
the one who had been shouting out, “What do you
expect Me to do for you?”
38 The beggar replied, “Great Healer, if You would
only help me to see again, I would be happy.”
39 {vWHY said, “Unfruitful happiness cannot be made
an end in life, but your affliction has served its
purpose.”
40 Then {vWHY placed His hands over the man’s
eyes and told him to sit no more by the roadside, but
to walk with the people.
41 About two miles from Yerushalayim they came to
a place called Bĕyth Anyah, close to the Mount of
Olives, where there were many fig trees. Calling two
of His talmidim to Him, {vWHY said, “Go into the
village just ahead, and there, at the first house, you
will see a man standing by his doorway with a pitcher
beside him. Go and ask him for a drink of water, and
say, ‘The Aḏonai comes.’ He will then give you a colt
which is tethered nearby. And two men will ask you
who it is for, and you must answer, ‘It is for {vWHY.’ ”
42 When the colt was brought to {vWHY, some cloaks
were laid over its back, and {vWHY mounted. Then,
some men having gone before, the people strewed
1703

BOOK OF NATSARIM

the road with flowers and brushwood.
43 And many shouted, “ha’Mashiaḥ comes. Hail to
He who represents Elohim. Hail to the day that
witnesses the One who will rule in the name of our
father Dawiḏ.” Many others cried, “Behold the
Deliverer,” while other people shouted, “Come and
see the vindicated Sovereign.”
44 Among the crowd were some who said, “This is
not a fighting Man mounted on a warhorse, but a
humble Man on a female colt.” Many mocked, while
some said, “It is only a sorcerer on a mare.”
45 That was the manner in which {vWHY came to
Yerushalayim. But night being close, He sought
shelter at a house just outside the city.
46 The following day, {vWHY went to the Great
Hĕyḵal of the Yahuḏim and, going around it, came to
the part where a fire was always maintained for the
burnt offerings, and payment was made for its use.
Here was the place where the father of Yoḥanan had
been slain. Outside this was a hall where money was
changed for those going in, the Parashyim not
permitting this to be done within the courtyard.
47 Seeing some men carrying vessels, {vWHY said to
them, “Surely you know it is written that the Hĕyḵal
shall not be made a thoroughfare.”
48 They turned on Him, saying, “Where have You
been, and who are You to rebuke us?” Whereupon
there was an outbreak of fighting between those with
{vWHY and others.
49 {vWHY also overturned the tables of the
moneychangers, saying, “You are just as bad, for you
turn the House of Elohim into a marketplace.”
50 When the Hĕyḵal guards came to restore order,
they said to {vWHY, “We should kill You for this.”
51 {vWHY replied, “Destroy this Hĕyḵal and in three
days it will rise again.”
52 They, not understanding, answered, “The Hĕyḵal
has stood for long and took forty-six years to build. If
You say it could be built in three days, You are a fool.”
1704

BOOK OF KAILEDY

They did not know {vWHY referred to a Hĕyḵal not
made by hands.
53 Going outside to the place of healing where many
lay under the trees, {vWHY went among them. And
because of the great power which was in Him, He
excelled all other healers.
54 Seeing this, some young men shouted, “Praise
HWHY our Elohim who has sent us the Bĕn of Dawiḏ.”
55 Hearing this, a number of kohenim came to {vWHY
and said, “Are You going to cause some disturbance?
Put a stop to these things they are saying.”
56 {vWHY answered, “Words of wisdom will issue
from the mouths of babes. This is written in the
Qodesh Books. Read them and you will learn much
more.” He then returned to Bĕyth Anyah.
57 The kohenim and law-scribes held a long
discussion about {vWHY, for they knew the mood of
the people and foresaw trouble. There was much
dispute as to who He was and what He claimed to be,
some saying one thing and some another.

18 The next day {vWHY returned to Yerushalayim
with three of the emissaries, and while within the
precincts of the Great Hĕyḵal some scribes and
counselors of the Hĕyḵal came up to Him and said, “By
whose authority and by what right do You behave as
You do?”
2 {vWHY said, “Before answering your question, let
Me ask you one. When Yoḥanan immersed in water,
was this divinely inspired, or did it originate in the
minds of men?”
3 This was not a question they could answer, for if
they replied, “It was divinely inspired,” {vWHY could
justly say, “Why then did you not listen to him?” If they
replied, “It originated with men,” it would arouse the
hostility of the people who believed Yoḥanan to be
divinely inspired.
4 When they declined to answer, {vWHY said,
“Neither need I answer you.”
5 A kohĕn said to {vWHY, “Tell us who You really
1705

BOOK OF NATSARIM

are.”
6 And He answered, “I am the Bĕn of Elohim and
the Servant of Man who, of Himself, can do nothing,
but being filled with the power of Him who
overshadows Me, One to whom all things are
possible.”
7 The kohĕn said, “The Bĕn of Elohim is not
unknown to us, and the Servant of Man will not come
as You have done, though we cannot understand this
Name. Some of the people say You are ha’Mashiaḥ
who will deliver us and reign over us, but He will come
with manifest power.”
8 {vWHY said, “This is a night of ignorance, and I
come declaring the Way of Light. Whoever believes
in Me does not serve Me but serves with Me. He is
My brother in the cause of Elohim. He who sees Me
sees the reflection of He who inspires Me. I am the
Light of the World. If anyone hears My words but
chooses to ignore them, I am not his judge, for I am
not come to judge men but to guide them. The Light
will not be with you for long, so hasten to it, lest you
be left in darkness.”
9 The kohenim said among themselves, “Perhaps
He is harmless.”
10 Going into the courtyard where many people were
gathered, {vWHY stood in a corner and spoke to any
who would listen. And it was here He told this parable:
11 “A man planted a vineyard, equipping it with all
things necessary for winemaking. Then he leased it
and left to live elsewhere. After the vintage season,
the owner sent a servant to the tenants to collect the
rent. But they laid hands on him and, after beating him
up, sent him on his way empty-handed. The owner
sent another, who was treated even worse, while the
third man was killed.”
12 “When no one else would go, the owner decided
to send his eldest son, reasoning that the tenants
would respect his authority. However, when the
eldest son came, the tenants decided that if he were
1706

BOOK OF KAILEDY

dead, no one else would dare to come. So, they killed
him and threw the body into a pit. Now, do you think
the tenants’ reasoning was sound? Of course, the
owner came with those who meted out justice and,
having put the tenants to death, gave the lease of the
vineyard to others.”
13 {vWHY also told other parables, and when the selfrighteous ones and false Parashyim realized that
most were directed against them, they considered
ways to silence Him. But as He was popular with the
people, they decided it would be better to leave Him
alone.
14 {vWHY taught that the greatest enemies of man
and the greatest opposition to the coming Rule of
Elohim were not the obvious evildoers and criminals,
but the hypocrites, self-deceivers and self-centered.
Those are the true enemies of men - the festering evil
in their midst. Yet, they cannot see themselves for
what they are and have many ways of justifying
themselves.
15 For {vWHY said of those, “They sit before wellfilled tables, condemning the crimes of those who are
hungry. They sleep on soft beds and wallow in worldly
luxuries, but their hearts are closed, and their faces
hardened towards those who steal and even murder.
Yet I tell you, their own thoughts conceive and
engender much greater wrongs. Neither are those
who associate with them free from guilt.”
16 Going to an open space beyond the Great Hĕyḵal,
{vWHY addressed those who believed in His cause,
saying, “Abiding by the things I have taught you will
bring knowledge of Truth, and Truth will set you free.”
17 Some replied, “We are of the stock of Aḇraham
and have never been enslaved to any man. How can
You state we will be made free?”
18 {vWHY said, “Anyone following an evil course is a
slave. There are men who are enslaved to their
desires, and others enslaved to unnatural cravings.
There are those enslaved to their weaknesses, and
1707

BOOK OF NATSARIM

others to their fears and doubts. That is why I say I
come to set you free.”
19 “I know you are from the stock of Aḇraham, but
you do him no credit in seeking to kill those whose
teachings disturb you. Why must you listen only to
those who tell you pleasing things, when there is
greater benefit to be gained from those who tell things
which disturb or displease? I have no time to go
around praising the good; there is too much badness
to be exposed.”
20 The people said, “We know our fathers and are of
their blood, and we know our Father who reigns in the
shamayim.”
21 {vWHY said, “If HWHY were your Father, you would
all love Me as a Brother. Can you understand the
things I say, or are they beyond your grasp?”
22 Not all the Parashyim were opposed to {vWHY,
only a few allying themselves with the Hĕrodians
because of Him. One of the latter came to {vWHY
trying to trap Him by asking, “Aḏonai, Your sincerity
is established, and Your impartiality known. Help us,
for this is the time of taxing. Shall the Hĕyḵal tax be
paid to Elohim or to Kaisar?”
23 {vWHY said, “Show Me the coins you use to pay
the tax.” And one was given to Him. {vWHY held it up
and asked, “Whose likeness and inscription appear
on the coin?”
24 They said, “It is Kaisar’s.”
25 {vWHY said, “Do not give to Elohim the things
which are rightly Kaisar’s, nor to Kaisar the things
which are rightly Elohim’s.”
26 The next question was asked by one who believed
in bodily renewal after death. And he said, “Aḏonai of
the Torah, Mosheh handed down laws to govern our
lives, and one states that when a man dies, his
brother should marry his wife, providing she is without
child. Now, if there are seven brothers, the first
marries and dies, and so his brother marries the
widow, she being childless. The same happens down
1708

BOOK OF KAILEDY

through all seven, so when the last dies, she is still
left childless until she too dies. Now, when all rise to
life at the resurrection, which one can rightfully claim
the woman as wife, when she has been legally
married to all seven?”
27 {vWHY said, “By believing in bodily renewal, you
start with a false premise and have no understanding
of the nature of the ruaḥ. Where death is overcome,
marriage does not conform to earthly laws, which are
made to mitigate the weaknesses of men. Tell Me,
with which one did the woman’s ruaḥ blend, and with
which was there only a union of flesh?”
28 {vWHY said, “Concerning the awakening of the
dead, do not the Qodesh Books declare there is only
an Elohim of the living? This is true, and those who
believe otherwise are in error. When all life is
supported by the arm of HWHY, how can He be the
Elohim of the dead?”
29 Many people believed in {vWHY and had faith in
His teachings, for they said among themselves,
“Would ha’Mashiaḥ show us any greater proofs than
this Man?”
30 Because of the things said and done by many
concerning {vWHY, those who held power, fearing a
disturbance, sent guards to seize Him.
31 But He said to the captain, “I am here for a few
days, and then I must go, following the path of My
obligation. Seek Me then, for I will be in a place
beyond your reach. I follow a chosen path, and none
may follow. We each have a duty, but you have
discretion whether to take Me or not. My frailties say,
‘Go with Him,’ but My heart calls Me to duty.”
32 The captain of the guard said, “Whom do You
serve so dutifully?”
33 {vWHY replied, “I serve HWHY.”
34 Then the captain said, “The kohenim serve HWHY,
and You are not a kohĕn. And it is said You call
Yourself the Servant of Man, but who is He?”
35 {vWHY answered, “The service rendered by
1709

BOOK OF NATSARIM

kohenim is meaningless unless it also serves man.
For service in the cause of Elohim is likewise service
in the cause of man. Can your sword arm serve one
master and your shield arm another?”
36 The captain said, “Aḏonai, I can see You are a
Man dedicated to duty. Whether Your cause be just
or unjust, whether You be friend or foe, it is not within
my understanding to know. But a man whose heart is
ruled by the demands of duty I can understand. I will
tell those who sent me that shortly You leave for a
distant place where none can follow, and they will
leave You alone.”
37 When those who sent to have {vWHY taken heard
this, they said, “Perhaps He goes to the Yawanites or
the islands in the sea, therefore we will ignore Him.”
38 {vWHY went and rested among the columns of
Shelomoh, and, while there, some people came and
asked why He did not declare Himself and reveal He
was ha’Mashiaḥ and HWHY’s Anointed, the Promised
One from the stock of Dawiḏ.
39 {vWHY said, “My works and words declare Me and
establish My Title. Those who heed My message
enter the proper fold, and a good shepherd protects
His flock, seeing none goes astray or is taken by
wolves. Though these are My first care, I seek to bring
all men into the fold best suited for them. And I am
prepared to die if thereby I can bring men into the fold
leading to the fields of everlasting ḥai.”
40 “The deeds whereby men save their lives on Earth
may cost them a life in glory, but whoever lays down
his life in the cause of Elohim shall surely know
eternal ḥai. I come to sow strife among men, so they
may be roused from the sleep of apathy. I come to
strengthen the poor, so they may take heart and
throw off the yoke imposed by the privileged.”
41 “This is My message for the wealthy: Enjoy your
ill-gotten goods, console yourselves with comfort, and
buy the fickle goodwill of men. Make merry while you
may, close your eyes to the harshness of reality, for
1710

BOOK OF KAILEDY

the day will surely come when your body weakens,
the pleasures pall, and you glimpse the dark doorway
ahead. Be certain that the only welcome you will get
on the other side is from Ruaḥ of darkness who will
escort you to a proper place in their dismal abode.”
42 Because of his condemnation of the rich who
misused their wealth - and nearly all of them did - the
kohenim were angry with {vWHY, for they depended
on rich patrons. They said, “Who are You to revile
Your betters when You are no more than a loudtongued beggar?”
43 {vWHY said, “Is it not written in the Qodesh Books,
‘Disregard outward appearances, for these may
conceal either treasure or garbage; only HWHY knows
what really lies within. The body is only the outer
covering shed at death. What matters is the likeness
of the ruaḥ it clothes’?”
44 One of the kohenim said, “You claim to save
through immersion - a cleansing by fire and water but, while these are both great purifiers, how can they
deliver man from sin?”
45 {vWHY said, “Water and fire are purifiers of earthly
things, but I tell you that unless men be cleansed in
the waters of contrition and tested in the fires of
adversity, they cannot enter the Reign of the
shamayim.”
46 The kohenim said, “Where, then, is the Reign of
the shamayim?”
47 {vWHY
answered, “Beyond Earth lie the
Dominions of Ruaḥ, and therein are the Reign of the
shamayim and the Principality of Evil - places of light
and glory, and of darkness and despair.”
48 Another kohĕn said, “Tell us about the ruaḥ.”
49 {vWHY said, “A vintner asking for wine! Does Mine
so much excel yours?”
50 Then He continued, “Men understand the things
wherein they place their hearts - if it be in worldliness,
they know worldly things; but if it be in spirituality, they
know things of the ruaḥ. He who is ever watchful of
1711

BOOK OF NATSARIM

the wind never sows, and he who fixes his eyes on
the clouds never reaps. The wind blows where it will,
and, though recognizing its sound, no man knows
from whence it comes or whither it goes.”
51 “For the best advice on worldly matters, I would go
to a worldly-wise man; but I am a spiritually-wise Man.
Therefore cannot you take notice when I talk of things
I know? That I gain nothing from My teachings is
obvious, for My clothes and manner of life bear
witness to this.”
52 Nearby, a rich man stood listening. And now he
said, “Have You never bought a tree for silver and
having worked it, sold the product of your hands for
gold? If a man has seed, should he let it rot? Is it not
better to plant the seed so it yields an increase? And
is not the sower entitled to this?”
53 {vWHY said, “The laborer is worthy of his hire, and
he who sows is entitled to reap the increase. But
remember, the sown seed does not grow through
human effort alone. It requires rain and sun, and the
soil must give up its goodness. These things come
from HWHY as gifts to man. Why, then, should man
deny Elohim’s participation? HWHY says, ‘As My share
is above My needs, give it to My little ones,’ and
should not the sower do the same?”
54 “Therefore I say, he who fails to support the
underprivileged in obedience to HWHY’s wishes
defrauds Elohim of His rightful due for what He has
done. For cannot even an earthly partner decree what
shall be done with the profit from this participation? I
assure you; no man has ever yet made a profit wholly
through his own efforts. And fraud perpetrated on the
Most High Elohim will not be overlooked.”
55 The rich man said, “Your words sound well, but the
Qodesh Books say the donkey is loaded according to
its strength. The more I give in charity, the more I am
harried by beggars. Even if I gave all I have, it would
fail to satisfy.”
56 {vWHY said, “If your wealth is so burdensome,
1712

BOOK OF KAILEDY

then sell all you have and give the proceeds to good
causes. It is not wholly good to give charity, for this is
like cutting the thornweed which quickly springs up
again from the root. It is more worthy to dig up the root
of poverty.”
57 Then
the rich man said, “Having my
responsibilities and a large household, I am caught
between the millstones. For is it not said in the Books
of Wisdom, ‘No man should disregard his
responsibilities’?”
58 {vWHY said, “The Torah brings all things to a
balance of moderation. Does it not say, ‘It is sufficient
to feed and clothe the womenfolk modestly, caring for
their needs but ensuring they are not spoilt by
idleness’? It suffices to provide your sons with
learning and skill, and your daughters with their
dowries. There is nothing more you can give them, for
above this you harm them with luxury. A poor man
cannot spoil his family with overindulgence, but
precautions against this are not the least of the rich
man’s burden.”
59 When it was close to eventide, {vWHY was in
another place. And He said to a few people who were
gathered about Him, “I am the Fountain of Ḥai. If any
thirst, let him come to Me, and his thirst will be
quenched. For is it not written, ‘Streams of living
waters will pour out from springs within Him and
overwhelm the seats of the deceitful’? The same
waters will strengthen the ruaḥ and wash away
falsity.”
60 {vWHY was referring to the power of the Ruaḥ
which filled Him as no other man had been filled.
61 Some of the people said, “Surely, this is
ha’Mashiaḥ,” while others said, “Yes, He is HWHY’s
Anointed.” There were many disputes concerning
Him.
62 {vWHY said, “You are betrayed by those who
preach one thing and practice another. They delight
in being seen in prominent places and think the
1713

BOOK OF NATSARIM

misguided adulations poured on them signify
greatness. Foolish people follow their ways and copy
their pretensions. These people are not least among
the hidden woemakers.”
63 “You are deceived by hypocrites and the selfrighteous and led into error by the self-justified. Those
who should watch over you set snares for your feet.
And many are those who say, ‘Heed my words but not
my deeds.’ Those who set themselves up over the
people or who attain positions of authority freely eat
the fruits of success but avoid the responsibility of
setting an example of goodness. I tell you, cast these
people out.”
64 “Instead of standing aside, wringing your hands
and crying, ‘Woe, for the world is all wrong,’ bestir
yourselves. For I tell you, HWHY will not do things you
are too apathetic to do for yourselves. They who
desire to be with Me in My Reign must stand firm,
holding fast to My cause through tribulation and trial.”
65 Just then, some Parashyim came by, and {vWHY
knew them to be false to their declared beliefs. So,
He called out, “Hear Me, you hypocrites and
deceivers. Are you not among those declaring that
any man swearing by the Hĕyḵal is not bound by his
oath, but any swearing by the Hĕyḵal gold is bound?
Fools, which is the greater - the gold or the Hĕyḵal
containing it? Or you say that those swearing by the
altar are not bound by their oath, but those who swear
by whatever is upon it are bound. Which is the greater
- the offering or the altar consecrating it?”
66 “You concern yourselves with selling incense and
the small profits from herbs and perfumed candles,
while overlooking more important matters. These
petty things can be delegated to others. Or do you
find weightier aspects of the Torah - such as mercy,
justice and truth-finding - beyond your abilities? If so,
then you deceive the people. Your minds are fixed on
little things and cannot grasp greater ones. You strain
a fly from the wine bowl but leave the wasp.”
1714

BOOK OF KAILEDY

The next day, {vWHY spoke outside the Gate of
the Nations, and, while there, a law-scribe asked Him,
“Which is the supreme Commandment?”
68 {vWHY answered, “None is supreme for all men.
But for you the supreme one is, ‘Listen, Oh people;
the Elohim whom you worship is the sole Elohim.
Love Him with all your heart, all your mind and all your
strength.’ The next one is, ‘Love your neighbor as
yourself.’ ”
69 The law-scribe said, “You speak well and speak
truthfully in saying there is only one Elohim having no
equal. I believe that if a man loves Him
wholeheartedly, and his neighbor as himself, it serves
Him better than all the burnt offerings which go up in
smoke.”
70 {vWHY said, “If these are not empty words, you will
know the glory in the Reign of the Ruaḥ.”
71 One of those there said, “I pray thrice daily, fasting
on the second and the fifth days. Does this prove my
love of Elohim?”
72 {vWHY said, “Words alone or deeds done which
benefit no other or purposeless restrictions do not
indicate true love of Elohim. They are sops to
weakness. These, being easy, deny such love its true
expression. Show your love of Elohim by working in
His cause and making the world a better place. Do
something requiring action where you may risk
unpopularity or scorn.”
73 Two dignitaries of the Hĕyḵal stopped to listen,
and {vWHY, pointing to them, said, “Beware of those
who ostentatiously display themselves, seeking the
acclaim or homage of others. From whence does their
wealth come? They prey on widows and enrich
themselves at the expense of others. Hardship,
providing it passes their door, is their friend. Yet these
hypocrites put on a great show of righteousness, but
one day they will be seen for what they really are
inside.”
74 Entering the Hĕyḵal, {vWHY stood near one of the
67

1715

BOOK OF NATSARIM

offering chests, watching as people dropped money
into the chest of their choice. Many rich people
contributed large amounts, but most did this so all
could see. Then a poor widow came, and she gave
only two small brass coins.
75 Seeing this, {vWHY said to one of the talmidim
beside Him, “Did you see what the poor widow gave?
Surely there is a lesson here. I can assure you that
the offering of this woman is more acceptable than
any of the others, for she gave all she had, while
others gave only a fraction of their wealth. Tonight,
they will eat well, but she will go hungry.”
76 “Giving is meaningless unless it entails some real
sacrifice. What the rich gave were only sops to their
consciences. When arriving in a town hungry, weary
and travel-stained, do we seek food and shelter from
the rich or from the poor? Is it not the rich, who have
so much to give, who turn us from their doors, while
the poor, who have little, provide hospitality?”
77 Later, one of the emissaries said to {vWHY, “When
will all the evil be purged from the Earth?”
78 {vWHY said, “When it is no longer spawned in the
hearts of men. There is nothing wrong with the Earth
that men cannot put right. Do not expect help from
Elohim, but be men enough to fight your own battles.
No easy time lies ahead of you, for wherever you go,
your loyalty to My cause will bring the hatred of men
upon you. Nevertheless, remain steadfast through all
the trials and tribulations lying ahead, and you will be
glorified in immortality.”
79 The emissaries said, “Aḏonai, can such things
indeed happen to us?”
80 {vWHY said, “Be sure they will.”
81 They said, “Surely our tree of suffering will not
bear bitter fruit or even prove fruitless.”
82 {vWHY answered, “No; the sapling will grow
strongly. From the tree will arise another teaching
and, out of this, a confusion of beliefs, each striving
for its own advantage. There will be unprofitable
1716

BOOK OF KAILEDY

doctrines and viciousness, cruelties and intolerance,
with many persecutions, all done in My Name. They
will corrupt and falsify My teachings to serve their own
ends. Hypocrisy will rule the hearts of men, and few
will follow even the beliefs of their own hearts. These
things must be, for they reside in the natures of men.
But under the Rule of Elohim, they will be changed.”
83 {vWHY said to those with Him, “I will be slain as
were Yoḥanan and his father, for I am feared because
I may claim a right to rule from the sovereigns who
were before Dawiḏ. The burden of My death lies
heavily, but it is undertaken with purpose so men can
be saved from evil. And what I do will speed the day
of their deliverance.”
84 “I do not ride the winds, but have mapped the road
ahead. No man can ever enter the shamayim unless
wearing the clothes of the shamayim. The world
knows the ways of the world and welcomes worldly
things, but the ruaḥ knows the ways of the ruaḥ and
welcomes spiritual things. Serve one or the other; no
man can serve both.”

19 When {vWHY spent the days in Yerushalayim, the
nights were spent on the slopes of the Mount of Olives.
And the talmidim built shelters close to a place where
there was an oil press.
2 However, one day at eventide, {vWHY went to the
house of Shim’on the Pure, where some women who
were followers of His were living. Though the talmidim
were given food, little was said to them; for, they
being strangers, the people in the house were
suspicious, and Shim’on lay on a cushion across from
{vWHY.
3 After they had eaten and were talking together, a
woman came from a house nearby. She was veiled
and carried an alabaster jar. Now, this was Miryam of
Maḡdala, whose father had been a merchant, but he
disowned her, for she had lived with a centurion
serving in the army of Rome. When he returned to his
lawful wife, Miryam had kept herself by singing in the
1717

BOOK OF NATSARIM

taverns of Galil.
4 The woman unsealed the jar and poured a sweetscented oil over the head of {vWHY, seeing which
some of those present were indignant, saying, “What
a waste, when this could have been sold for a lot of
money which would have benefited the poor.”
5 {vWHY said, “Leave her alone. There is little point
in being angry with her when all she has done is to
honor Me. You can help the poor whenever you like,
but I will not be here much longer.”
6 Turning to Miryam of Maḡdala, He said, “Why do
you pay Me this honor? For the cost to you must have
been great.”
7 Someone said, “The price was easily obtained.”
8 [Miryam said to {vWHY, “Sire, I am she whom You
saw in Paneas, for when women reviled me, I came
to You and said, ‘Forgive my sins.’ When You asked
wherein I had sinned, I said, ‘By loving while unwed.’
Thereupon You said, ‘That of itself is no wrongdoing
and demonstrates greater love than that of many who
say, “The price of my love is marriage.” ’ You said I
gave the greatest form of love any woman can give,
for, being virgin, I went to my love without the security
of marriage, seeking in no way to bind the man.”
9 {vWHY said, “With this man you did no wrong, and
though your love was not baruḵ in the eyes of men,
providing you loved truly, it was pure and sanctified in
the sight of Elohim. The man, however, is not without
sin in this manner and will surely be called to a proper
accounting. And though since leaving him you have
done wrong; he bears his portion of the guilt. You
chose freely not to be a woman reserved for marriage
- a choice you could rightly make. Only should you
now seek marriage, saying, ‘Though I love you too,
now I have my price,’ would you be doing wrong, this
being committed against Elohim, love and your
husband.”]
10 Miryam said, “Sire, I have been a sinner but have
not sinned this last year, nor shall I again. Should I
1718

BOOK OF KAILEDY

love once more, I will not now claim the rights of
marriage which I once repudiated.”
11 {vWHY said, “Love is a blending of spirits, and not
a union of flesh. Woe to those whose love compounds
discord in the place where love is fulfilled. If these
things confound you, read the Books of Wisdom.”
12 During this time, those in positions of power were
taking counsel as to how they might take {vWHY by
guile and deliver Him to the Romans. For they feared
a rising of the people during the Great Festival of the
Yahuḏim.
13 Now, Yahuḏah of Qeriyoth, son of Shim’on, who
had followed Yosĕph the Just before coming to
{vWHY and becoming one of the twelve apostles,
sought for ha’Mashiaḥ who would deliver the
Yahuḏim. This he now believed to be another, not
{vWHY; and he therefore sought to have {vWHY held
during the festival. Yahuḏah, unlike the other
emissaries, was of the Yahuḏim; therefore, he was
unrestricted.
14 Yahuḏah went to the Council and said, “My Aḏonai
performs signs and fulfills neḇuoth which speak to the
hearts of the people. Therefore, might they not
proclaim Him in the coming days?”
15 The Council said, “The people are ripe for revolt,
and troublemakers are many. We will take this One
also. Reveal Him to us, and we will hold Him. And for
the service you will be paid in silver.”
16 One who sat in the Council sent a warning to
{vWHY, saying, “Leave Bĕyth Anyah and go to
Ephrayim.”
17 But {vWHY returned a reply which said, “Things
are as they should be, and the neḇuoth will be
fulfilled.”
18 On the first day of the festival, when lambs were
being sacrificed, the talmidim came to {vWHY and
asked where the Pesaḥ meal should be eaten. {vWHY
chose two of these and sent them away with this
instruction:
1719

BOOK OF NATSARIM

“Go down and cross the stream flowing eastward
from the city, at a place where there is a covered well.
There you will see a man seated with a water pitcher
beside him. Say to this man, ‘We thirst but need more
than water.’ He will then arise, saying nothing, and
you must follow him at a distance. And when you see
him enter a house, go in also, giving this message to
the owner: ‘We come from the Aḏonai.’ He will then
show you a room where you must make
preparations.”
20 Now, the house belonged to Oḇĕḏ, who was nigh
four score years of age, whose brother was Barnaḇah
the Elder. In an upper room, the talmidim prepared
the Pesaḥ meal. And when it was evening, {vWHY
came with the twelve emissaries and three others, but
only thirteen ate with Him.
21 After He had taken His place at the table and all
were seated, {vWHY said, “I have very much wanted
to keep this Pesaḥ with you because it is the last
before My ordeal. And I tell you, I will not share
another with you until My purpose is fulfilled.”
22 Then He took the cup before Him and drank,
saying, “Blood is the ḥai of men, while this is the ḥai
of the grape sacrificed for men, so it is a fitting and
worthy symbol of He who offers His ḥai for men. I will
not taste wine again until the Rule of Elohim is
established.”
23 He then passed the cup to Yoḥanan, and, taking
the bread, He gave thanks and broke it, saying, “This
represents My body, which will be broken as an
example to the sons and daughters of men; for all
must freely sacrifice for others. As you eat of the
bread, which is sacrifice, so shall you eat the Bread
of Eternal Ḥai. For without sacrifice, there is no ḥai.
Henceforth, call it Remembrance Bread and
Remembrance Wine; when meeting afterwards, do
this and remember Me. But remember also the
sacrifices which must be made for the cause of
Elohim.”
19

1720

BOOK OF KAILEDY

{vWHY said, “The sacrifice is ready. The hand of
the betrayer rests upon this table and dips in the bowl.
But this is as it should be. Take the cup and drink
again; let it seal a new Covenant signed with the
blood of One who is dedicated to the cause of men
and their deliverance from darkness into ḥai eternal.”
25 Those about the table began to speculate among
themselves as to who would do such a thing. But
{vWHY bid them be silent, saying, “There is no evil
lacking some seeds of goodness which, if extracted,
can be nurtured into great trees. A man, finding his
store bag of seed grain is moldy, does not throw it out,
but searches to find the good grains; and from these
he grows a crop which ripens to goodness.”
26 They then began disputing among themselves as
to who was first in precedence among them. And
{vWHY said, “Those with worldly authority derive
satisfaction from declaring themselves benefactors of
the people, but the benefit they seek is that accruing
to themselves. Let this not be so among you, the ones
seeking least for themselves and giving most being
those taking precedence.”
27 After a while, {vWHY said, “My friends, I shall be
with you only a short time now.”
28 Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, where do You go? Are You
deserting us? Can we not come with You?”
29 {vWHY said, “You cannot follow Me immediately
on this path, and to accompany Me would serve no
purpose. But later on you can follow Me. Do not
become fainthearted, for if you believe in what I have
taught you, believe also that I will be guided and
strengthened.”
30 “I shall prepare a place for you in the Reign of
HWHY and wait there to welcome you. Where I will be,
you shall be also; and where you are, there too I will
be. You know the way to where I am going and can
follow, for the Torah and the Books of Wisdom are the
Way, the Truth and the Light. I have brought you a
Light to show the way; follow it and you will not go
24

1721

BOOK OF NATSARIM

astray.”
31 “Later you will understand that I am united with the
Father. And as I am united with Him, so you are united
with Me. Though we are many, let us stand as one.
And those who serve I will serve.”
32 “To he who believes in My teachings I will
manifest. For what I do is done to prove to men My
own convictions, that they will come to accept My
teachings and follow the road of deliverance. The
people yearn for the fulfillment of the prophecies and
will surely follow One who fulfills them.”
33 T’oma said, “Are You going to manifest only to
us?”
34 {vWHY answered, “If anyone care for Me and My
cause, I will speak to him through the power of the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh, and it will come to him also. Those
who do not care for Me or My cause will ignore My
teachings, but do not fear them. Be on guard against
those who pay lip service only. While I am with you, I
can speak as men speak; but when I am gone, the
Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh will bear messages in My Name,
clarifying your minds so you recall all I have taught
you.”
35 “In the Reign of the Ruaḥ there are many splendid
places, and I assure those who remain steadfast that
they will be in the best of these. For when men die,
each is drawn to the place whereof he is worthy; even
to each one is prepared a place for his soul.”
36 “I will go down in the flesh to arise again in the ruaḥ
with power to manifest to men. I will demonstrate
what man can do; and as I do, so can all men. I am a
sacrifice to the misguided beliefs of men, that, in the
fulfillment of those beliefs, they might turn to the path
of their deliverance.”
37 “I am the Vine, and He who is above Me is the
Cultivator; you are the branches, and the sap in Me
flows out to you. The sap is My teachings, severed
from which you will be like a branch cut from the vine,
only suitable for burning. I am the vine, and you are
1722

BOOK OF KAILEDY

its fruit; and if the vine is sound, surely its fruit will be
sound also.”
38 “This is My last instruction to you: Love one
another as I have loved you. For there is but one
greater love than that of a man who would sacrifice
his life for His friends, and that is sacrifice of a life for
a cause where he serves those unknown to him. I
have said, ‘Love one another,’ for you will be
strengthened in the knowledge of that love.”
39 “If the world hates you, it has hated Me first. If you
were to remain part of the world, it would accept you
as its own and love you. But because I have severed
you from the world, setting you apart, it will hate you.
For it is in the nature of worldly men to hate those who
are different. And not only are you different, but you
also seek to point out their wickedness.”
40 “If I chose an easier path, your burden would be
so much greater, and the fruit of the vine might fall on
barren ground. As they have persecuted Me, so they
would have persecuted you. As they have spurned
My teachings, so they would have spurned yours.
And as they rejected Me, so they would have rejected
you.”
41 “I have much more to say, but you cannot receive
it now. Later, the Ruaḥ of Wisdom will come when you
are ready and guide you truthfully. It will speak to you
with a voice of its own, but will convey to you what
comes from above. Soon now you will see Me no
more in the flesh, but you will behold Me in a new and
glorious form.”
42 Those with {vWHY did not understand the meaning
of what He said, and discussed it among themselves,
saying, “What does He mean by ‘soon’?” Others said,
“What can He mean when He says, ‘Soon you will no
longer see Me, but then you will behold Me’?” The
others said, “We just cannot tell.”
43 {vWHY, knowing what they were saying and what
was in their thoughts, said, “You are wondering about
the things I have said. I can assure you that while you
1723

BOOK OF NATSARIM

sorrow, the world will rejoice, for its hopes are fulfilled.
A woman becomes afraid just before she gives birth,
but once the ordeal is over, she no longer recalls the
labor pains but rejoices in her child. So too you will
grieve for a while, but I will manifest to you, and then
you will rejoice in your hearts.”
44 “The Father’s Will is that the things I teach should
be given to the people, but they will not listen, arguing
among themselves as to who I am. Therefore, I must
drain the bitter cup of ḥai to its last dregs. Then they
will say, ‘This is He,’ and heed My words. This I do for
men, and none can say I have not faced up to the
tests of ḥai or I have shirked its supreme trial.”
45 The talmidim then drank the reeling cup, and
{vWHY said to Kĕpha, “I depend upon you to carry the
burden among the brethren.”
46 Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, I am ready to go anywhere,
to follow You to prison or even to death.”
47 {vWHY said, “Before the cock’s crow in the
morning, even you, the most loyal of men, will desert
Me. Must I undergo the ordeal friendless?”
48 Then all the others assured Him of their loyalty.
49 {vWHY said, “When I sent you out with few
possessions, did you ever go short of anything?”
50 They said, “No.”
51 {vWHY then said, “Things are different now. Those
who have a purse of money had better take it with
them and keep a pack prepared for flight. Whoever is
without a sword, let him sell his cloak and buy one.
For I can assure you I will fulfill all that the Qodesh
Books say. And is it not written, ‘He was classified as
an outlaw’? Yes, truly all that is written will be fulfilled
in Me, and men will find deliverance through this
fulfillment.”
52 One of the talmidim said, “Look, Aḏonai. We have
two swords among us.”
53 {vWHY said, “That is sufficient.”
54 Kĕpha said, “Aḏonai, are You going to lead us
against the reign of evil in arms?”
1724

BOOK OF KAILEDY

{vWHY said, “The battle is for the immortal souls
of men. Feast your eyes on Me, for the hour draws
near when I shall no longer be with you in body.”
56 Then He said to Yahuḏah, “Go, spend whatever
money is needful, but make haste.” No man there
understood the meaning of this saying.
57 When Yahuḏah had gone, {vWHY said, “Upon Me
has fallen the obligation for fulfilling the hopes of men.
Now I give you a last command: Stand by one
another. For if you remain loyal to My cause and to
each other, all will know you are true men of HWHY.
Do not worry overmuch; have faith in the goodness of
HWHY and in Me. In the Reign of the shamayim there
are many places, and had it been otherwise, I would
have told you. I go first and will prepare a compatible
place for all who are with Us.”
58 “Do not fear because of the destruction of the
body. Remember all I have told you. But be staunch
and steadfast, for as they have persecuted Me, so will
they persecute you. Remember, I have overcome the
fears of the flesh; this is My conquest. I will now reveal
the secret of My glory: It is dedication to service. And
that glory is the heritage of all men.”
59 When they had finished, {vWHY went out with His
followers and, passing over the wadi Kiḏron, went to
a place called Gath Shemen because of an oil press
there. He took eleven, as Marqos the Yahuḏim, who
was a kohĕn, did not go, Kĕpha being jealous of him.
This Marqos had been a follower of Yoḥanan of the
Wilderness and was a friend of Yahuḏah.
60 When {vWHY departed with the eleven, Marqos
did not return to his mother’s house in Ophal, but
stayed with El’azar and the others. After {vWHY had
gone, men came to take Him, and Marqos, snatching
a cloak, dashed out to warn {vWHY.
61 Though knowing what should be done for
ha’Mashiaḥ, Yahuḏah went to the captain of the
Hĕyḵal guard and said, “I am one of those who follow
{vWHY the Man of Galil, but I fear what He intends to
55

1725

BOOK OF NATSARIM

bring about. Therefore, let Him be held as the Council
has decreed.”
62 When {vWHY reached the chosen spot in Gath
Shemen, He turned and said to those with Him, “Pray
that you may be spared the test.”
63 He then took Kĕpha, Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan and
withdrew with them about a stone’s throw away.
{vWHY was depressed and filled with foreboding.
64 And He said to the three, “I am going apart to pray
for strength to do what must be done. You stay here
and keep watch. Perhaps the cup of bitterness will
pass Me by, for with the Father all things are possible.
But I fear there is no other way for Me but to abide My
destiny.”
65 {vWHY went just a short distance and lifted His
face to the stars and red-glowing moon above.
Ya’aqoḇ heard Him pray,
66 “Father, everything is in Your Hand. Let it not be
as I would have it, but according to Your Will; I leave
it in Your hand. But let not the ordeal be too much for
Me. The hour is at hand. Strengthen the Bĕn whom
You have glorified with the power of Your Ruaḥ, that
He may bring to fruition the task You have set Him,
leading men to the path of eternal ḥai. Is there no
other way?”
67 He then came back to the three, and the sweat
stood out redly on His brow. And finding two asleep,
for they were heavy with wine, He said to Kĕpha,
“Shim’on, could you not stay awake even at a time
such as this? Be vigilant and watch, praying you may
be spared a greater test.”
68 “In days to come, men will lift up their eyes to the
shamayim and say, ‘Baruḵ was He who came in the
Name of HWHY, bringing us the Light of Deliverance.’
My soul is very sorrowful because of the things I must
endure and accomplish, that the aspirations of men
shall not be denied a response. Tarry, therefore, a
while longer, keeping Me company so I do not
weaken. The Ruaḥ is willing, but the flesh is weak. It
1726

BOOK OF KAILEDY

is a dreadful thing I must do.”
69 Then He went away again, but what He prayed no
man knows.
70 When He returned, all three were asleep, for the
wine had befuddled them. {vWHY said, “Still sleeping.
Now it is enough, for the hour has come, and the
Servant of Man is betrayed into the hands of His
enemies. Let us wait no longer, for here they come.”
71 {vWHY was now quite calm and strengthened.
72 Now, the place where {vWHY had gone was
known to Yahuḏah, who arrived accompanied by the
Hĕyḵal guards carrying torches, staves and cudgels.
Seeing them, {vWHY stood up and said, “Whom do
you seek?”
73 Yahuḏah went up to Him and said, “Aḏonai, I am
here.”
74 He kissed {vWHY to let Him know he came with
friendly intentions, but it also identified Him. For
though those who came knew {vWHY by sight, the
Torah required that some other identify Him. But He
was not taken according to the Torah, but by the
Hĕyḵal guards.
75 {vWHY said, “So ha’Mashiaḥ has been selected for
sacrifice by a kiss.”
76 But Yahuḏah said, “No, Aḏonai; there will be no
sacrifice.”
77 When the Hĕyḵal guards seized hold of {vWHY,
one with Him drew a sword and wounded one of
them. Another said, “Shall we smite with our swords?”
78 But {vWHY forbade this, saying to the captain of
the guard, “Were My reign of this world, I would order
My followers to take up arms. But My Reign is not of
this world, and evil cannot be vanquished by evil.”
79 He rebuked them with the words, “Did you expect
to find a dangerous criminal who had to be overcome
with weapons? I have been among you many days,
and you left Me alone. Still, what has to be done will
be done, so do as you must.”
80 The captain of the guard said, “If this were left until
1727

BOOK OF NATSARIM

tomorrow, many would die.”

20 {vWHY was brought privately before Ḥanan, son
of Shĕth, who, after questioning {vWHY, sent Him to
the Supreme Council of the Yahuḏim, which was
assembled. He also sent a message saying, “This Man
is deluded but nonetheless dangerous, and these are
troubled times.”
2 When {vWHY was taken away, Shim’on Kĕpha
followed at a distance. And after {vWHY was brought
from the residence of Ḥanan, he followed and came
to the forecourt of the Hĕyḵal, but could not go
beyond because of the disturbance. Servants lit a
brazier of charcoal and stood warming themselves for the night was cold - and Kĕpha stood with them.
3 While he stood there, a relative of the Kohĕn
ha’Gadol - named Yosĕph but called Yoḥanan, a
follower of {vWHY in secret - came and spoke to the
woman at the door and went into the chamber hall.
He also spoke to Kĕpha.
4 Then a maidservant came and spoke with the
woman at the door, who came over to Kĕpha and
said, “You are one of the Galilean’s followers.” But
Kĕpha said, “I am no friend of His. You must be
mistaken.”
5 However, the woman persisted, saying, “Your
speech betrays you.” Then she cried out to those
about the brazier, “Beware, here is one of the
Galilean sorcerer’s followers.”
6 Then the men clustered about Kĕpha and said,
“Certainly you are a Galilean.” And some said, “We
have seen him with this Rebel.” Then they said to
Kĕpha, “Did you not cause trouble in the Hĕyḵal? We
have seen you there.”
7 Then the men said, “The woman is right, you are
a Galilean. Your speech witnesses against you.”
Others said, “He is just a Galilean,” and laughed.
8 Kĕpha then became angry and shouted, “Why do
you pester me? I do not know the Man. I have heard
about Him but not seen Him.”
1728

BOOK OF KAILEDY

Then the other talmid came out and told the men
to leave Kĕpha alone. He took him by the arm and
went out through the gateway. As they went, a cock
crew, for the fowls were in the city. And Kĕpha wept
bitterly, for he had failed the test. The other had
compassion on Kĕpha because of the weakness of
the flesh. And Kĕpha said, “I will make amends.” Then
the talmid took Kĕpha to a safe place nearby.
10 The Supreme Council had assembled that night in
the Chamber of Hewn Stone within the Great Hĕyḵal.
Though the Roman law did not permit men to sit in
judgment during the night hours, the Supreme
Council was afraid because of the mood of the
people.
11 When {vWHY stood before the Council, He was
asked, “Are you ha’Mashiaḥ - Elohim’s Anointed who
will deliver us?”
12 {vWHY replied, “I could deliver the people if you
would let Me do so.”
13 The Kohĕn ha’Gadol, son-in-law of Ḥanan, sat
with the Council. And he said to {vWHY, “Are You a
Galilean?”
14 When {vWHY replied that He was, the Kohĕn
ha’Gadol said, “Surely You, being a learned Man,
know that no naḇi will come from that place.” {vWHY
made no reply.
15 Then a man named Nicodemus said to {vWHY,
“The Torah does not condemn any man without trying
to understand his motives. Tell us why You do these
things.”
16 {vWHY answered, “Is it not written that if the
people are to be saved, there must be a Suffering
Deliverer who will also be the Anointed of HWHY?”
17 Nicodemus then said to the Council, “If this Man is
what He claims, He is harmless. For He brings
suffering to none except Himself.”
18 Then another councilor said, “I myself have heard
Him say He comes, not to suffer, but to bring a sword
to free the people.”
9

1729

BOOK OF NATSARIM

{vWHY stood calm and serene.
20 One of the elders said to Him, “Is it true You were
born of fornication, and, when born, Your father
Yosĕph and Miryam, the woman who gave birth to
You, had to flee from the anger of the people?”
21 But twelve of those present witnessed for Him that
He was not the Child of fornication, but of a rightly
married mother.
22 Though many of the elders tried to make out a
case against {vWHY, they failed. For though there
were witnesses who gave false evidence against
Him, others spoke in favor of {vWHY. Then a lawscribe came forward and testified with the others he
had heard {vWHY declare that the Hĕyḵal was only a
man-made structure which He would destroy in three
days. However, there was no agreement among the
witnesses as to what had been said or what it meant.
Some held {vWHY to be a sorcerer who spoke of
magic, while others held Him to be a madman whose
talk was not rational. Many remained silent and
thoughtful.
23 One of the leading men among the elders stood
up and said to {vWHY, “Can You not speak for
Yourself and answer the accusations?”
24 {vWHY said, “Are the charges not being fully
argued out?”
25 The Kohĕn ha’Gadol said, “I ask You, in the Name
of the Most High Elohim, tell us - for we do not wish
to make any mistake - are You ha’Mashiaḥ who will
deliver us?”
26 {vWHY answered, “You ask this because others,
witnessing what I do, say this is so. If I say I am the
Deliverer, I do not lie. I am the true Bĕn of Elohim,
standing at His Right Hand, ready to obey His Will,
and I speak with divine authority. I am the One
destined to bring down the whole structure, replacing
it with a new rule.”
27 Upon hearing this, the Kohĕn ha’Gadol said, “We
need no more witnesses, for we have all heard Him
19

1730

BOOK OF KAILEDY

blaspheme. The evidence for treason has been given
by His own mouth. He is convicted through words
from His own lips. What more is required before your
verdict?”
28 But there was no little dispute among the elders,
for some said, “It is no crime to say, ‘I am ha’Mashiaḥ
who will deliver.’ ” Others said, “It is no crime for a
man to be misguided and deluded, for will not the
Deliverer be disclosed by deeds which this Man has
not performed?” It was also said, “Is He not fulfilling
the neḇuoth? Therefore, be wary in judgment.”
29 One of the elders said, “Let us set the good this
Man does against the other. And is it not well known
that He has a power of healing not in other men?
What wrong has He done? He has not called men to
arms against Kaisar.”
30 The Kohĕn ha’Gadol then stood up and said, “If
we allow this Man to go free at this time, He will stir
up trouble, the people being ripe for revolt. Then
Kaisar will send his legions against us, and the nation
will be destroyed, for the hand of Kaisar is heavy. We
cannot set the life of one Man against the lives of
many. And those who would set Him free are no
friends of Rome, neither can they be friends of our
people.”
31 Then some said, “His crime is against Rome, and
not against us.” But others said, “What? Shall we
deliver Him to Roman cruelty?”
32 The Kohĕn ha’Gadol said, “This can be no
concern of ours. We are shepherds of the people. Let
those who speak against Kaisar stand before Kaisar’s
judgment seat. Let our judgment be that we found
Him guilty against Kaisar, and then leave Him to
Roman mercy. We have no power to condemn Him.”
33 Therefore, it then being daylight, they bound
{vWHY and delivered Him to Pilatus with the verdict,
“He is guilty against Rome.”
34 It was now, for many, Pesaḥ Eve - not all keeping
it at the same time, for this was in dispute. Therefore,
1731

BOOK OF NATSARIM

many who could have spoken for {vWHY, being
righteous men, went to make their preparations for
the festival. Some thought He would be set free when
it was over, but most knew in their hearts He would
not be released.
35 When {vWHY was brought before Pontius Pilatus,
Governor of Yahuḏah, who sat upon the judgment
seat, the law-scribes testified to the charges, saying,
“This Man stirs up the people to revolt against Kaisar
by taking the title ‘Bĕn of Elohim,’ thus claiming to be
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim. He says He brings swords
and will purge the land with fire. He blasphemes
against Kaisar and seeks to bring a new rule of law
into the land. He rides into the city proclaiming
Himself the Deliverer fulfilling the neḇuoth. From
whom can we be delivered?”
36 Pilatus said to {vWHY, “There are many serious
charges against You. Have You any defense against
them?”
37 When {vWHY remained silent, Pilatus said, “Tell
me, if ‘Bĕn of Elohim’ is a sovereignly title, are you the
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim?”
38 {vWHY said, “Do you ask this for yourself, or are
you being influenced by the things said about Me?”
39 Pilatus answered, “Am I a Yahuḏi, to know these
things? Your people have handed You over, for,
according to their interpretation, You have made
sovereignly claims. What have You done?”
40 {vWHY said, “Is an earthly Sovereign most worthy
to be called the Bĕn of Elohim? Surely it is goodness
and not diadem that counts. I am the Bĕn of Elohim,
and this title I rightly claim, but if I have a Reign, it is
not of Earth. Had it been otherwise, My followers
would not have permitted Me to be taken.”
41 Pilatus said, “You are, then, a Sovereign of some
kind.”
42 {vWHY replied, “As you say, I am a Sovereign, but
I do not come to rule, for I was born into the world to
testify of the Truth. And all who honor Truth listen to
1732

BOOK OF KAILEDY

My words.”
43 Pilatus said, “Who knows what is Truth or what it
means? One man’s Truth is another man’s
deception.”
44 {vWHY answered, “No man can know Truth, for it
is not of Earth, which is a place of deception. But
HWHY knows Truth, and it is with Him alone.”
45 Pilatus said, “Does not Kaisar know Truth?”
46 To which {vWHY replied, “No man knows truth.”
47 Pilatus said, “Is the Truth with You or with Kaisar?”
48 {vWHY said, “Kaisar’s heart is in fornication, not in
Truth. And this you know to be true. Would you
condemn Me for speaking Truth?”
49 Pilatus said, “Say no more.”
50 {vWHY said, “See how those who uphold Truth are
judged by those holding authority.”
51 Then a man who was guardian at the Hĕyḵal
testified, “This Man stirs up trouble in the land so the
people are ripe for revolt. And His doctrine is not
contained in Galil, but is spreading all over Yahuḏah.”
52 Hearing this, Pilatus asked whether the Man
before Him was Galilean, and, being told He was,
Pilatus said, “This Man should be tried before
Hĕrodĕs.”
53 Therefore, {vWHY was sent to Hĕrodĕs, who,
being in Yerushalayim at the time, was residing
nearby, for he was under the protection of the
Governor. Hĕrodĕs was pleased for the opportunity
to see {vWHY and questioned Him at length, hoping
to see some miracle performed, but he was
disappointed in all things. Though many testified
against Him before Hĕrodĕs, {vWHY remained silent
on such matters, for it was His duty and destiny to
fulfill the neḇuoth in the Qodesh Books.
54 Hĕrodĕs found {vWHY guilty of blasphemy and
treason, and returned Him to Pilatus, saying, “He has
committed treason in Yahuḏah. Let Him be tried for
that. It has not been fully proven before me, but this I
know surely: If He is released, there will be a revolt.
1733

BOOK OF NATSARIM

For the people are inflamed, and your army is not
large.”
55 When Pilatus had taken his place on the judgment
seat and {vWHY was before him, he said, “I am told
You are a just Man. Can goodness father crime?”
56 {vWHY answered, “Hypocritical goodness fathers
many crimes. The people live in a night of ignorance;
I come to lighten the darkness.”
57 Pilatus said, “If the Light is put out, does that help
the people? Is it not better for the Light to shine? Even
a faint glow is better than none.”
58 {vWHY said, “Do with Me as you will. I will light a
flame which will consume the world, and darkness will
be no more.”
59 Pilatus said, “These things I do not understand, for
Your people have devious minds and make great
issues over things of little importance. What else have
You to say?”
60 {vWHY replied, “I came to men to manifest the love
HWHY has for them. As One of their brothers, I have
undergone the trials and tribulations of men,
overcoming the claims of the flesh so the Ruaḥ within
shines forth with strength. I have pointed the way
whereby men may rise to greatness, for such is their
destiny.”
61 Pilatus then said to the elders and some Lĕwites
who witnessed against {vWHY, “I am not a Yahuḏi,
nor am I bound by the laws of the Yahuḏim. If this
Man has blasphemed against your Elohim, then let
Him be tried by your law; but do not mention it to me,
for I only listen to the law of Rome.”
62 They said, “Do you say that a man who
blasphemes against the divine Kaisar is not worthy of
death?”
63 Pilatus said, “Such a man should die.”
64 They said, “This He has done. Also, in proclaiming
Himself Sovereign, He speaks against Kaisar and
Rome. Had He not done wrong to Kaisar, we would
surely not have delivered Him to you.”
1734

BOOK OF KAILEDY

Pilatus said, “You are a troublesome people and
tire me with these things. What would you have me
do with your Sovereign?”
66 They answered, “These are His words. We have
no Sovereign except Kaisar.” Someone said, “And
acknowledge no other Elohim.”
67 Then one of the elders stood up and said, “Many
have testified concerning His offenses. We know
what should be done, but the power is with you. It is
not lawful for us to put this Man to death, therefore
deal with Him as seems best in your eyes.”
68 Pilatus said, “Why have you been spared the
wrath of your Elohim?” Then Pilatus said to those in
the chamber of judgment, “Who else wishes to testify
against this Man?”
69 One of the elders, a law-scribe of the Council,
said, “This Man has claimed before the people that
He is Heir to the throne of Dawiḏ, but He is an
Impostor. He blasphemes the Qodesh One of our
people by saying He is His Bĕn. If these things
inflame the people so they revolt, then Rome pays the
price. He comes forth from among the poor and
disinherited, arousing the people so they seek to
overthrow the stability of established authority. If His
intentions are put into effect, we are all lost.”
70 “He proclaims Himself Sovereign and declares He
will pull down the Hĕyḵal. He blasphemes against
Kaisar and says He will supersede Kaisar’s rule. He
slanders Kaisar and calls him a fornicator and liar.
Under our laws, which you must also uphold, He
deserves to die, and, if you are not against Kaisar,
also under the laws of Rome.”
71 Pilatus said to {vWHY, “The balance weighs
against You. Have You anything to say?”
72 When {vWHY did not reply, Pilatus asked Him
where He really came from. But {vWHY remained
silent. Pilatus then said, “Have You nothing to say to
me, who have the power to condemn or release You?
What shall I do with One such as You?”
65

1735

BOOK OF NATSARIM

{vWHY then said, “The power of Rome rests in
your hands, but it gives you power over nothing
except My body. Do with that as you will. It is not you,
but those distorting the face of Truth, who are to
blame.”
74 Pilatus said, “If I deal with You one way, the people
will say the authority of Rome supports Your
teachings and is not against the things You declare.
They will say Your claim to diadem is upheld and may
even say You are preferred to Kaisar. If I do this, I will
certainly be called to account; for am I not the hand
of Kaisar whom You blaspheme and decry?”
75 {vWHY said, “I call men to a reign which is not yet
of Earth.”
76 Pilatus said to {vWHY, “No one is compelled to
speak on his own behalf.” Then to the others there he
said, “Clearly this Man is not guiltless concerning
Kaisar, but will any here speak for Him?”
77 Then one of the Parashyim stood up and said,
“Many could speak for this just Man but have decided
their duty lies elsewhere. We are an unbending
people,
sometimes
over-concerned
with
righteousness; but mercy and justice are not least
among the things we uphold.”
78 “What wrong has this Man done to Kaisar? He has
uttered words, which are no more than a breeze from
the lips. And surely one so great as Kaisar can
withstand even the greatest tempest. If Kaisar be
man, then words would hurt him; but we are a people
knowing nothing man can do will harm the highest
divinities. Therefore, we could be less cautious than
others. The greater they are, the more they tend to
overlook the many weaknesses and failings of men.
You, who know the greatness or smallness of he for
whom you are the mouthpiece, can incline towards
one less knowledgeable in such matters. If you are a
worthy representative of Kaisar, you will uphold his
greatness and reveal his indulgence to us. As to
whether this Man be ha’Mashiaḥ or the Deliverer,
73

1736

BOOK OF KAILEDY

such questions can only be meaningless to Rome, for
even we Yahuḏim are not in accord as to who they
are or what they will do.”
79 Pilatus said, “You are a perverse race, overconcerned with unworldly things and ensnaring
yourselves in your own net of goodness. You cannot
even agree on the dates of your own festivals or the
nature of your Elohim. Instead of heroes you have
saints, yet your saintliness makes you unsaintly. You
all agree to seek the Truth but dispute which path to
follow and so get nowhere. You agree to follow your
Elohim, but some say, ‘We go this way,’ and others
say, ‘We go another.’ What you say today about this
Man you said yesterday about another. Your laws are
a maze which I will not attempt to negotiate. Your
thoughts are devious, and your hearts an unreadable
scroll. I am unfortunate in my governorship.”
80 Now, a man named Barabbas had also been
brought forth to be judged. And Pilatus continued, “I
know not one man from the other; who is reverent and
who is of Beliya’al I cannot tell. You yourselves do not
know which of these two men has said and done
these things, or which is your Sovereign. All I know is
that there must be a strife. The rights of Kaisar must
be upheld, and justice must be done. The rest I leave
in your hands.”
81 “No two men can suffer for the same crime unless
they be in association; but if no association is proven,
only one may suffer. Therefore, decide among
yourselves which man is to die. Both claim to be the
Bĕn of Elohim, both are deliverers, both have
blasphemed against Kaisar and your Elohim, and
both have struck against Kaisar. One has killed, the
Other has not. Clemency is mine to give at this time,
but clemency overruling justice is weakness.”
82 “If both these men be killed, then surely the whole
of the people will rise in revolt. Already the streets are
thronged, and much wine is being drunk. But if one is
released, those rejoicing will restrain those who
1737

BOOK OF NATSARIM

sorrow. It will also divide the people who otherwise
might act in accord. If one is truly the Bĕn of Elohim,
then the Father will not desert His Bĕn; so, it would
not be wrong to condemn Him, for thus two will be
saved.”
83 “Responsibility for restraining bloodshed now lies
with you. And already the people outside are in
riotous mood. Therefore, choose between the two
men. Both have the same name, but one is called
Barabbas, and the Other Barharets. Choose which
shall be condemned for these crimes and which shall
be released. Then announce it to the people.”
84 Pilatus said, “I will condemn the one claiming to be
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim, for this is a crime against
the peace of Kaisar. You tell me which He is.”
85 So all the elders of the Yahuḏim went out and
consulted among themselves and sent heralds
among the people. {vWHY remained calm and
unshaken, though He had been three hours in the
judgment chamber. When consulting among
themselves, one of the elders said, “One dies and one
is saved. Let us be sure we save the one who will
deliver us.”
86 A Parashyim said, “It is not for us to choose which
of these is ha’Mashiaḥ of Elohim, for both are equally
deluded. Neither should we choose according to their
goodness or their teachings, or even by what they
have done. This is a time of turmoil. Therefore, what
is the life of one man against the lives of thousands?
For surely this number will die if there is a revolt.
Which will appease the people by His release, and
which will cause less strife if He dies? May the Most
High Elohim help us to choose wisely, and may He
show compassion on the one who must die.
Whichever dies is the savior of many, and so who are
we to condemn Him otherwise? Let the other be the
bearer of our sins, and we will cast Him out from
among us.”
87 Then some Lĕwites went and addressed the
1738

BOOK OF KAILEDY

people thronging about, and they shouted, “Crucify
the Sovereign, save the Deliverer.” But all were not in
accord, and there were many disputes. Then the
elders went back to Pilatus and said, “Release
Barabbas.”
88 Now, when Yahuḏah saw what had happened, he
was exceedingly troubled. For he had hoped neither
{vWHY nor the other would suffer more than
confinement over the festival period. He was
therefore filled with remorse. He sought to return the
silver to the Hĕyḵal treasurers, throwing it before
them, saying, “I have betrayed the innocent.”
89 They said, “It means nothing to us. Be it on your
head, not ours.”
90 When they told the Kohĕn ha’Gadol about the
matter, he said, “This money is tainted and cannot be
put into the Hĕyḵal coffers.”
91 So they used the money to buy a plot in the clay
field used by potters, and it was used for the burial of
strangers having no kindred. Then, after putting his
house in order, Yahuḏah hanged himself from a
ledge.
92 Pilatus ordered that {vWHY be scourged after the
custom of Rome and delivered Him to the army for
crucifixion. And it was then about the sixth hour. The
soldiers took Him to a small court where, by custom,
men gathered who took pleasure in tormenting the
condemned. They danced before Him, spitting and
mocking. A victor’s crown was plaited from thornbush,
and He was beaten with burning weeds. Placing a
soldier’s scarlet mantle about His shoulders, they
bowed before Him in mock homage, saying, “Hail,
You Great Sovereign of the Yahuḏim.” Others
covered His eyes and struck Him, saying, “Now,
Sorcerer, tell us who hit You then.” He was pricked
with reeds, and the mockers made sport with Him in
many ways.
93 When the cruelty was over, the soldiers stripped
off the scarlet mantle and replaced His tunic, taking
1739

BOOK OF NATSARIM

Him away to the place of execution. Because of the
scourging and other sufferings, {vWHY was unable to
bear the stake He carried. And a man named Shim’on
the Kurĕnĕ, a stranger from Africa just come by way
of Yoppa, was forced by the soldiers to carry it.
94 A crowd followed, among which were many
lamenting and wailing women. {vWHY turned to them
and said, “Daughters of Yerushalayim, do not be
sorrowful because of Me, for I approach the door of a
greater Ḥai. Weep instead for yourselves and your
children, for the day comes when you will have much
greater cause for sorrow. If these things are done
while the tree is green and full of life, what would they
not do if it were old and dry?”
95 Coming to the place of execution, which was
where the skull of Aḏam lay buried, the soldiers
fastened {vWHY to the stake and raised it up into its
slot. Then His feet were fastened to the rest. After
this, they divided His clothes among them; but the
mantle, being woven without a seam, was given to
one selected by lot. About His neck was hung a
plaque, written in Latin, which read, ‘YAHUSHUA
BARHARETS, SOVEREIGN OF THE YAHUḎIM.’ ”
96 The Yahuḏim protested to Pilatus about this, but
he said, “This is written by my authority.”
97 Two others were crucified with {vWHY, one on His
right and one on His left. People passing along the
road mocked and abused Him, shouting, “Come
down and rule over Your reign.” Some said, “Where
is Your all-powerful Father now?” and, “If You are
what You claim to be, get Yourself out of this.” Many
laughed, saying, “He came to save us, but cannot
save Himself. Savior, save Yourself first.” The
witnesses who stood about the stake also mocked
Him. They said, “Oh Deliverer, now deliver Yourself.”
98 At the ninth hour, the sky darkened with cloud, and
there was thunder and lightning. Thus, the neḇuah
was fulfilled which said, “In the valley of decision, on
the day of the Deliverer, the sun and the Earth will be
1740

BOOK OF KAILEDY

darkened.”
99 Then {vWHY began to speak the words of Dawiḏ
and later said, “My Elohim, do not let Your power
drain away from Me.”
100 Some standing nearby said, “Listen, He is calling
on Ĕliyahu.” Another said, “Let us see if Ĕliyahu will
come and take Him.”
101 A man came with a sponge soaked in vinegar and
duwed and raised it to the lips of {vWHY, but He
turned His head away. Then some said, “He is ready
to give up the ruaḥ.”
102 {vWHY opened His eyes and said to those who
stood near, “It is nearly over.”
103 Manilaus, the centurion who stood facing {vWHY,
said, “Truly this is a Man.”
104 Then someone shouted, “It is over,” and there was
an outbreak of wailing from the women.

21 A number of women stood off watching from a
distance, among them being Miryam of Maḡdala - also
called Miryam of Bĕyth Anyah, Marmaryam, and
Miryam the mother of Ya’aqoḇ the Younger and
Yosĕph - and Salome, who had followed {vWHY,
administering to His needs in Galil.
2 There were also others who had come to
Yerushalayim with Him, but the only talmid there was
Ya’aqoḇ.
3 When the women wept with pity, he said to them,
“I see now what I was blind to before. Let us not waste
tears in futile pity, but strengthen our hearts so His
sacrifice is not in vain. He did this to change the
hearts of the people. Let us be worthy of Him.”
4 Then Ya’aqoḇ left, for he received word that the
talmidim were being sought, it being feared they
would set fire to the Great Hĕyḵal, or arouse the
people so there was a revolt. There had been
disturbances in the city, but because of Barabbas,
only three were killed.
5 Miryam, the mother of {vWHY, was taken to the
house of Yoḥanan, and Marqos and Yosĕph also
1741

BOOK OF NATSARIM

came there. It was in that house that the first words of
this Besorah were written.
6 Many of the talmidim had deserted {vWHY and
were in hiding. Others went about not knowing what
to do, their hearts full of misery and sorrow. They
lacked the influence needed to save {vWHY from the
common pit of criminals. And Miryam, His mother, did
not claim the Body, though the arrangements made
were unknown to her.
7 Now, one of the elders of the Supreme Council
was a man named Yosias, called Yosĕph
of Ramathayim - son of Yoachim, son of Nathan, son
of El’azar, son of Ĕliyahu, son of Yaḵin, son of Zadok
- who lived on the Merchant’s Road, a day’s journey
from Yerushalayim. He also owned an estate
northwest of the city. He had a brother-in-law named
Nikodius, and both were secret followers of {vWHY.
Yosĕph of Ramathayim, the wise Commander, had
been present at the Council when it sat in judgment
on {vWHY, and he supported Him, but many more
who could have done so were absent because of the
hour.
8 When evening drew near and {vWHY had been
four hours on the stake, Yosĕph of Ramathayim,
being a man of status and authority, went to Pontius
Pilatus without fear, for they were friends. He
requested the Body of {vWHY, His kinsman, saying,
“It is written in our law that the sun shall not be
permitted to set on the body of a murdered man.”
9 The Governor said, “You are an upright man, and
I will not deny this to you.”
10 But he was surprised to hear {vWHY had died so
quickly, and he sent for the centurion in charge of the
execution, a man known to Yosĕph, who assured
Pilatus that {vWHY was undoubtedly dead.
11 On hearing this, Pilatus granted the Commander
custody of the Body, and though some Yahuḏim
present objected, wishing {vWHY to be buried in the
criminals’ pit, they had to submit to Roman law. Yet
1742

BOOK OF KAILEDY

the Yahuḏim’s law also stated it was the duty of the
nearest relative to dispose of the body, irrespective of
how death occurred.
12 Now this being the Shabbat Eve, the bodies could
not remain upon their stakes after nightfall. Therefore,
the Yahuḏim requested of Pilatus that the legs of the
condemned men be broken, allowing the bodies to
hang free so they quickly died. So, the soldiers took
mallets and broke the legs of the other two, but when
they came to {vWHY, the centurion said, “He is
already dead.”
13 Yosĕph the Commander took his son Yosĕph,
Nikodius and one other and, having already
purchased a linen shroud, went to the place of
execution and removed {vWHY from the stake.
Wrapping Him in the sheet, they carried {vWHY
through the darkness to a tomb already cut out of the
rock. It was a two-chambered cavern northwest of the
city, having a ledge running around the inside, and
the entrance faced eastward towards the place of
execution. It was the north end of a garden planted
with cabbages, and the gardener was also custodian
of the tomb.
14 When {vWHY had been placed inside, a great
stone was rolled across the entrance, and two men
were left on guard beside it. Now, things happened
on the Shabbat which may not be written, for they are
in the secret of HWHY, known only to the elect of the
House of Elohim, which is in the Isle of Departure.
15 Those who guarded the tomb, when questioned
regarding these things, said, “The talmidim came
early and carried Him away for burial in a proper
manner at another place. For He was laid here only
because of the Shabbat, and it was not His tomb.”
None questioned them further, for this was proper.
And the guards were only placed to protect certain
bodies from those who would work evil sorceries on
them, those who improperly tampered with bodies
being put to death.
1743

BOOK OF NATSARIM

After the Shabbat was over, some women came
with spices and oils to deal with the body of {vWHY.
But when they came to the tomb, they found that the
great stone had been rolled aside. The guards were
gone, but a young man was seated just inside the
entrance, and he said to them, “Do not be afraid of
me, for I am a friend. {vWHY, whom you seek, is not
here. But go and tell Kĕpha that He will be with Him
as promised.” The women were very much afraid and
left in haste.
17 When they had gone, Miryam came with another
and stood outside the tomb weeping. And as she did
so, a voice behind her said, “Why do you weep?”
Turning, she saw the gardener and said to Him, “They
have taken {vWHY away, and I have no knowledge of
what has happened to Him.” Then the gardener told
her to go to Yoḥanan, the son of Ḥanan.
18 Kĕpha and two others were also making their way
to the tomb when they met the women coming away.
The women told them what they had seen and heard.
And Kĕpha, thinking they were talking wildly through
sorrow, sent one of his companions to go with them.
Then he hastened to the tomb, arriving to find it empty
and no one there. So, being perplexed, he sat down
outside while the other went in search of the
gardener. While seated there, he saw a shining figure
in the gloom within the tomb and knew it for a
messenger. And he heard a voice saying, “{vWHY has
fulfilled the promises and is truly ha’Mashiaḥ, HWHY’s
Anointed.”
19 Then the other returned with the gardener, who
told Kĕpha to go and meet Yoḥanan, the son of
Ḥanan, at Emeras, about nine miles distant. And they
went to that place, which was a village not far from
the house of Yosĕph of Ramathayim.
20 Arriving there, they found Yoḥanan, the son of
Ḥanan, and another Yoḥanan, and Ya’aqoḇ and
Yosĕph, the sons of Yosĕph by Anna - his first wife,
the fair stranger - his son by Miryam, and Marqos, his
16

1744

BOOK OF KAILEDY

adopted son. Nikodius was also there with El’azar,
and they were all in the house of Hosius. Later, a
number of emissaries came.
21 Then, while they were seated at a table, {vWHY
came among them and said, “Let us take food
together and rejoice, for the neḇuoth have been
fulfilled regarding ha’Mashiaḥ as it is said in the
Qodesh Books. The Servant of Man is arisen from
among those who sleep, for death has not claimed
Him. But these things, while fulfilling the promises, will
not bring about the Rule of Elohim, for this will not
come while men sit waiting for signs. The people have
been given that which fulfills their hopes and
aspirations. Now surely, they will believe in My cause
and arise to sweep evil aside. Now the Ruaḥ of Truth
dwells among you, though it is still out of place in a
world under the rule of man.”
22 Then {vWHY told of all the things which had been
written in the Qodesh Books concerning these things,
and how ha’Mashiaḥ, HWHY’s Anointed, would be
disowned by men, would suffer for their willfulness
and arise from among the dead to appear on the third
day. Then He said, “Are not all these things fulfilled in
Me?” Then He departed.
23 Some days later, all the talmidim who were the
chosen of {vWHY met in a secret place. And {vWHY
joined them and proved Himself to those who still
disbelieved. And they said, “Aḏonai, forgive our
disbelief and forgive us for doubting the things You
taught concerning Yourself.”
24 {vWHY said, “This is the day of the coming of
HWHY, who will rule the Earth. Yet is it not written,
‘This will be a day of darkness, and not of light’?”
25 Then {vWHY spoke these words: “I go to a place
far away beyond the world, where you may not follow.
For I fulfill the hopes of all men. Now, you go out,
carrying the message that the neḇuoth have been
fulfilled and the time is at hand when the Rule of
Elohim should be established among men. For, the
1745

BOOK OF NATSARIM

promises having been fulfilled for the people, surely,
they will now believe and rally to the cause of good,
sweeping wickedness and evil from the face of the
Earth. Say to them, ‘That has been done that had to
be done.’ ”
26 “Now you must take up the burden, for if you would
become children of HWHY and reclaim your lost
heritage, you must prove yourselves worthy heirs. Let
not all the suffering be in vain.”
27 Then He told them secret things concerning the
Rule of Elohim, and how men should be freed from
trouble, distress and pain. He explained how each
man could be freed of all sickness and see beyond
the range of the eye. These and many other things
were explained, and also many things concerning the
Dominion of the Ruaḥ.
28 He said, “Follow My teachings, and the power of
the Ruaḥ Ha’Qodesh will come to you, enabling you
to do many great things causing wonder among
others. Yet all these are the rightful possessions of
men, if they will but establish their worthiness.”
29 “Think not that HWHY will descend from the
shamayim to do the work of men. The world is yours,
but Ḥai is with Elohim; in the end, there is the
accounting. Man must be responsible for his own
destiny, so seek no divine intervention while men
remain apathetic. HWHY comes to the aid only of those
who strive, who surmount the difficulties and
obstacles of life.”
30 Having said these things, {vWHY revealed Himself
to them in His form of glory, so they might know Truth
had been established in Him. Then they were all
bedazzled and astonished at what Man could become
and the extent of His powers awaiting development.
Then they knew {vWHY was all He claimed to be and
hailed Him as Mashiaḥ, the Anointed by HWHY. For in
Him the Ruaḥ of Mashiaḥ was manifested as in no
other. After this, {vWHY left.
31 Now, rumors of strange events came to the ears
1746

BOOK OF KAILEDY

of certain Yahuḏim who were Hĕrodians and
Sadducees. Then they were exceedingly angry with
those in power who had inclined towards Yosĕph, the
wise Commander. He said to those who raised their
voices against him, “Why do you seek to stir up
trouble? Those in high places, holding positions of
power, did only what they thought best and complied
with the Torah. What else could they do? I received
the Body of my kinsman because this was my duty,
and I dealt with it decently, letting it rest in my private
tomb over the Shabbat.”
32 Despite his authority, there was evidence against
Yosĕph, and he was imprisoned, being kept under
constant guard. One Shabbat, during the night hours,
the Ruaḥ of {vWHY was projected to Yosĕph so he
was comforted. But the guards, seeing it, fainted with
fear. Then Yosĕph was brought before Pontius
Pilatus, but the Governor found no fault in him, and
he was released.
33 Later, Ḥanan and his son-in-law, who were then
the Kohĕn ha’Gadol of the Yahuḏim, came to the
house of Yosĕph, bringing with them the Qodesh
Books written on scrolls within their box. They
requested that he swear upon it in the sacred Name
of Elohim, but he made oath only that he had done no
wrong or broken no law. The wise Commander
remained in his house for many days, after which he
went about undisturbed.
34 Then, when Pontius Pilatus returned to Rome,
Yosĕph departed from his home shores, coming to
Setnadoin, from whence he moved to a well at the
foot of a hill. He brought with him a clay cup which
had been set in silver by a silversmith, and this was
that cup used by {vWHY.
35 Some say Yosĕph of Ramathayim married
Miryam, mother of {vWHY, after the death of his wife,
but this is a known heresy put about by those in
ignorance of what is written, for his wife was not that
Miryam.
1747

Glossary

GLOSSARY
HWHY -YHWH
[FWHY- Yahushua
Aḏon / Aḏonai - Master / my Master
ammah - cubit/s
Ashshur-Assyria
Ba'al* - Lord*
Baḇel - Babylon*
baraḵ - bless*/blesses/blessed
baruḵ - blessed
beraḵah – blessing
bireḵoth - blessings
Bĕn - Son
Dammeseq / Darmeseq - Damascus
Ĕl/Eloah/Elohim - Almighty (God*)
Ĕl Shaddai - the Almighty
Gĕy-Hinnom - Hell*
Ḥai - Life*
Hallelu-Yah - you praise Yah
HalleliHWHY- I praise HWHY
Hallĕl Yah - Praise Yah
Hĕyḵal - Temple*
Iḇri / Iḇrim - Hebrew I Hebrews
Keruḇ / keruḇim - angelic being/s
kohĕn - priest*
kohenim – priests
kohĕn ha'gadol - high priest
kehunnah - priesthood
Maḏai – Media
Mashiaḥ - Messiah (Christ*)
ha'Mashiaḥ - the Messiah
Mashiaḥiyim – Messianic
Matstsoth - Unleavened Bread messenger - angel*
Miqdash - Set-apart Place (Sanctuary)
1748

Glossary

miqdashim - set-apart places
Mishkan - Dwelling Place (Tabernacle)
Mishkanoth - Dwelling Places
Mitsrayim - Egypt
naḇi - prophet*
neḇi'im – prophets
neḇiyah – prophetess
naḇa - prophesy*/prophesying
naḇu – prophesied
neḇuah - prophecy
neḇuoth – prophecies
Paras – Persia
Pelesheth – Philistia
Pesaḥ - Passover
Perath - Euphrates
qodesh – set-apart (holy*)
qodeshah - set-apartness (holiness)
qodeshi - set-apart one (saint*)
qodeshim - set-apart ones (saints)
qadosh - set-apart (sanctify/sanctified)
Qadosh One - Set-apart One
Ruaḥ ha'Qodesh - Set-apart Spirit (Holy* Spirit)
Ruaḥ - Spirit
Ruaḥoth – Spirits
Shabbath – Sabbath
Shabbathoth – Sabbaths
Shaḇuoth - Weeks
shamayim - heaven/s*
Sukkoth – Booths
talmid - taught one (disciple)
talmidim - taught ones (disciples)
tehillah - psalm
tehillim – psalms
t’fillen - phylacteries/frontlets
Torah - Teaching, Law
Torot - Teachings, Laws
tsitsit – tassels
1749

Glossary

Yahuḏah – Judah
Yahuḏi - Jew/Jewish
Yahuḏim - Jews
Yawan – Greece
Yawanite – Greek
Yoḇĕl – Jubilee
Yom – Day
Yom ha’Kippurim - Day of Atonement Yom
Yom Teruah - Day of Trumpets
* of pagan origin

1750

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Note: These conversions of weights and measures are based on the best,
conservative information available to us from ancient sources. It isn't
always possible to be precise and some ancient measures definitely vary.
While every effort has been made to provide accurate modern
equivalencies, it should be noted that the measures listed here vary from
one ancient country to another and from one era to another. Those
measures that apply exclusively to the Renewed Covenant period are
noted by the letters (RC).
WEIGHTS
Before the first coins were minted around 640 BCE, merchants measured
out pieces of silver and gold according to weight. As a result, terms of
weight (such as sheqel, mina, and kiḵar) were also used to express
amounts of money.
UNIT
EQUAL TO
METRIC
IMPERIAL
qesitah
Unknown monetary unit
gĕrah
1/20th sheqel
0.57 g
0.02 oz
beqa
10 gĕrahs
5.7 g
0.2 oz
pirn
1 1/3 beqa
7.6 g
0.27 oz
sheqel
2 beqas
11.4 g
0.4 oz
mina
50 sheqels
570 g
1.26 lb
kiḵar
3000 sheqels
34.2 kg
75.4 lb
talanton (RC)
26 - 36 kg 57 - 80 lb
litra (RC)
340 g
12 oz
LIQUID MEASURES
The standard liquid measure in Scripture is the bath. The name "bath" is
related to the Hebrew word for daughter and may represent the capacity
of the jars young women used when carrying water from wells. Since the
bath varied between cultures and periods of the ancient world, the liquid
measures below should be taken as approximations.
UNIT
log
hin
bath
ḥomer
metretes

EQUAL TO
1/12 hin
1/6 bath
1/10 homer
10 baths

METRIC
0.3 litres
3.8 litres
22.7 litres
227 litres
38-115 litres

1751

IMPERIAL
0.67 pints
1 gallon
6 gallons
60 gallons
10-30
gallons

LENGTHS AND DISTANCES
The standard measurement of length in Scripture is the ammah, which was based
on the length of an adult's forearm (from the tip of the fingers to the elbow). This
standard varied from place to place throughout history.
UNIT
etsba
tophah
zereth
ammah
ammah (long)
qaneh
pekus (RC)
fathom (RC)
stadion (RC)
miliyon (RC)

EQUAL TO
1/4 tophah
4 etsba’oth
3 tephahoth
6 tephahoth
7 tephahoth
6 ammah
4 pekun (RC)
400 pekun (RC)
3,200 pekun (RC)

METRIC
1.85 cm
7.4 cm
22.2 cm
44.5 cm
52.1 cm
2.67 m
42 - 48 cm
1.8 m
183 m
1.48 km

IMPERIAL
0.73”
2.92”
8.75”
17.5”
20.5”
8.76 ft
17”-19”
6ft
600 ft
4,854 ft

DRY MEASURES
The kor/homer was originally understood to be the maximum amount a donkey
could carry. The standard upon which lesser measures are based is the ephah.
Since the ephah varied between the cultures and periods of the ancient world, the
dry measures below should be taken as approximations.
UNIT
qab
omer
se’ah
ephah
lethek
kor
homer

EQUAL TO
1/18 ephah
1/10 ephah
2 hins
3 se’im
5 ephahs
10 ephahs
10 ephahs

METRIC
1.2 litres
2.2 litres
7.3 litres
22 litres
110 litres
220 litres
220 litres

1752

IMPERIAL
1.3 quarts
2.3 quarts
7.7 quarts
23.3 quarts
25 gallons
50 gallons
50 gallons

PRONUNCIATION GUIDE
a - äh in ärm
ḇ - bh v as in vet
e - eh as in elm ḏ - dh th as in them
i - ee as in ēel
ĕ- ey as in eight
o - oh as in on ḡ - gh The ‘ḡ’ is pronounced as
u - oo as in üno
a soft aspirated g sound.
ḥ - (ch) The 'ḥ' and 'ḵ' are pronounced as
ḵ - (kh) the 'ch' in the German composer
Bach, or the Scottish Loch, like a
guttural, aspirated h sound.

HEBREW ALEPH-BET
Below the transliterated English titles of the individual books of Scripture,
the titles have also been written in modern Hebrew and paleo Hebrew
script. The table below is given to aid in the comparison between the two
letter forms:
NAME
MODERN
PALEO SOUND
Aleph
‫א‬
A
Ah, Eh, Ee, Oh, Ooh (Variable)
Bĕt
‫ב‬
B
B as in Bay or V as in Vase
Gimel
‫ג‬
g
G as in Grey or G (Soft G)
Dalet
‫ד‬
d
D as in Day or D as in They
Hay
‫ה‬
h
H as in Hay
Waw
‫ו‬
W
Ooh as in Too or Oh as in Obey
Zayin
‫ז‬
z
Z as in Zap
Ḥet
‫ח‬
X
H as in Loch or Bach
Tet
‫ט‬
j
T as in Tame
Yod
‫י‬
Y
Y as in Yay
Kaph
‫כ‬
K
K as in Kay or K as in Bach
Lamed
‫ל‬
L
L as in Lay
Mem
‫מ‬
m
M as in May
Nun
‫נ‬
!
N as in Nay
Sameḵ
‫ס‬
s
S as in Say
Ayin
‫ע‬
[
Ah, Eh, Ee, Oh, Ooh (Variable)
Peh
‫ּפ‬
p
P as in Pay or PH as in Phase
Tsadĕ
‫צ‬
C
TS as in Its
Qoph
‫ק‬
q
Q as in Quay
Resh
‫ר‬
R
R as in Ray
Shin
‫ׁש‬
v
SH as in Shame or S as in Same
Tau
‫ת‬
t
T as in Tame or Th as in They
1753

1754

1755

1756

1757

4Q Ḥanoḵ fragment 1, pieces c,d and e cols 2 and 3, containing
parts of Ḥanoḵ chapters 2-8, from the Book of the Watchers

Fragment of the Book of Yoḇelim from the Dead Sea Scrolls – Cave 4,
Qumran

1758

