1

INTRODUCTION
This translation of the Scriptures uses a number of words
and names that may be unfamiliar to some.
THE NAME OF THE ALMIGHTY
The Name of the Creator, YHWH known as the
'tetragrammaton' is rendered using the ancient Hebrew
letters: yod, hay, waw, hay in the Dead Sea Scrolls. The
practice of copying the Scriptures into modern Hebrew
was applied by the scribes, while the Name of YHWH
was rendered in the Paleo Hebrew script – HWHY. This
English translation uses the same script throughout. It is
believed to be the form used by HWHY Himself when He
gave the Commandments in stone to Mosheh.
THE NAME OF HA'MASHIAḤ
The Name of the Messiah which means 'Yah is salvation'
is spelled in Hebrew: yod, hay, waw, shin, ayin - spoken
and spelled similar to Yahoshua, the successor to
Mosheh and is also rendered in the Paleo Hebrew Script
- [FWHY throughout the Renewed Covenant.
ORDER OF BOOKS
The order of Books in the First Covenant follow the
traditional Hebraic TaNaḴ (Torah, Neḇi'im, Ketuḇim)
while the Letters of Sha'ul have been arranged in
approximate chronological order.
FOOTNOTES
In this translation you will find no comments or footnotes!
It is vitally important that if you do not understand a
certain issue from Scripture that you ask HWHY to teach
you through the Ruaḥ ha'Qodesh (see 1 Jn 2:27, 1 Co
2:13) He is your teacher - not man.

2

THE PRONUNCIATION OF NAMES
All the names throughout this translation have been
transliterated to give an accurate pronunciation in the
Hebrew language. The following table gives the vocal
sounds necessary for correct pronunciation.
PRONUNCIATION GUIDE
a - äh in ärm
ḇ - bh v as in vet
e - eh as in elm
ḏ - dh th as in them
i - ee as in ēel
ĕ- ey as in eight
o - oh as in on
ḡ - gh The ‘ḡ’ is pronounced as
u - oo as in üno
soft aspirated g sound.
ḥ - (ch) The 'ḥ' and 'ḵ' are pronounced as
ḵ - (kh) the 'ch' in the German composer
Bach, or the Scottish Loch, like a
guttural, aspirated h sound.
OTHER USE OF LANGUAGE
The Torah commands not to speak the names of false
mighty ones (Exo 23:13, Jos 23:7, Psa 16:4), and in an
effort to reduce the number of English words derived
from pagan deities or pagan titles, especially when
pertaining to His Bĕn and His people, the YAH Scriptures
contains a number of Hebrew words, also reflecting the
Hebrew origin of Scripture. As these terms will be foreign
to many, a GLOSSARY is included to familiarize the user
with these new words.

To purchase a copy or to download the free android
application go to YahScriptures.com
For questions or concerns please email
info@yahscriptures.com
Revision 6
1st Edition - 2023
3

TANAḴ
First Covenant
TORAH (TEACHING)
Title
BERĔSHITH
SHEMOTH
WAYYIQRA
BEMIḎBAR
DEḆARIM

Translation
In the Beginning
Names
And He Called
In the Wilderness
Words

Name
GENESIS
EXODUS
LEVITICUS
NUMBERS
DEUTERONOMY

Page
8
142
253
333
446

NEḆI’IM (PROPHETS)
Title
YAHOSHUA
SHOPHETIM
SHEMU’ĔL 1
SHEMU’ĔL 2
MELAḴIM 1
MELAḴIM 2
YESHAYAHU
YIRMEYAHU
YEḤEZQĔL
DANI’ĔL
HOSHĔA
YO’ĔL
AMOS
OḆAḎYAH
YONAH
MIḴAH
NAḤUM
ḤAḆAQQUQ
TSEPHANYAH
ḤAGGAI
ZEḴARYAH
MAL’AḴI

Translation
Yah is Salvation
Judges
Heard of Ĕl
Heard of Ĕl
Sovereigns
Sovereigns
Salvation of Yah
Exultation of Yah
Strength of El
Judgment of El
Salvation
Yah Is Ĕl
Burden
Servant of Yah
Dove
Who is Like Yah?
Comfort
Embrace
Treasured of Yah
Festive
Remembered of Yah
My Messenger
4

Name
JOSHUA
JUDGES
1 SAMUEL
2 SAMUEL
1 KINGS
2 KINGS
ISAIAH
JEREMIAH
EZEKIEL
DANIEL
HOSEA
JOEL
AMOS
OBADIAH
JONAH
MICAH
NAHUM
HABAKKUK
ZEPHANIAH
HAGGAI
ZECHARIAH
MALACHI

Page
540
604
669
754
826
912
992
1117
1259
1389
1431
1450
1458
1473
1476
1481
1492
1497
1503
1509
1513
1533

KETUḆIM (WRITINGS)
Title
TEHILLIM
MISHLĔY
IYOḆ
SHIR HA’SHIRIM
RUTH
ĔYḴAH
QOHELETH
HAḎASSAH
EZRA
NEḤEMYAH

Translation
Psalms
Proverbs
Hated
Song of Songs
Friend
How
Convener
Myrtle Tree
Help

DIBRĔY HA’YAMIM 1
DIBRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

Annals of Time
Annals of Time

Consolation of Yah

Name
PSALMS
PROVERBS
JOB
SONG OF SONGS
RUTH
LAMENTATIONS
ECCLESIASTES
ESTHER
EZRA
NEHEMIAH
1 CHRONICLES
2 CHRONICLES

Page
1539
1730
1791
1859
1872
1881
1897
1916
1936
1961
1999
2076

B’RIT ḤAḎASHAH
RENEWED COVENANT
MESSIANIC WRITINGS
Title
MATTITHUYAHU
MARQOS
LUQAS
YOḤANAN
MA’ASĔH

Translation
Gift of Yah
Defense
Illuminating
Yah has Favoured
Actions

Name
MATTHEW
MARK
LUKE
JOHN
ACTS

Page
2169
2256
2311
2394
2463

LETTERS OF SHA'UL
Title
GALATIYIM
TAS’LONIQIM 1
TAS’LONIQIM 2
QORIN’TIYIM 1
QORIN’TIYIM 2
ROMIYIM
PILĔYMON
QOLASIM

Translation
Of the Gauls
Victory of Falsity
Victory of Falsity
Satiated
Satiated
Strength
One who Kisses
Colossal
5

Name
GALATIANS
1 THESSALONIANS
2 THESSALONIANS
1 CORINTHIANS
2 CORINTHIANS
ROMANS
PHILEMON
COLOSSIANS

Page

2557
2569
2577
2581
2616
2638
2675
2677

Title
EPH’SIYM
PILIPPIYM
TIMOTIYOS 1
TITOS
TIMOTIYOS 2

Translation
Permitted
Lover of Horses
Honouring Elohim
Nurse
Honouring Elohim

Name
EPHESIANS
PHILIPPIANS
1 TIMOTHY
TITUS
2 TIMOTHY

Page

2685
2697
2706
2716
2720

OTHER WRITINGS
Title
IḆRIM
YA’AQOḆ
KĔPHA 1
KĔPHA 2
YOḤANAN 1
YOḤANAN 2
YOḤANAN 3
YAHUḎAH
ḤAZON

Translation
Those From Beyond
Supplanter
Rock
Rock
Yah has Favoured
Yah has Favoured
Yah has Favoured
Yah is Praised
Vision

Name
HEBREWS
JAMES
1 PETER
2 PETER
1 JOHN
2 JOHN
3 JOHN
JUDE
REVELATION

GLOSSARY
WEIGHTS AND MEASUREMENTS

MAPS

6

Page
2727
2753
2762
2772
2778
2787
2789
2791
2794

Ḵ
(FIRST COVENANT)

7

GENESIS

BERĔSHITH
‫ בראׁשית‬tYvARB

1 In the beginning Elohim created the shamayim and
the earth.
2 And the earth came to be formless and empty, and
darkness was on the face of the deep. And the Ruaḥ
of Elohim was moving on the face of the waters.
3 And Elohim said, “Let light come to be,” and light
came to be.
4 And Elohim saw the light, that it was good. And
Elohim separated the light from the darkness.
5 And Elohim called the light ‘day’ and the darkness
He called ‘night.’ And there came to be evening and
there came to be morning, day one.
6 And Elohim said, “Let an expanse come to be in the
midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from
the waters.”
7 And Elohim made the expanse, and separated the
waters which were under the expanse from the waters
which were above the expanse. And it came to be so.
8 And Elohim called the expanse ‘shamayim.’ And
there came to be evening and there came to be
morning, the second day.
9 And Elohim said, “Let the waters under the
shamayim be gathered together into one place, and let
the dry land appear.” And it came to be so.
10 And Elohim called the dry land ‘earth,’ and the
collection of the waters He called ‘seas.’ And Elohim
saw that it was good.
11 And Elohim said, “Let the earth bring forth grass,
the plant that yields seed, and the fruit tree that yields
fruit according to its kind, whose seed is in itself, on the
earth.” And it came to be so.
8

BERĔSHITH

And the earth brought forth grass, the plant that
yields seed according to its kind, and the tree that
yields fruit, whose seed is in itself according to its kind.
And Elohim saw that it was good.
13 And there came to be evening and there came to
be morning, the third day.
14 And Elohim said, “Let lights come to be in the
expanse of the shamayim to separate the day from the
night, and let them be for signs and Appointed Times,
and for days and years,
15 and let them be for lights in the expanse of the
shamayim to give light on the earth.” And it came to be
so.
16 And Elohim made two great lights: the greater light
to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night,
and the stars.
17 And Elohim placed them in the expanse of the
shamayim to give light on the earth,
18 and to rule over the day and over the night, and to
separate the light from the darkness. And Elohim saw
that it was good.
19 And there came to be evening and there came to
be morning, the fourth day.
20 And Elohim said, “Let the waters teem with shoals
of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth on
the face of the expanse of the shamayim.”
21 And Elohim created great sea creatures and every
living creature that moves, with which the waters
teemed, according to their kind, and every winged bird
according to its kind. And Elohim saw that it was good.
22 And Elohim baraḵ them, saying, “Bear fruit and
increase, and fill the waters in the seas, and let the
birds increase on the earth.”
23 And there came to be evening and there came to
be morning, the fifth day.
12

9

GENESIS

And Elohim said, “Let the earth bring forth the living
creature according to its kind: livestock and creeping
creatures and beasts of the earth, according to its
kind.” And it came to be so.
25 And Elohim made the beast of the earth according
to its kind, livestock according to its kind, and all that
creep on the earth according to its kind. And Elohim
saw that it was good.
26 And Elohim said, “Let Us make man in Our image,
according to Our likeness, and let them rule over the
fish of the sea, and over the birds of the shamayim,
and over the livestock, and over all the earth and over
all the creeping creatures that creep on the earth.”
27 And Elohim created the man in His image, in the
image of Elohim He created him - male and female He
created them.
28 And Elohim baraḵ them, and Elohim said to them,
“Bear fruit and increase, and fill the earth and subdue
it, and rule over the fish of the sea, and over the birds
of the shamayim, and over all creatures moving on the
earth.”
29 And Elohim said, “See, I have given you every plant
that yields seed which is on the face of all the earth,
and every tree whose fruit yields seed, to you it is for
food.
30 “And to every beast of the earth, and to every bird
of the shamayim, and to every creeping creature on
the earth, in which there is breath of life, every green
plant is for food.” And it came to be so.
31 And Elohim saw all that He had made, and see, it
was very good. And there came to be evening and
there came to be morning, the sixth day.
24

2 Thus the shamayim and the earth were completed,
and all their array.
10

BERĔSHITH

And on the seventh day Elohim completed His work
which He had done, and He rested on the seventh day
from all His work which He had made.
3 And Elohim baraḵ the seventh day and made it
qodesh, because on it He rested from all His work
which Elohim in creating had made.
4 These are the births of the shamayim and the earth
when they were created, in the day that HWHY Elohim
made earth and shamayim.
5 Now no shrub of the field was yet on the earth, and
no plant of the field had yet sprung up, for HWHY Elohim
had not sent rain on the earth, and there was no man
to till the ground,
6 but a mist went up from the earth and watered the
entire surface of the ground.
7 And HWHY Elohim formed the man out of dust from
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils breath of life.
And the man became a living being.
8 And HWHY Elohim planted a garden in Ĕḏen, to the
east, and there He put the man whom He had formed.
9 And out of the ground HWHY Elohim made every
tree grow that is pleasant to the sight and good for
food, with the tree of ḥai in the midst of the garden and
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
10 And a river went out of Ĕḏen to water the garden,
and from there it divided and became four riverheads.
11 The name of the first is Pishon, it is the one
surrounding the entire land of Ḥawilah, where there is
gold.
12 And the gold of that land is good. Bdellium is there,
and the shoham stone.
13 And the name of the second river is Giḥon, it is the
one surrounding the entire land of Kush.
2

11

GENESIS

And the name of the third river is Ḥiddeqel, it is the
one which goes toward the east of Ashshur. And the
fourth river is Perath.
15 And HWHY Elohim took the man and put him in the
garden of Ĕḏen to work it and to guard it.
16 And HWHY Elohim commanded the man, saying,
“Eat of every tree of the garden,
17 but do not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, for in the day that you eat of it you shall
certainly die.”
18 And HWHY Elohim said, “It is not good for the man
to be alone, I am going to make a helper for him, as
his counterpart.”
19 And from the ground HWHY Elohim formed every
beast of the field and every bird of the shamayim, and
brought them to the man to see what he would call
them. And whatever the man called each living
creature, that was its name.
20 So the man gave names to all livestock, and to the
birds of the shamayim, and to every beast of the field.
But for the man there was not found a helper for him,
as his counterpart.
21 So HWHY Elohim caused a deep sleep to fall on the
man, and he slept. And He took one of his ribs, and
closed up the flesh in its place.
22 And the rib which HWHY Elohim had taken from the
man He made into a woman, and He brought her to
the man.
23 And the man said, “This is now bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh. This one is called ‘woman’,
because she was taken out of man.”
24 For this cause a man shall leave his father and
mother, and join unto his wife, and they shall become
one flesh. And they were both naked, the man and his
wife, yet they were not ashamed.
14

12

BERĔSHITH

3 And the serpent was more crafty than any beast of
the field which HWHY Elohim had made, and he said to
the woman, “Is it true that Elohim has said, ‘Do not eat
of every tree of the garden’?”
2 And the woman said to the serpent, “We are to eat
of the fruit of the trees of the garden,
3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, Elohim has said, ‘Do not eat of it, nor touch it,
lest you die.’ ”
4 And the serpent said to the woman, “You shall
certainly not die.
5 “For Elohim knows that in the day you eat of it your
eyes shall be opened, and you shall be like Elohim,
knowing good and evil.”
6 And the woman saw that the tree was good for
food, that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree
desirable to make one wise, and she took of its fruit
and ate. And she also gave to her husband with her,
and he ate.
7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and
they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig
leaves together and made loin coverings for
themselves.
8 And they heard the sound of HWHY Elohim walking
about in the garden in the cool of the day, and Aḏam
and his wife hid themselves from the presence of HWHY
Elohim among the trees of the garden.
9 And HWHY Elohim called unto Aḏam and said to
him, “Where are you?”
10 And he said, “I heard Your voice in the garden, and
I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.”
11 And He said, “Who made you know that you were
naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I
commanded you that you should not eat?”
13

GENESIS

And the man said, “The woman whom You gave to
be with me, she gave me of the tree and I ate.”
13 And HWHY Elohim said to the woman, “What is this
you have done?” And the woman said, “The serpent
deceived me, and I ate.”
14 And HWHY Elohim said to the serpent, “Because
you have done this, you are cursed more than all
livestock and more than every beast of the field. On
your abdomen you are to go, and eat dust all the days
of your life.
15 “And I put enmity between you and the woman, and
between your seed and her Seed. He shall crush your
head, and you shall crush His heel.”
16 To the woman He said, “I greatly increase your
sorrow and your conception - bring forth children in
pain. And your desire is for your husband, and he rules
over you.”
17 And to the man He said, “Because you have
listened to the voice of your wife, and have eaten of
the tree of which I commanded you, saying, ‘Do not eat
of it’: “Cursed is the ground because of you, in toil you
are to eat of it all the days of your life,
18 and it shall bring forth thorns and thistles for you,
and you shall eat the plants of the field.
19 “By the sweat of your face you are to eat bread until
you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken.
For dust you are, and to dust you return.”
20 And the man called his wife’s name Ḥawwah,
because she became the mother of all living.
21 And HWHY Elohim made coats of skin for the man
and his wife and dressed them.
22 And HWHY Elohim said, “See, the man has become
like one of Us, to know good and evil. And now, lest he
put out his hand and take also of the tree of ḥai, and
eat, and live forever...”
12

14

BERĔSHITH

so HWHY Elohim sent him out of the garden of Ĕḏen
to till the ground from which he was taken,
24 and He drove the man out. And He placed keruḇim
at the east of the garden of Ĕḏen, and a flaming sword
which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree
of ḥai.
23

4 And Aḏam knew Ḥawwah his wife, and she
conceived and bore Qayin, and said, “I have gained a
man from HWHY.”
2 And again, she gave birth to his brother Heḇel. And
Heḇel became a keeper of sheep, but Qayin became
a tiller of the ground.
3 And it came to be, in the course of time, that Qayin
brought an offering of the fruit of the ground to HWHY.
4 And Heḇel also brought of the first-born of his flock
and of their fat. And HWHY looked to Heḇel and his
offering,
5 but He did not look to Qayin and his offering. And
Qayin was very wroth, and his face fell.
6 And HWHY said to Qayin, “Why are you wroth? And
why is your face fallen?
7 “If you do well, is there not acceptance? And if you
do not do well, sin is crouching at the door. And its
desire is for you, but you should master it.”
8 And Qayin told Heḇel his brother, “Come, let us go
into the field.” And it came to be when they were in the
field, that Qayin rose up against Heḇel his brother and
killed him.
9 And HWHY said to Qayin, “Where is Heḇel your
brother?” And he said, “I do not know. Am I my
brother’s guard?”
10 And He said, “What have you done? The voice of
your brother’s blood cries out to Me from the ground.
15

GENESIS

“And now you are cursed from the earth, which has
opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from
your hand.
12 “If you till the ground, it shall no longer yield its
strength to you. You shall be a fugitive and a wanderer
on the earth.”
13 And Qayin said to HWHY, “My wickedness is too
great to bear!
14 “See, You have driven me from the face of the
ground today, and I am hidden from Your face. I shall
be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth, and it shall
be that anyone who finds me kills me.”
15 And HWHY said to him, “Well, if anyone kills Qayin,
vengeance is taken on him sevenfold.” And HWHY
placed a sign for Qayin, lest anyone finding him kills
him.
16 So Qayin went out from the presence of HWHY and
dwelt in the land of Noḏ on the east of Ĕḏen.
17 And Qayin knew his wife, and she conceived and
bore Ḥanoḵ. And he built a city, and called the name
of the city after the name of his son, Ḥanoḵ.
18 And to Ḥanoḵ was born lraḏ. And lraḏ brought forth
Meḥuya’ĕl, and Meḥuya’ĕl brought forth Methusa’ĕl,
and Methusa’ĕl brought forth Lemeḵ.
19 And Lemeḵ took for himself two wives, the name of
one was Aḏah, and the name of the second was
Tsillah.
20 And Aḏah bore Yaḇal. He was the father of those
who dwell in tents, with livestock.
21 And his brother’s name was Yuḇal. He was the
father of all those who play the lyre and flute.
22 As for Tsillah, she also bore Tuḇal-Qayin, a smith
of all kinds of tools in bronze and iron. And the sister
of Tuḇal-Qayin was Na’amah.
11

16

BERĔSHITH

And Lemeḵ said to his wives Aḏah and Tsillah,
“Hear my voice! Wives of Lemeḵ, listen to my words!
For I have killed a man for wounding me, even a young
man for hurting me.
24 “For Qayin is avenged sevenfold, and Lemeḵ
seventy-sevenfold.”
25 And Aḏam knew his wife again, and she bore a son
and called his name Shĕth, “For Elohim has appointed
me another seed instead of Heḇel,” because Qayin
had slain him.
26 And to Shĕth, to him also a son was born. And he
called his name Enosh. Then it was begun to call on
the Name of HWHY.
23

5 This is the book of the genealogy of Aḏam. In the
day that Elohim created man, He made him in the
likeness of Elohim.
2 Male and female He created them, and He baraḵ
them, and called their name ‘Aḏam’ in the day they
were created.
3 And Aḏam lived one hundred and thirty years, and
brought forth a son in his own likeness, after his image,
and called his name Shĕth.
4 And after he brought forth Shĕth, the days of Aḏam
were eight hundred years. And he brought forth sons
and daughters.
5 So all the days that Aḏam lived were nine hundred
and thirty years, and he died.
6 And Shĕth lived one hundred and five years, and
brought forth Enosh.
7 And after he brought forth Enosh, Shĕth lived eight
hundred and seven years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
8 So all the days of Shĕth were nine hundred and
twelve years, and he died.
17

GENESIS

And Enosh lived ninety years, and brought forth
Qĕynan.
10 And after he brought forth Qĕynan, Enosh lived
eight hundred and fifteen years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
11 So all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and
five years, and he died.
12 And Qĕynan lived seventy years, and brought forth
Mahalal’ĕl.
13 After he brought forth Mahalal’ĕl, Qĕynan lived
eight hundred and forty years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
14 So all the days of Qĕynan were nine hundred and
ten years, and he died.
15 And Mahalal’ĕl lived sixty-five years, and brought
forth Yereḏ.
16 And after he brought forth Yereḏ, Mahalal’ĕl lived
eight hundred and thirty years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
17 So all the days of Mahalal’ĕl were eight hundred
and ninety-five years, and he died.
18 And Yereḏ lived one hundred and sixty-two years,
and brought forth Ḥanoḵ.
19 And after he brought forth Ḥanoḵ, Yereḏ lived eight
hundred years, and brought forth sons and daughters.
20 So all the days of Yereḏ were nine hundred and
sixty-two years, and he died.
21 And Ḥanoḵ lived sixty-five years, and brought forth
Methushelaḥ.
22 And after he brought forth Methushelaḥ, Ḥanoḵ
walked with Elohim three hundred years, and brought
forth sons and daughters.
23 So all the days of Ḥanoḵ were three hundred and
sixty-five years.
9

18

BERĔSHITH

And Ḥanoḵ walked with Elohim. Then he was no
more, for Elohim took him.
25 And Methushelaḥ lived one hundred and eightyseven years, and brought forth Lemeḵ.
26 And after he brought forth Lemeḵ, Methushelaḥ
lived seven hundred and eighty-two years, and
brought forth sons and daughters.
27 So all the days of Methushelaḥ were nine hundred
and sixty-nine years, and he died.
28 And Lemeḵ lived one hundred and eighty-two
years, and brought forth a son,
29 and called his name Noaḥ, saying, “This one
comforts us concerning our work and the toil of our
hands, because of the ground which HWHY has
cursed.”
30 And after he brought forth Noaḥ, Lemeḵ lived five
hundred and ninety-five years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
31 So all the days of Lemeḵ were seven hundred and
seventy-seven years, and he died.
32 And Noaḥ was five hundred years old, and Noaḥ
brought forth Shĕm, Ḥam, and Yepheth.
24

6 And it came to be, when men began to increase on
the face of the earth, and daughters were born to them,
2 that the sons of Elohim saw the daughters of men,
that they were good. And they took wives for
themselves of all whom they chose.
3 And HWHY said, “My Ruaḥ shall not strive with
mankind forever in his going astray. He is flesh, and
his days shall be one hundred and twenty years.”
4
The Nephilim were on the earth in those days, and
also afterward, when the sons of Elohim came in to the
daughters of men and they bore children to them.
19

GENESIS

Those were the mighty men who were of old, the men
of name.
5 And HWHY saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, and that every inclination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
6 And HWHY was sorry that He had made man on the
earth, and He was grieved in His heart.
7 And HWHY said, “I am going to wipe off man whom
I have created from the face of the earth, both man and
beast, creeping creature and birds of the shamayim,
for I am sorry that I have made them.”
8 But Noaḥ found favour in the eyes of HWHY.
9 This is the genealogy of Noaḥ. Noaḥ was a
righteous man, perfect in his generations. Noaḥ
walked with Elohim.
10 And Noaḥ brought forth three sons: Shĕm, Ḥam
and Yepheth.
11 And the earth was corrupt before Elohim, and the
earth was filled with violence.
12 And Elohim looked upon the earth and saw that it
was corrupt - for all flesh had corrupted their way on
the earth 13 and Elohim said to Noaḥ, “The end of all flesh has
come before Me, for the earth is filled with violence
through them. And see, I am going to destroy them
from the earth.
14 “Make yourself an ark of gopherwood. Make rooms
in the ark, and cover it inside and outside with tar.
15 “And this is how you are to make it: The length of
the ark is three hundred ammah, its width fifty ammah,
and its height thirty ammah.
16 “Make a window for the ark, and complete it to an
ammah from above. And put the door of the ark in its
side. Make it with lower, second, and third decks.
20

BERĔSHITH

“And see, I Myself am bringing floodwaters on the
earth, to destroy all flesh in which is the breath of life
from under the shamayim - all that is on the earth is to
die.
18 “And I shall establish My Covenant with you, and
you shall come into the ark, you and your sons and
your wife and your sons’ wives with you.
19 “And of all the living creatures of all flesh, two of
each, you are to bring into the ark, to keep them alive
with you - a male and a female.
20 “Of the birds after their kind, and of the cattle after
their kind, and of all creeping creatures of the earth
after their kind, two of each are to come to you, to keep
them alive.
21 “As for you, take of all food that is eaten and gather
it to yourself. And it shall be food for you and for them.”
22 And Noaḥ did according to all that Elohim
commanded him, so he did.
17

7 And HWHY said to Noaḥ, “Come into the ark, you
and all your household, because I have seen that you
are righteous before Me in this generation.
2 “Of all the clean beasts take with you seven pairs,
a male and his female; and of the beasts that are
unclean two, a male and his female;
3 and of birds of the shamayim seven pairs, male and
female, to keep offspring alive on the face of all the
earth.
4 “For after seven more days I am sending rain on
the earth, forty days and forty nights, and shall wipe
from the face of the earth all that stand that I created.”
5 And Noaḥ did according to all that HWHY
commanded him.
6 Now Noaḥ was six hundred years old when the
flood-waters were on the earth.
21

GENESIS

And Noaḥ and his sons and his wife and his sons’
wives went into the ark because of the waters of the
flood.
8 Of the clean beasts and of the beasts that are
unclean, and of birds, and of all that creep on the earth,
9 two by two they went into the ark to Noaḥ, male and
female, as Elohim had commanded Noaḥ.
10 And it came to be after seven days that the waters
of the flood were on the earth.
11 In the six hundredth year of Noaḥ’s life, in the
second month, the seventeenth day of the month, on
that day all the fountains of the great deep were broken
up, and the windows of the shamayim were opened.
12 And the rain was on the earth forty days and forty
nights.
13 On that same day Noaḥ and Shĕm and Ḥam and
Yepheth, the sons of Noaḥ, and Noaḥ’s wife and the
three wives of his sons with them, went into the ark,
14 they and every living creature after its kind, and
every beast after its kind, and every creeping creature
that creeps on the earth after its kind, and every bird
after its kind, every bird of every sort.
15 And they went into the ark to Noaḥ, two by two, of
all flesh in which is the breath of life.
16 And those going in, male and female of all flesh,
went in as Elohim had commanded him, and HWHY
shut him in.
17 And the flood was on the earth forty days, and the
waters increased and lifted up the ark, and it rose high
above the earth.
18 And the waters were mighty and greatly increased
on the earth, and the ark moved about on the surface
of the waters.
7

22

BERĔSHITH

And the waters were exceedingly mighty on the
earth, and all the high mountains under all the
shamayim were covered.
20 The waters became mighty, fifteen ammah upward,
and the mountains were covered.
21 And all flesh died that moved on the earth - birds
and cattle and beasts and every creeping creature that
creeps on the earth, and all mankind.
22 All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of
life, all that was on the dry land, died.
23 So He wiped off all that stand, which were on the
face of the ground - both man and beast, creeping
creature and bird of the shamayim. And they were
wiped off from the earth. And only Noaḥ was left, and
those with him in the ark.
24 And the waters were mighty on the earth, one
hundred and fifty days.
19

8 And Elohim remembered Noaḥ, and all the beasts
and all the cattle that were with him in the ark. And
Elohim made a wind to pass over the earth, and the
waters subsided.
2 And the fountains of the deep and the windows of
the shamayim were stopped, and the rain from the
shamayim was withheld.
3 And the waters receded steadily from the earth,
and at the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters
diminished.
4 And in the seventh month, the seventeenth day of
the month, the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat.
5 And the waters decreased steadily until the tenth
month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the
month, the tops of the mountains became visible.

23

GENESIS

And it came to be, at the end of forty days, that
Noaḥ opened the window of the ark which he had
made,
7 and he sent out a raven, which kept going out and
turning back until the waters had dried up from the
earth.
8 Then he sent out a dove from him, to see if the
waters had receded from the face of the ground.
9 But the dove found no resting place for its feet and
returned into the ark to him, for the waters were on the
face of all the earth. So he put out his hand and took
it, and pulled it into the ark to himself.
10 And he waited yet another seven days, and again
he sent the dove out from the ark.
11 And the dove came to him in the evening, and see,
a freshly plucked olive leaf was in its mouth. And Noaḥ
knew that the waters had receded from the earth.
12 And he waited yet another seven days and sent out
the dove, which did not return to him again.
13 And it came to be in the six hundred and first year,
in the first month, the first day of the month, that the
waters were dried up from the earth. And Noaḥ
removed the covering of the ark and looked, and saw
the surface of the ground was dry.
14 And in the second month, on the twenty-seventh
day of the month, the earth was dry.
15 And Elohim spoke to Noaḥ, saying,
16 “Go out of the ark, you and your wife and your sons
and your sons’ wives with you.
17 “Bring out with you every living creature of all flesh
that is with you: of birds, of cattle and all creeping
creatures that creep on the earth. And let them teem
on the earth, and bear and increase on the earth.”
18 So Noaḥ went out, and his sons and his wife and
his sons’ wives with him,
6

24

BERĔSHITH

every beast, every creeping creature, and every
bird, whatever creeps on the earth, according to their
kinds, went out of the ark.
20 And Noaḥ built an altar to HWHY, and took of every
clean beast and of every clean bird, and offered burnt
offerings on the altar.
21 And HWHY smelled a soothing fragrance, and HWHY
said in His heart, “Never again shall I curse the ground
because of man, although the inclination of man’s
heart is evil from his youth, and never again smite all
life, as I have done,
22 as long as the earth remains, seedtime and
harvest, and cold and heat, and winter and summer,
and day and night shall not cease.”
19

9 And Elohim baraḵ Noaḥ and his sons, and said to
them, “Bear fruit and increase, and fill the earth.
2 “And the fear of you and the dread of you is on
every beast of the earth, on every bird of the
shamayim, on all that creeps on the ground, and on all
the fish of the sea - into your hand they have been
given.
3 “Every moving creature that lives is food for you. I
have given you all, as the green plants.
4 “But do not eat flesh with its life, its blood.
5 “But only your blood for your lives I require, from
the hand of every beast I require it, and from the hand
of man. From the hand of every man’s brother I require
the life of man.
6 “Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man his blood is
shed, for in the image of Elohim has He made man.
7 “As for you, bear fruit and increase, bring forth
teemingly in the earth and increase in it.”
8 And Elohim spoke to Noaḥ and to his sons with him,
saying,
25

GENESIS

“And I, see, I establish My Covenant with you and
with your seed after you,
10 and with every living creature that is with you: of the
birds, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with
you, of all that go out of the ark, every beast of the
earth.
11 “And I shall establish My Covenant with you, and
never again is all flesh cut off by the waters of the flood,
and never again is there a flood to destroy the earth.”
12 And Elohim said, “This is the sign of the Covenant
which I make between Me and you, and every living
creature that is with you, for all generations to come:
13 “I shall put My rainbow in the cloud, and it shall be
for the sign of the Covenant between Me and the earth.
14 “And it shall be, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the rainbow shall be seen in the cloud,
15 and I shall remember My Covenant which is
between Me and you and every living creature of all
flesh, and never again let the waters become a flood
to destroy all flesh.
16 “And the rainbow shall be in the cloud, and I shall
see it, to remember the everlasting Covenant between
Elohim and every living creature of all flesh that is on
the earth.”
17 And Elohim said to Noaḥ, “This is the sign of the
Covenant which I have established between Me and
all flesh that is on the earth.”
18 And the sons of Noaḥ who went out of the ark were
Shĕm and Ḥam and Yepheth. And Ḥam was the father
of Kena’an.
19 These three were the sons of Noaḥ, and all the
earth was overspread from them.
20 And Noaḥ, a man of the soil, began and planted a
vineyard.
9

26

BERĔSHITH

And he drank of the wine and was drunk, and
became uncovered in his tent.
22 And Ḥam, the father of Kena’an, saw the
nakedness of his father, and told his two brothers
outside.
23 So Shĕm and Yepheth took a garment, laid it on
both their shoulders, and went backward and covered
the nakedness of their father, but their faces were
turned away, and they did not see their father’s
nakedness.
24 And Noaḥ awoke from his wine, and he knew what
his younger son had done to him,
25 and he said, “Cursed is Kena’an, let him become a
servant of servants to his brothers.”
26 And he said, “Baruḵ be HWHY, the Elohim of Shĕm,
and let Kena’an become his servant.
27 “Let Elohim enlarge Yepheth, and let him dwell in
the tents of Shĕm. And let Kena’an become his
servant.”
28 And Noaḥ lived after the flood three hundred and
fifty years.
29 So all the days of Noaḥ were nine hundred and fifty
years, and he died.
21

10 And this is the genealogy of the sons of Noaḥ:
Shĕm, Ḥam, and Yepheth. And sons were born to
them after the flood.
2 The sons of Yepheth: Gomer, and Maḡoḡ, and
Maḏai, and Yawan, and Tuḇal, and Mesheḵ and Tiras.
3 And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Riphath,
and Toḡarmah.
4 And the sons of Yawan: Elishah and Tarshish,
Kittim and Doḏanim.
5 From these the coastland peoples of the nations
were separated into their lands, everyone according to
27

GENESIS

his language, according to their clans, into their
nations.
6 And the sons of Ḥam: Kush, and Mitsrayim, and
Put, and Kena’an.
7 And the sons of Kush: Seḇa, and Ḥawilah, and
Saḇtah, and Ra’mah, and Saḇteḵa. And the sons of
Ra’mah: Sheḇa and Deḏan.
8 And Kush brought forth Nimroḏ, he began to be a
mighty one on the earth.
9 He was a mighty hunter before HWHY, therefore it is
said, “Like Nimroḏ the mighty hunter before HWHY.”
10 And the beginning of his reign was Baḇel, and Ereḵ,
and Akkaḏ, and Kalnĕh, in the land of Shin’ar.
11 From that land he went to Ashshur and built
Ninewĕh, and Reḥoḇoth Ir, and Kelaḥ,
12 and Resen between Ninewĕh and Kelaḥ, the great
city.
13 And Mitsrayim brought forth Luḏim, and Anamim,
and Lehaḇim, and Naphtuḥim,
14 and Pathrusim, and Kasluḥim, from whom came
the Pelishtites and Kaphtorim.
15 And Kena’an brought forth Tsiḏon his first-born,
and Ḥĕth,
16 and the Yeḇusite, and the Amorite, and the
Girgashite,
17 and the Ḥiwwite, and the Arqite, and the Sinite,
18 and the Arwaḏite, and the Tsemarite, and the
Ḥamathite. And afterward the clans of the Kena’anites
were spread abroad.
19 And the border of the Kena’anites was from Tsiḏon
as you go toward Gerar, as far as Azzah, as you go
toward Seḏom, and Amorah, and Aḏmah, and
Tseḇoyim, as far as Lasha.

28

BERĔSHITH

These were the sons of Ḥam, according to their
clans, according to their languages, in their lands, in
their nations.
21 And also to Shĕm, the father of all the children of
Ĕḇer, the brother of Yepheth the elder, brought forth.
22 The sons of Shĕm: Ĕylam, and Asshur, and
Arpaḵshaḏ, and Luḏ, and Aram.
23 And the sons of Aram: Uts, and Ḥul, and Gether,
and Mash.
24 And Arpaḵshaḏ brought forth Shelaḥ, and Shelaḥ
brought forth Ĕḇer.
25 And to Ĕḇer were born two sons, the name of one
was Peleḡ, for in his days the earth was divided, and
his brother’s name was Yoqtan.
26 And Yoqtan brought forth Almoḏaḏ, and Sheleph,
and Ḥatsarmaweth, and Yeraḥ,
27 and Haḏoram, and Uzal, and Diqlah,
28 and Oḇal, and Aḇima’ĕl, and Sheḇa,
29 and Ophir, and Ḥawilah, and Yoḇaḇ. All these were
sons of Yoqtan.
30 And their dwelling place was from Mĕysha as you
go toward Sephar, a mountain of the east.
31 These were the sons of Shĕm, according to their
clans, according to their languages, in their lands,
according to their nations.
32 These were the clans of the sons of Noaḥ,
according to their generations, in their nations. And
from these the nations were divided on the earth after
the flood.
20

11And it came to be, all the earth had one language
and one speech.
2 And it came to be, as they departed from the east,
that they found a plain in the land of Shin’ar, and they
dwelt there.
29

GENESIS

And they said to each other, “Come, let us make
bricks and bake them thoroughly.” And they had brick
for stone, and they had asphalt for mortar.
4 And they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city,
and a tower whose top is in the shamayim, and make
a name for ourselves, lest we be scattered over all the
face of the earth.”
5 Then HWHY came down to see the city and the
tower which the sons of men had built.
6 And HWHY said, “Look, they are one people and
they all have one language, and this is what they begin
to do! And now, they are not going to be withheld from
doing whatever they plan to do.
7 “Come, let Us go there and confuse their language,
so that they do not understand one another’s speech.”
8 And HWHY scattered them from there, over the face
of all the earth, and they ceased building the city.
9 That is why its name was called Baḇel, because
there HWHY confused the language of all the earth, and
from there HWHY scattered them over the face of all the
earth.
10 This is the genealogy of Shĕm: Shĕm was a
hundred years old and brought forth Arpaḵshaḏ, two
years after the flood.
11 And after he brought forth Arpaḵshaḏ, Shĕm lived
five hundred years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
12 And Arpaḵshaḏ lived thirty-five years, and brought
forth Shelaḥ.
13 And after he brought forth Shelaḥ, Arpaḵshaḏ lived
four hundred and three years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
14 And Shelaḥ lived thirty years, and brought forth
Ĕḇer.
3

30

BERĔSHITH

And after he brought forth Ĕḇer, Shelaḥ lived four
hundred and three years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
16 And Ĕḇer lived thirty-four years, and brought forth
Peleḡ.
17 And after he brought forth Peleḡ, Ĕḇer lived four
hundred and thirty years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
18 And Peleḡ lived thirty years, and brought forth Re’u.
19 And after he brought forth Re’u, Peleḡ lived two
hundred and nine years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
20 And Re’u lived thirty-two years, and brought forth
Seruḡ.
21 And after he brought forth Seruḡ, Re’u lived two
hundred and seven years, and brought forth sons and
daughters.
22 And Seruḡ lived thirty years, and brought forth
Naḥor.
23 And after he brought forth Naḥor, Seruḡ lived two
hundred years, and brought forth sons and daughters.
24 And Naḥor lived twenty-nine years, and brought
forth Teraḥ.
25 And after he brought forth Teraḥ, Naḥor lived one
hundred and nineteen years, and brought forth sons
and daughters.
26 And Teraḥ lived seventy years, and brought forth
Aḇram, Naḥor, and Haran.
27 And this is the genealogy of Teraḥ: Teraḥ brought
forth Aḇram, Naḥor, and Haran. And Haran brought
forth Lot.
28 And Haran died before his father Teraḥ in the land
of his birth, in Ur-Kasdim.
29 And Aḇram and Naḥor took wives: the name of
Aḇram’s wife was Sarai, and the name of Naḥor’s wife,
15

31

GENESIS

Milkah, the daughter of Haran the father of Milkah and
the father of Yiskah.
30 And Sarai was barren, she had no child.
31 And Teraḥ took his son Aḇram and his grandson
Lot, son of Haran, and his daughter-in-law Sarai, his
son Aḇram’s wife, and they went out with them from
Ur-Kasdim to go to the land of Kena’an. And they came
to Ḥaran and dwelt there.
32 And the days of Teraḥ came to be two hundred and
five years, and Teraḥ died in Ḥaran.

12 And HWHY said to Aḇram, “Go yourself out of
your land, from your relatives and from your father’s
house, to a land which I show you.
2 “And I shall make you a great nation, and baraḵ you
and make your name great, and you shall be a
beraḵah!
3 “And I shall baraḵ those who baraḵ you, and curse
him who curses you. And in you all the clans of the
earth shall be baruḵ.”
4 So Aḇram left, as HWHY had commanded him, and
Lot went with him. And Aḇram was seventy-five years
old when he departed from Ḥaran.
5 And Aḇram took Sarai his wife and Lot his brother’s
son, and all their possessions that they had gathered,
and the beings whom they had acquired in Ḥaran, and
they departed for the land of Kena’an. And they came
to the land of Kena’an.
6 And Aḇram passed through the land to the place of
Sheḵem, as far as the terebinth tree of Moreh. At that
time the Kena’anites were in the land.
7 And HWHY appeared to Aḇram and said, “To your
seed I give this land.” And he built there an altar to
HWHY, who had appeared to him.
32

BERĔSHITH

And from there he moved to the mountain east of
Bĕyth Ĕl, and he pitched his tent, with Bĕyth Ĕl on the
west and Ai on the east. And he built there an altar to
HWHY, and called on the Name of HWHY.
9 And Aḇram departed, continuing toward the Negeḇ.
10 And a scarcity of food came to be in the land, and
Aḇram went down to Mitsrayim to dwell there, for the
scarcity of food was severe in the land.
11 And it came to be, when he was close to entering
Mitsrayim, that he said to Sarai his wife, “See, I know
that you are a lovely woman to look at.
12 “And it shall be, when the Mitsrites see you, that
they shall say, ‘This is his wife.’ And they shall kill me,
but let you live.
13 “Please say you are my sister, so that it shall be
well with me for your sake, and my life be spared
because of you.”
14 And it came to be, when Aḇram came into
Mitsrayim, that the Mitsrites saw the woman, that she
was very lovely.
15 And Pharaoh’s officials saw her and praised her
before Pharaoh, and the woman was taken to
Pharaoh’s house.
16 And he treated Aḇram well for her sake, and he had
sheep, and cattle, and male donkeys, and male and
female servants, and female donkeys, and camels.
17 But HWHY plagued Pharaoh and his house with
great plagues because of Sarai, Aḇram’s wife.
18 And Pharaoh called Aḇram and said, “What is this
you have done to me? Why did you not inform me that
she was your wife?
19 “Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’? And so I was
going to take her for my wife. Look, here is your wife,
take her and go.”
8

33

GENESIS

And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him,
and they sent him away, with his wife and all that he
had.

20

13 And Aḇram went up from Mitsrayim into the
Negeḇ, he and his wife and all that he had, and Lot
with him.
2 And Aḇram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and
in gold.
3 And he went on his journey from the Negeḇ as far
as Bĕyth Ĕl, to the place where his tent had been at
the beginning, between Bĕyth Ĕl and Ai,
4 to the place of the altar which he had made there
at first. And there Aḇram called on the Name of HWHY.
5 Now Lot, who went with Aḇram, also had flocks and
herds and tents.
6 And the land was not able to bear them, that they
might dwell together, for their possessions were great,
so that they could not dwell together.
7 And there was strife between the herdsmen of
Aḇram’s livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock.
And at that time the Kena’anites and the Perizzites
dwelt in the land.
8 Then Aḇram said to Lot, “Please let there be no
strife between you and me, and between my herdsmen
and your herdsmen, for we are brothers.
9 “Is not all the land before you? Please separate
from me. If you take the left, then I go to the right; or, if
you go to the right, then I go to the left.”
10 And Lot lifted his eyes and saw all the plain of the
Yardĕn, that it was well watered everywhere - before
HWHY destroyed Seḏom and Amorah – like the garden
of HWHY, like the land of Mitsrayim as you go toward
Tso’ar.
34

BERĔSHITH

So Lot chose for himself all the plain of the Yardĕn,
and Lot moved east. Thus they separated from each
other,
12 Aḇram dwelling in the land of Kena’an, and Lot
dwelling in the cities of the plain and pitched his tent
as far as Seḏom.
13 But the men of Seḏom were evil and sinned before
HWHY, exceedingly so.
14 And after Lot had separated from him, HWHY said to
Aḇram, “Now lift up your eyes and look from the place
where you are, northward and southward and
eastward and westward,
15 for all the land which you see I shall give to you and
your seed forever.
16 “And I shall make your seed as the dust of the
earth, so that, if a man could count the dust of the
earth, then your seed also could be counted.
17 “Arise, walk in the land through its length and its
width, for I give it to you.”
18 So Aḇram moved his tent, and went and dwelt by
the terebinth trees of Mamrĕ, which are in Ḥeḇron, and
built an altar there to HWHY.
11

14 And it came to be in the days of Amraphel
sovereign of Shin’ar, Aryoḵ sovereign of Ellasar,
Keḏorla’omer sovereign of Ĕylam, and Tiḏ’al sovereign
of Goyim,
2 that they fought against Bera sovereign of Seḏom,
Birsha sovereign of Amorah, Shinaḇ sovereign of
Aḏmah, Shem’ĕḇer sovereign of Tseḇoyim, and the
sovereign of Bela, that is Tso’ar.
3 All these joined together in the Valley of Siddim,
that is the Salt Sea.
4 Twelve years they served Keḏorla’omer, and in the
thirteenth year they rebelled.
35

GENESIS

And in the fourteenth year Keḏorla’omer and the
sovereigns that were with him came and smote the
Repha’im in Ashteroth Qarnayim, and the Zuzim in
Ḥam, and the Ĕymites in Shawĕh Qiryathayim,
6 and the Ḥorites in their mountain of Sĕ’ir, as far as
Ĕl Paran, which is by the wilderness.
7 And they turned back and came to Ĕyn Mishpat,
that is Qaḏĕsh, and smote all the country of the
Amalĕqites, and also the Amorites who dwelt in
Ḥatsetson Tamar.
8 And the sovereign of Seḏom, and the sovereign of
Amorah, and the sovereign of Aḏmah, and the
sovereign of Tseḇoyim, and the sovereign of Bela, that
is Tso’ar, went out and joined together in battle in the
Valley of Siddim,
9 against Keḏorla’omer sovereign of Ĕylam, and
Tiḏ’al sovereign of Goyim, and Amraphel sovereign of
Shin’ar, and Aryoḵ sovereign of Ellasar - four
sovereigns against five.
10 And the Valley of Siddim had many tar pits. And the
sovereigns of Seḏom and Amorah fled and fell there,
and the remainder fled to the mountains.
11 And they took all the goods of Seḏom and Amorah,
and all their food, and went away.
12 And they took Lot, Aḇram’s brother’s son who dwelt
in Seḏom, and his goods, and left.
13 And one who had escaped came and informed
Aḇram the lḇri, for he dwelt by the terebinth trees of
Mamrĕ the Amorite, brother of Eshkol and brother of
Anĕr, and they had a covenant with Aḇram.
14 And when Aḇram heard that his brother was taken
captive, he armed his three hundred and eighteen
trained servants who were born in his own house, and
went in pursuit as far as Dan.
5

36

BERĔSHITH

And he and his servants divided against them by
night, and smote them and pursued them as far as
Ḥoḇah, which is on the left of Dammeseq.
16 So he brought back all the goods, and also brought
back his brother Lot and his goods, as well as the
women and the people.
17 And after his return from the defeat of Keḏorla’omer
and the sovereigns who were with him, the sovereign
of Seḏom came out to meet him at the Valley of
Shawĕh, that is, the Sovereign’s Valley.
18 And Malkitseḏeq sovereign of Shalĕm brought out
bread and wine. Now he was the kohĕn of the Most
High Ĕl.
19 And he baraḵ him and said, “Baruḵ be Aḇram of the
Most High Ĕl, Possessor of the shamayim and earth.
20 “And baruḵ be the Most High Ĕl who has delivered
your enemies into your hand.” And he gave him a tenth
of all.
21 And the sovereign of Seḏom said to Aḇram, “Give
me the people, and take the goods for yourself.”
22 But Aḇram said to the sovereign of Seḏom, “I have
lifted my hand to HWHY, the Most High Ĕl, the
Possessor of the shamayim and earth,
23 not to take a thread or a sandal strap or whatever
is yours, lest you should say, ‘I have made Aḇram rich,’
24 except only what the young men have eaten, and
the portion of the men who went with me: Anĕr, Eshkol,
and Mamrĕ. Let them take their portion.”
15

15 After these events the word of HWHY came to
Aḇram in a vision, saying, “Do not be afraid, Aḇram. I
am your shield, your reward is exceedingly great.”
2 And Aḇram said, “Aḏonai HWHY, what would You
give me, seeing I go childless, and the heir of my
house is Eli’ezer of Dammeseq?”
37

GENESIS

And Aḇram said, “See, You have given me no seed,
and see, one born in my house is my heir!”
4 And see, the word of HWHY came to him, saying,
“This one is not your heir, but he who comes from your
own body is your heir.”
5 And He brought him outside and said, “Look now
toward the shamayim, and count the stars if you are
able to count them.” And He said to him, “So are your
seed.”
6 And he believed in HWHY, and He reckoned it to him
for righteousness.
7 And He said to him, “I am HWHY, who brought you
out of Ur-Kasdim, to give you this land to inherit it.”
8 And he said, “Aḏonai HWHY, whereby do I know that
I possess it?”
9 And He said to him, “Bring Me a three-year-old
heifer, and a three-year-old female goat, and a threeyear-old ram, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.”
10 And he took all these to Him and cut them in the
middle, and placed each half opposite the other, but
he did not cut the birds.
11 And the birds of prey came down on the carcasses,
and Aḇram drove them away.
12 And it came to be, when the sun was going down,
and a deep sleep fell upon Aḇram, that see, a
frightening great darkness fell upon him.
13 And He said to Aḇram, “Know for certain that your
seed are to be sojourners in a land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four
hundred years.
14 “But the nation whom they serve I am going to
judge, and afterward let them come out with great
possessions.
15 “Now as for you, you are to go to your fathers in
peace, you are to be buried at a good old age.
3

38

BERĔSHITH

“Then, in the fourth generation they shall return
here, for the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet
complete.”
17 And it came to be, when the sun went down and it
was dark, that see, a smoking oven and a burning
torch passing between those pieces.
18 On the same day HWHY made a Covenant with
Aḇram, saying, “I have given this land to your seed,
from the river of Mitsrayim to the great river, the River
Perath,
19 with the Qĕynite, and the Qenizzite, and the
Qaḏmonite,
20 and the Ḥittite, and the Perizzite, and the Repha’im,
21 and the Amorite, and the Kena’anite, and the
Girgashite, and the Yeḇusite.”
16

16 And Sarai, Aḇram’s wife, had borne him no child.
And she had a Mitsrite female servant whose name
was Haḡar.
2 And Sarai said to Aḇram, “See, HWHY has kept me
from bearing children. Please, go in to my female
servant. It might be that I am built up by her.” And
Abram listened to the voice of Sarai.
3 And Sarai, Aḇram’s wife, took Haḡar her female
servant, the Mitsrite, and gave her to her husband
Aḇram to be his wife, after Aḇram had dwelt ten years
in the land of Kena’an.
4 And he went in to Haḡar, and she conceived. And
when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress
was despised in her eyes.
5 And Sarai said to Aḇram, “My wrong be upon you!
I gave my female servant into your bosom. And when
she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her
eyes. Let HWHY judge between you and me.”
39

GENESIS

And Aḇram said to Sarai, “See, your female servant
is in your hand, do to her what is good in your eyes.”
And Sarai treated her harshly, and she fled from her
presence.
7 And the Messenger of HWHY found her by a spring
of water in the wilderness, by the spring on the way to
Shur,
8 and He said, “Haḡar, Sarai’s female servant, where
have you come from, and where are you going?” And
she said, “I am fleeing from the presence of Sarai, my
mistress.”
9 And the Messenger of HWHY said to her, “Return to
your mistress, and humble yourself under her hand.”
10 And the Messenger of HWHY said to her, “I am going
to increase your seed greatly, too numerous to be
counted.”
11 And the Messenger of HWHY said to her, “See, you
are conceiving and bearing a son, and shall call his
name Yishma’ĕl, because HWHY has heard your
affliction.
12 “And he is to be a wild man, his hand against every
one and every one’s hand against him, and dwell over
against all his brothers.”
13 And she called the Name of HWHY who spoke to
her, “You are the Ĕl who sees,” for she said, “Even
here have I seen after Him who sees me?”
14 That is why the well was called Be’ĕr Laḥai Ro’i,
see, it is between Qaḏĕsh and Bereḏ.
15 And Haḡar bore Aḇram a son, and Aḇram called
the name of his son, whom Haḡar bore, Yishma’ĕl.
16 And Aḇram was eighty-six years old when Haḡar
bore Yishma’ĕl to Aḇram.
6

40

BERĔSHITH

17And it came to be when Aḇram was ninety-nine
years old, that HWHY appeared to Aḇram and said to
him, “I am Ĕl Shaddai - walk before Me and be perfect.
2 “And I give My Covenant between Me and you, and
shall greatly increase you.”
3 And Aḇram fell on his face, and Elohim spoke with
him, saying,
4 “As for Me, look, My Covenant is with you, and you
shall become a father of many nations.
5 “And no longer is your name called Aḇram, but your
name shall be Aḇraham, because I shall make you a
father of many nations.
6 “And I shall make you bear fruit exceedingly, and
make nations of you, and sovereigns shall come from
you.
7 “And I shall establish My Covenant between Me
and you and your seed after you in their generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be Elohim to you and
your seed after you.
8 “And I shall give to you and your seed after you the
land of your sojournings, all the land of Kena’an, as an
everlasting possession. And I shall be their Elohim.”
9 And Elohim said to Aḇraham, “As for you, guard My
Covenant, you and your seed after you throughout
their generations.
10 “This is My Covenant which you guard between Me
and you, and your seed after you: Every male child
among you is to be circumcised.
11 “And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,
and it shall become a sign of the Covenant between
Me and you.
12 “And a son of eight days is circumcised by you,
every male child in your generations, he who is born in
41

GENESIS

your house or bought with silver from any foreigner
who is not of your seed.
13 “He who is born in your house, and he who is
bought with your silver, has to be circumcised. So shall
My Covenant be in your flesh, for an everlasting
Covenant.
14 “And an uncircumcised male child, who is not
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, his life shall be
cut off from his people - he has broken My Covenant.”
15 And Elohim said to Aḇraham, “As for Sarai your
wife, do not call her name Sarai, for Sarah is her name.
16 “And I shall baraḵ her and also give you a son by
her. And I shall baraḵ her, and she shall become
nations - sovereigns of peoples are to be from her.”
17 And Aḇraham fell on his face and laughed, and said
in his heart, “ls a child born to a man who is a hundred
years old? Or is Sarah, who is ninety years old, to bear
a child?”
18 And Aḇraham said to Elohim, “Oh, let Yishma’ĕl live
before You!”
19 And Elohim said, “No, Sarah your wife is truly
bearing a son to you, and you shall call his name
Yitsḥaq. And I shall establish My Covenant with him for
an everlasting Covenant, and with his seed after him.
20 “And as for Yishma’ĕl, I have heard you. See, I shall
baraḵ him, and shall make him bear fruit, and greatly
increase him. He is to bring forth twelve princes, and I
shall make him a great nation.
21 “But My Covenant I establish with Yitsḥaq, whom
Sarah is to bear to you at this appointed time next
year.”
22 And when He had ended speaking with him, Elohim
went up from Aḇraham.
23 And Aḇraham took Yishma’ĕl his son, and all those
born in his house and all those bought with his silver,
42

BERĔSHITH

every male among the men of Aḇraham’s house, and
circumcised the flesh of their foreskins that same day,
as Elohim told him.
24 And Aḇraham was ninety-nine years old when he
was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
25 And Yishma’ĕl his son was thirteen years old when
he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
26 Aḇraham and his son Yishma’ĕl were circumcised
that same day.
27 And all the men of his house, born in the house or
bought with silver from a foreigner, were circumcised
with him.

18 And HWHY appeared to him by the terebinth trees
of Mamrĕ, while he was sitting in the tent door in the
heat of the day.
2 So he lifted his eyes and looked, and saw three
men standing opposite him. And when he saw them,
he ran from the tent door to meet them, and bowed
himself to the ground,
3 and said, “HWHY, if I have now found favour in Your
eyes, please do not pass Your servant by.
4 “Please let a little water be brought, and wash your
feet, and rest yourselves under the tree.
5 “And let me bring a piece of bread and refresh your
hearts, and then go on, for this is why you have come
to your servant.” And they said, “Do as you have said.”
6 So Aḇraham ran into the tent to Sarah and said,
“Hurry, make ready three se’im of fine flour, knead it
and make cakes.”
7 And Aḇraham ran to the herd, took a tender and
good calf, gave it to a young man, and he hurried to
prepare it.

43

GENESIS

And he took curds and milk and the calf which he
had prepared, and put it before them, and he stood by
them under the tree as they ate.
9 And they said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?”
And he said, “See, in the tent.”
10 And He said, “I shall certainly return to you
according to the time of life, and see, Sarah your wife
is to have a son!” And Sarah was listening in the tent
door which was behind him.
11 Now Aḇraham and Sarah were old, well advanced
in age, and Sarah was past the way of women.
12 And Sarah laughed within herself, saying, “After I
have grown old, shall I have pleasure, my master being
old too?”
13 And HWHY said to Aḇraham, “Why did Sarah laugh,
saying, ‘Shall I truly have a child, since I am old?’
14 “Is any matter too hard for HWHY? At the appointed
time I am going to return to you, according to the time
of life, and Sarah is to have a son.”
15 But Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh,” for she
was afraid. And He said, “No, but you did laugh!”
16 And the men rose up from there and looked toward
Seḏom, and Aḇraham went with them to send them
away.
17 And HWHY said, “Shall I hide from Aḇraham what I
am doing,
18 since Aḇraham is certainly going to become a great
and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall
be baraḵ in him?
19 “For I have known him, so that he commands his
children and his household after him, to guard the Way
of HWHY, to do righteousness and Right-Ruling, so that
HWHY brings to Aḇraham what He has spoken to him.”
8

44

BERĔSHITH

And HWHY said, “Because the outcry against
Seḏom and Amorah is great, and because their sin is
very heavy,
21 “I am going down now to see whether they have
done altogether according to the outcry against it that
has come to Me, and if not, I know.”
22 So the men turned away from there and went
toward Seḏom, but Aḇraham still stood before HWHY.
23 And Aḇraham drew near and said, “Would You also
destroy the righteous with the wicked?
24 “Suppose there are fifty righteous within the city,
would You also destroy the place and not spare it for
the fifty righteous that were in it?
25 “Far be it from You to act in this way, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous should
be as the wicked. Far be it from You! Does the Judge
of all the earth not do right?”
26 And HWHY said, “If I find in Seḏom fifty righteous
within the city, then I shall spare all the place for their
sakes.”
27 And Aḇraham answered and said, “Look, please, I
who am but dust and ashes have taken it upon myself
to speak to HWHY,
28 “Suppose there are five less than the fifty righteous,
would You destroy all of the city for lack of five?” And
He said, “If I find there forty-five, I do not destroy it.”
29 And he spoke to Him yet again and said, “Suppose
there are found forty?” And He said, “I would not do it
for the sake of forty.”
30 And he said, “Let not HWHY be displeased, and let
me speak: Suppose there are found thirty?” And He
said, “I would not do it if I find thirty there.”
31 And he said, “Look, please, I have taken it upon
myself to speak to HWHY: Suppose there are found
20

45

GENESIS

twenty?” And He said, “I would not destroy it for the
sake of twenty.”
32 And he said, “Let not HWHY be displeased, and let
me speak only this time: Suppose there are found
ten?” And He said, “I would not destroy it for the sake
of ten.”
33 Then HWHY went away as soon as He had ended
speaking to Aḇraham. And Aḇraham returned to his
place.

19 And the two messengers came to Seḏom in the
evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Seḏom. And
when Lot saw them, he rose up to meet them, and he
bowed himself with his face toward the ground,
2 and he said, “Look, please my masters, please turn
in to your servant’s house and spend the night, and
wash your feet, and rise early and go your way.” And
they said, “No, but let us spend the night in the open
square.”
3 But he urged them strongly, and they turned in to
him and came into his house. And he made them a
feast, and baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
4 Before they lay down, the men of the city, the men
of Seḏom, both old and young, all the people from
every part, surrounded the house.
5 And they called to Lot and said to him, “Where are
the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to
us, and let us ‘know’ them.”
6 So Lot went out to them through the doorway, and
shut the door behind him,
7 and said, “Please, my brothers, do not do evil!
8 “Look, please, I have two daughters who have not
known a man. Please, let me bring them out to you,
and do to them as is good in your eyes, only do no
46

BERĔSHITH

deed to these men, because they have come under
the shadow of my roof.”
9 But they said, “Stand back!” And they said, “This
one came in to sojourn, and should he always judge?
Now we are going to treat you worse than them.” So
they pressed hard against the man Lot, and came near
to break down the door.
10 But the men reached out their hands and pulled Lot
into the house with them, and shut the door.
11 Then they struck the men who were at the doorway
of the house with blindness, both small and great, and
they wearied themselves to find the door.
12 And the men said to Lot, “Have you anyone else
here? A son-in-law, and your sons, and your
daughters, and whomever you have in the city - bring
them out of this place!
13 “For we are going to destroy this place, because
the cry against them has grown great before the face
of HWHY, and HWHY has sent us to destroy it.”
14 And Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law, who
had married his daughters, and said, “Get up, get out
of this place, for HWHY is going to destroy this city!” But
to his sons-in-law he seemed to be as one joking.
15 And when morning dawned, the messengers urged
Lot to hurry, saying, “Get up, take your wife and your
two daughters who are here, lest you be consumed in
the punishment of the city.”
16 And while he lingered, the men took hold of his
hand, and his wife’s hand, and the hands of his two
daughters, HWHY having compassion on him, and they
brought him out and put him outside the city.
17 And it came to be, when they had brought them
outside, that he said, “Escape for your life! Do not look
behind you nor stay anywhere in the plain. Escape to
the mountains, lest you be consumed.”
47

GENESIS

And Lot said to them, “Oh no, HWHY!
19 “Look, please, your servant has found favour in
your eyes, and you have increased your kindness
which you have shown me by saving my life, but I am
unable to escape to the mountains, lest calamity
overtake me and I die.
20 “Look, please, this city is near enough to flee to,
and it is small. Please let me escape there - is it not a
small matter - and let my life be saved?”
21 And He said to him, “Look, I have favoured you
concerning this matter also, without overthrowing this
city for which you have spoken.
22 “Hurry, escape there. For I am not able to do any
deed until you arrive there.” So the name of the city
was called Tso’ar.
23 The sun had risen upon the earth when Lot entered
Tso’ar.
24 And HWHY rained sulphur and fire on Seḏom and
Amorah, from HWHY out of the shamayim.
25 So He overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and
all the inhabitants of the cities, and what grew on the
ground.
26 But his wife looked back from behind him, and she
became a post of salt.
27 And Aḇraham arose early in the morning to the
place where he had stood before HWHY,
28 and he looked toward Seḏom and Amorah, and
toward all the land of the plain. And he looked and saw
the smoke of the land which went up like the smoke of
a furnace.
29 Thus it came to be, when Elohim destroyed the
cities of the plain, that Elohim remembered Aḇraham,
and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when
He overthrew the cities in which Lot had dwelt.
18

48

BERĔSHITH

And Lot went up out of Tso’ar and dwelt in the
mountains, and his two daughters were with him, for
he was afraid to dwell in Tso’ar. And he and his two
daughters dwelt in a cave.
31 And the first-born said to the younger, “Our father
is old, and there is no man on the earth to come in to
us, as is the way of all the earth.
32 “Come, let us make our father drink wine and lie
with him, so that we preserve the seed of our father.”
33 So they made their father drink wine that night. And
the first-born went in and lay with her father, and he
was not aware of it when she lay down or when she
arose.
34 And it came to be on the next day that the first-born
said to the younger, “See, I lay with my father last
night. Let us make him drink wine tonight as well, and
you go in and lie with him, so that we keep the seed of
our father.”
35 So they made their father drink wine that night as
well. And the younger arose and lay with him, and he
was not aware of it when she lay down or when she
arose.
36 Thus both the daughters of Lot became pregnant
by their father.
37 And the first-born bore a son and called his name
Mo’aḇ, he is the father of the Mo’abites to this day.
38 And the younger, she also bore a son and called
his name Ben-Ammi, he is the father of the children of
Ammon to this day.
30

20 And Aḇraham departed from there to the land of
the Negeḇ, and dwelt between Qaḏĕsh and Shur, and
stayed in Gerar.

49

GENESIS

And Aḇraham said concerning Sarah his wife, “She
is my sister.” And Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of Gerar sent
and took Sarah.
3 But Elohim came to Aḇimeleḵ in a dream by night,
and said to him, “See, you are a dead man because of
the woman whom you have taken, for she is a man’s
wife.”
4 However, Aḇimeleḵ had not come near her, and he
said, “HWHY, would You slay a righteous nation also?
5 “Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister’? And she,
even she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ In the
integrity of my heart and in the innocence of my hands
I have done this.”
6 And Elohim said to him in a dream, “Though I know
that you did this in the integrity of your heart, and so I
kept you from sinning against Me, for this reason I did
not let you touch her.
7 “And now, return the man’s wife, for he is a naḇi,
and let him pray for you and you live. But if you do not
return her, know that you shall certainly die, you and
all that are yours.”
8 So Aḇimeleḵ rose early in the morning, and called
all his servants, and spoke all these words in their
hearing. And the men were greatly frightened.
9 And Aḇimeleḵ called Aḇraham and said to him,
“What have you done to us? In what have I sinned
against you, that you have brought on me and on my
reign a great sin? You have done matters to me that
should not be done.”
10 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Aḇraham, “What did you have
in view, that you have done this matter?”
11 And Aḇraham said, “Only because I said, the
reverence of Elohim is not in this place, and they shall
kill me for the sake of my wife.
2

50

BERĔSHITH

“And yet, she is truly my sister. She is the daughter
of my father, but not the daughter of my mother, and
she became my wife.
13 “And it came to be, when Elohim caused me to
wander from my father’s house, that I said to her, ‘This
is your kindness that you should do for me: in every
place, wherever we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”
’”
14 Then Aḇimeleḵ took sheep, and cattle, and male
and female servants, and gave them to Aḇraham. And
he returned Sarah his wife to him.
15 And Aḇimeleḵ said, “See, my land is before you,
dwell wherever it is good in your eyes.”
16 And to Sarah he said, “See, I have given your
brother a thousand pieces of silver. See, it is to you a
covering of eyes before all who are with you and before
all others, and you are cleared before everyone.”
17 And Aḇraham prayed to Elohim, and Elohim healed
Aḇimeleḵ, and his wife, and his female servants, so
they bore children,
18 for HWHY had closed up all the wombs of the house
of Aḇimeleḵ because of Sarah, Aḇraham’s wife.
12

21 And HWHY visited Sarah as He had said, and
HWHY did for Sarah as He had spoken.
2 So Sarah conceived and bore Aḇraham a son in his
old age, at the appointed time of which Elohim had
spoken to him.
3 And Aḇraham called the name of his son who was
born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Yitsḥaq.
4 And Aḇraham circumcised his son Yitsḥaq when he
was eight days old, as Elohim had commanded him.
5 And Aḇraham was one hundred years old when his
son Yitsḥaq was born to him.
51

GENESIS

And Sarah said, “Elohim has made me laugh, and
everyone who hears of it laughs with me.”
7 And she said, “Who would have said to Aḇraham
that Sarah would nurse children? For I have borne him
a son in his old age.”
8 And the child grew and was weaned, and Aḇraham
made a great feast on the day that Yitsḥaq was
weaned.
9 And Sarah saw the son of Haḡar the Mitsrite, whom
she had borne to Aḇraham, mocking.
10 So she said to Aḇraham, “Drive out this female
servant and her son, for the son of this female servant
shall not inherit with my son, with Yitsḥaq.”
11 And the matter was very evil in the eyes of
Aḇraham because of his son.
12 But Elohim said to Aḇraham, “Let it not be evil in
your eyes because of the boy and because of your
female servant. Whatever Sarah has said to you, listen
to her voice, for in Yitsḥaq your seed is called.
13 “And of the son of the female servant I also make a
nation, because he is your seed.”
14 And Aḇraham rose early in the morning, and took
bread and a skin of water, which he gave to Haḡar,
putting it on her shoulder, also the boy, and sent her
away. And she left and wandered in the Wilderness of
Be’ĕrsheḇa.
15 And the water in the skin was used up, and she
placed the boy under one of the shrubs.
16 And she went and sat down about a bowshot away,
for she said, “Let me not see the death of the boy.” And
she sat opposite him, and lifted her voice and wept.
17 And Elohim heard the voice of the boy, and the
messenger of Elohim called to Haḡar from the
shamayim, and said to her, “What is the matter with
6

52

BERĔSHITH

you, Haḡar? Do not fear, for Elohim has heard the
voice of the boy where he is.
18 “Arise, lift up the boy and hold him with your hand,
for I make a great nation of him.”
19 And Elohim opened her eyes, and she saw a well
of water. And she went and filled the skin with water,
and gave the boy a drink.
20 And Elohim was with the boy, and he grew and
dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.
21 And he dwelt in the Wilderness of Paran, and his
mother took a wife for him from the land of Mitsrayim.
22 And it came to be at that time that Aḇimeleḵ and
Piḵol, the commander of his army, spoke to Aḇraham,
saying, “Elohim is with you in all that you do.
23 “And now, swear to me by Elohim, not to be untrue
to me, to my offspring, or to my descendants. Do to me
according to the kindness that I have done to you and
to the land in which you have dwelt.”
24 And Aḇraham said, “I swear.”
25 And Aḇraham reproved Aḇimeleḵ because of a well
of water which Aḇimeleḵ’s servants had seized.
26 And Aḇimeleḵ said, “I do not know who has done
this deed. Neither did you inform me, nor did I hear
until today.”
27 So Aḇraham took sheep and cattle and gave them
to Aḇimeleḵ, and the two of them made a covenant.
28 And Aḇraham put seven ewe lambs of the flock by
themselves.
29 And Aḇimeleḵ asked Aḇraham, “What are these
seven ewe lambs which you have put by themselves?”
30 And he said, “Take these seven ewe lambs from
my hand, to be my witness that I have dug this well.”
31 So he called that place Be’ĕrsheḇa, because the
two of them swore an oath there.
53

GENESIS

Thus they made a covenant at Be’ĕrsheḇa. And
Aḇimeleḵ rose with Piḵol, the commander of his army,
and they returned to the land of the Pelishtites.
33 And he planted a tamarisk tree in Be’ĕrsheḇa, and
there called on the Name of HWHY, the Everlasting Ĕl.
34 And Aḇraham sojourned in the land of the
Pelishtites many days.
32

22 And it came to be after these events that Elohim
tried Aḇraham, and said to him, “Aḇraham!” And he
said, “Here I am.”
2 And He said, “Take your son, now, your only son
Yitsḥaq, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriyah,
and offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the
mountains which I command you.”
3 And Aḇraham rose early in the morning and
saddled his donkey, and took two of his young men
with him, and Yitsḥaq his son. And he split the wood
for the burnt offering, and arose and went to the place
which Elohim had commanded him.
4 And on the third day Aḇraham lifted his eyes and
saw the place from a distance.
5 So Aḇraham said to his young men, “Stay here with
the donkey while the boy and I go over there and
worship, and come back to you.”
6 And Aḇraham took the wood of the burnt offering
and laid it on Yitsḥaq his son. And he took the fire in
his hand, and a knife, and the two of them went
together.
7 And Yitsḥaq spoke to Aḇraham his father and said,
“My father!” And he said, “Here I am, my son.” And he
said, “See, the fire and the wood! But where is the lamb
for a burnt offering?”

54

BERĔSHITH

And Aḇraham said, “My son, Elohim provides for
Himself the lamb for a burnt offering.” And the two of
them went together.
9 And they came to the place which Elohim had
commanded him, and Aḇraham built an altar there and
placed the wood in order. And he bound Yitsḥaq his
son and laid him on the altar, upon the wood.
10 And Aḇraham stretched out his hand and took the
knife to slay his son,
11 but the Messenger of HWHY called to him from the
shamayim and said, “Aḇraham, Aḇraham!” And he
said, “Here I am.”
12 And He said, “Do not lay your hand on the boy, nor
touch him. For now I know that you revere Elohim,
seeing you have not withheld your son, your only son,
from Me.”
13 And Aḇraham lifted his eyes and looked and saw
behind him a ram caught in a bush by its horns, and
Aḇraham went and took the ram and offered it up for a
burnt offering instead of his son.
14 And Aḇraham called the name of the place, ‘HWHY
Yireh,’ as it is said to this day, “On the mountain HWHY
provides.”
15 And the Messenger of HWHY called to Aḇraham a
second time from the shamayim,
16 and said, “By Myself I have sworn, declares HWHY,
because you have done this, and have not withheld
your son, your only son,
17 that I shall certainly baraḵ you, and I shall certainly
increase your seed as the stars of the shamayim and
as the sand which is on the seashore, and let your
seed possess the gate of their enemies.
18 “And in your seed all the nations of the earth shall
be baruḵ, because you have obeyed My voice.”
8

55

GENESIS

Then Aḇraham returned to his young men, and they
rose up and went together to Be’ĕrsheḇa. And
Aḇraham dwelt at Be’ĕrsheḇa.
20 And it came to be after these events that it was
reported to Aḇraham, saying, “See, Milkah too has
borne children to your brother Naḥor:
21 “Uts his first-born, and Buz his brother, and
Qemu’ĕl the father of Aram,
22 and Keseḏ, and Ḥazo, and Pildash, and Yiḏlaph,
and Bethu’ĕl.”
23 And Bethu’ĕl brought forth Riḇqah. These eight,
Milkah bore to Naḥor, Aḇraham’s brother.
24 And his concubine, whose name was Re’uwmah,
also bore Teḇaḥ, and Gaḥam, and Taḥash, and
Ma’aḵah.
19

23 And Sarah lived one hundred and twenty-seven
years, the years of the life of Sarah.
2 And Sarah died in Qiryath Arba, that is Ḥeḇron, in
the land of Kena’an, and Aḇraham came to mourn for
Sarah and to weep for her.
3 Then Aḇraham rose up from beside his dead, and
spoke to the sons of Ḥĕth, saying,
4 “I am a foreigner and a sojourner among you. Give
me property for a burial site among you, so that I bury
my dead from my presence.”
5 And the sons of Ḥĕth answered Aḇraham, saying
to him,
6 “Hear us, my master: You are a prince of Elohim
among us. Bury your dead in the choicest of our burial
places. None of us withholds from you his burial site,
from burying your dead.”
7 So Aḇraham rose and bowed himself to the people
of the land, the sons of Ḥĕth.
56

BERĔSHITH

And he spoke with them, saying, “If it is your desire
that I bury my dead from my presence, hear me, and
approach Ephron son of Tsoḥar for me,
9 and let me have the cave of Maḵpĕlah which he
has, which is at the end of his field. Let him give it to
me for the complete amount of silver, as property for a
burial site among you.”
10 And Ephron dwelt among the sons of Ḥĕth. And
Ephron the Ḥittite answered Aḇraham in the hearing of
the sons of Ḥĕth, all who entered at the gate of his city,
saying,
11 “No, my master, listen to me! I shall give you the
field and the cave that is in it. I shall give it to you in the
presence of the sons of my people. I shall give it to
you. Bury your dead!”
12 And Aḇraham bowed himself down before the
people of the land,
13 and he spoke to Ephron in the hearing of the people
of the land, saying, “If only you would hear me. I shall
give the amount of silver for the field, take it from me,
and let me bury my dead there.”
14 And Ephron answered Aḇraham, saying to him,
15 “My master, listen to me! The land is worth four
hundred sheqels of silver. What is that between you
and me? So bury your dead.”
16 And Aḇraham listened to Ephron, and Aḇraham
weighed out the silver for Ephron which he had named
in the hearing of the sons of Ḥĕth, four hundred
sheqels of silver, currency of the merchants.
17 Thus the field of Ephron which was in Maḵpĕlah,
which was before Mamrĕ, the field and the cave which
was in it, and all the trees that were in the field, which
were within all the surrounding borders, were deeded
8

57

GENESIS

to Aḇraham as a possession in the presence of the
sons of Ḥĕth, before all who went in at the gate of his
city.
19 And after this Aḇraham buried Sarah his wife in the
cave of the field of Maḵpĕlah, before Mamrĕ, that is
Ḥeḇron, in the land of Kena’an.
20 Thus the field and the cave that is in it were deeded
to Aḇraham by the sons of Ḥĕth as property for a burial
site.
18

24 And Aḇraham was old, advanced in years. And
HWHY had baraḵ Aḇraham in every way.
2 And Aḇraham said to the oldest servant of his
house, who ruled over all that he had, “Please, put your
hand under my thigh,
3 so that I make you swear by HWHY, the Elohim of
the shamayim and the Elohim of the earth, that you do
not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the
Kena’anites, among whom I dwell,
4 but go to my land and to my relatives, and take a
wife for my son Yitsḥaq.”
5 And the servant said to him, “What if the woman
refuses to follow me to this land? Do I then take your
son back to the land from which you came?”
6 And Aḇraham said to him, “Beware lest you take
my son back there!”
7 “HWHY, Elohim of the shamayim, who took me from
my father’s house and from the land of my relatives,
and who spoke to me and swore to me, saying, ‘To
your seed I give this land,’ He sends His messenger
before you, and you shall take a wife for my son from
there.
8 “And if the woman refuses to follow you, then you
shall be released from this oath; only, do not take my
son back there.”
58

BERĔSHITH

Then the servant put his hand under the thigh of
Aḇraham his master, and swore to him concerning this
matter.
10 And the servant took ten of his master’s camels and
left, for all his master’s goods were in his hand. And he
arose and went to Aram Naharayim, to the city of
Naḥor.
11 And he made his camels kneel down outside the
city by a fountain of water at evening time, the time
when women go out to draw water.
12 And he said, “HWHY, Elohim of my master Aḇraham,
please meet before me this day, and show kindness to
my master Aḇraham.
13 “See, I am standing here by the fountain of water,
and the daughters of the men of the city are coming
out to draw water.
14 “Now let it be that the young woman to whom I say,
‘Please let down your jar to let me drink,’ and she says,
‘Drink, and let me water your camels too,’ let her be
the one whom You have appointed for Your servant
Yitsḥaq. And let me know by this that You have shown
kindness to my master.”
15 And it came to be, before he had ended speaking,
that see, Riḇqah, who was born to Bethu’ĕl, son of
Milkah, the wife of Naḥor, Aḇraham’s brother, came
out with her jar on her shoulder.
16 And the young woman was very good-looking, a
maiden, no man having known her. And she went
down to the fountain, filled her jar, and came up.
17 And the servant ran to meet her and said, “Please
let me drink a little water from your jar.”
18 And she said, “Drink, my master.” And she hurried
and let her jar down to her hand, and gave him a drink.
9

59

GENESIS

And when she had finished giving him a drink, she
said, “Let me draw water for your camels too, until they
have finished drinking.”
20 And she hurried and emptied her jar into the trough,
ran back to the fountain to draw water, and drew for all
his camels.
21 And watching her, the man remained silent in order
to know whether HWHY had prospered his way or not.
22 And it came to be, when the camels had finished
drinking, that the man took a golden nose ring
weighing half a sheqel, and two bracelets for her wrists
weighing ten sheqels of gold,
23 and said, “Whose daughter are you? Please inform
me, is there room in your father’s house for us to spend
the night?”
24 And she said to him, “I am the daughter of Bethu’ĕl,
Milkah’s son, whom she bore to Naḥor.”
25 And she said to him, “We have both straw and
fodder enough, and room to spend the night.”
26 And the man bowed down his head and
worshipped HWHY.
27 And he said, “Baruḵ be HWHY Elohim of my master
Aḇraham, who has not forsaken His kindness and His
truth toward my master. As for me, being on the way,
HWHY led me to the house of my master’s brothers.”
28 Then the young woman ran and informed those of
her mother’s house these matters.
29 And Riḇqah had a brother whose name was Laḇan,
and Laḇan ran out to the man, to the fountain.
30 And it came to be, when he saw the nose ring, and
the bracelets on his sister’s wrists, and when he heard
the words of his sister Riḇqah, saying, “Thus the man
spoke to me,” that he went to the man and saw him
standing by the camels at the fountain.
19

60

BERĔSHITH

And he said, “Come in, O baruḵ of HWHY! Why do
you stand outside? I myself have prepared the house,
and a place for the camels.
32 So the man came into the house, while he unloaded
the camels and provided straw and fodder for the
camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the
men who were with him,
33 and put food before him to eat. But he said, “Let me
not eat until I have spoken my word.” And he said,
“Speak on.”
34 And he said, “I am Aḇraham’s servant.
35 “And HWHY has baraḵ my master exceedingly, and
he has become great. And He has given him flocks and
herds, and silver and gold, and male and female
servants, and camels and donkeys.
36 “And Sarah my master’s wife bore a son to my
master after she was old. And he has given to him all
that he has.
37 “And my master made me swear, saying, ‘Do not
take a wife for my son from the daughters of the
Kena’anites, in whose land I dwell,
38 but go to my father’s house and to my relatives, and
take a wife for my son.’
39 “And I said to my master, ‘What if the woman does
not follow me?’
40 “But he said to me, ‘HWHY, before whom I walk,
sends His messenger with you and shall prosper your
way. And you shall take a wife for my son from my
relatives and from my father’s house.
41 ‘Then, when you go to my relatives, you are to be
released from this oath. And if they do not give her to
you, then you are released from my oath.’
42 “And this day I came to the fountain and said,
‘HWHY, Elohim of my master Aḇraham, please, if You
are prospering the way in which I am going,
31

61

GENESIS

see, I am standing by the fountain of water, and
when the maiden comes out to draw water, and I say
to her, “Please give me a little water from your jar to
drink,”
44 and she says to me, “Drink, and let me draw for
your camels too,” let her be the woman whom HWHY
has appointed for my master’s son.’
45 “I had not yet ended speaking in my heart, then see,
Riḇqah was coming out with her jar on her shoulder.
And she went down to the fountain and drew water.
And I said to her, ‘Please let me drink.’
46 “And she hurried and let her jar down from her
shoulder, and said, ‘Drink, and let me water your
camels too.’ So I drank, and she watered the camels
too.
47 “And I asked her, and said, ‘Whose daughter are
you?’ And she said, ‘The daughter of Bethu’ĕl, Naḥor’s
son, whom Milkah bore to him.’ Then I put the nose
ring on her nose and the bracelets on her wrists.
48 “And I bowed my head and worshipped HWHY, and
baraḵ HWHY, Elohim of my master Aḇraham, who had
led me in the true way to take the daughter of my
master’s brother for his son.
49 “And now, if you are going to show kindness and
truth to my master, let me know, and if not, let me
know, so that I turn to the right or to the left.”
50 And Laḇan answered - Bethu’ĕl too - and said, “The
matter comes from HWHY, we are not able to speak to
you either evil or good.
51 “See, Riḇqah is before you. Take her and go, and
let her be your master’s son’s wife, as HWHY has
spoken.”
52 And it came to be, when Aḇraham’s servant heard
their words, that he bowed himself towards the earth
before HWHY.
43

62

BERĔSHITH

And the servant brought out ornaments of silver,
and ornaments of gold, and garments, and gave them
to Riḇqah. He also gave costly gifts to her brother and
to her mother.
54 And he and the men who were with him ate and
drank and spent the night. When they arose in the
morning he said, “Let me go to my master.”
55 But her brother and her mother said, “Let the young
woman stay with us a few days, at least ten, then you
go.”
56 And he said to them, “Do not delay me, since HWHY
has prospered my way. Let me go so that I go to my
master.”
57 And they said, “Let us call the young woman and
ask her.”
58 So they called Riḇqah and said to her, “Are you
going with this man?” And she said, “I shall go.”
59 So they let go Riḇqah their sister and her nurse,
and Aḇraham’s servant and his men.
60 And they baraḵ Riḇqah and said to her, “Let our
sister become the mother of thousands of ten
thousands, and let your seed possess the gates of
those who hate them.”
61 And Riḇqah and her young women arose, and they
rode on the camels and followed the man. So the
servant took Riḇqah and left.
62 And Yitsḥaq came from the way of Be’ĕr Laḥai Ro’i,
for he dwelt in the Negeḇ.
63 And Yitsḥaq went out to meditate in the field in the
evening. And he lifted his eyes and looked and saw the
camels coming.
64 And Riḇqah lifted her eyes, and when she saw
Yitsḥaq she dismounted from her camel,
65 and she said to the servant, “Who is this man
walking in the field to meet us?” And the servant said,
53

63

GENESIS

“It is my master.” So she took a veil and covered
herself.
66 And the servant told Yitsḥaq all the matters he had
done.
67 And Yitsḥaq brought her into his mother Sarah’s
tent. And he took Riḇqah and she became his wife, and
he loved her. Thus Yitsḥaq was comforted after his
mother’s death.

25 And Aḇraham took another wife, whose name
was Qeturah.
2 And she bore him Zimran, and Yoqshan, and
Meḏan, and Miḏyan, and Yishbaq, and Shuwaḥ.
3 And Yoqshan brought forth Sheḇa and Deḏan. And
the sons of Deḏan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and
Le’ummim.
4 And the sons of Miḏyan were Ĕphah, and Ĕpher,
and Ḥanoḵ, and Aḇiḏa, and Elda’ah. All these were the
children of Qeturah.
5 Now Aḇraham gave all that he had to Yitsḥaq,
6 but to the sons of the concubines whom Aḇraham
had, Aḇraham gave gifts while he was still living, and
sent them away from his son Yitsḥaq, eastward, to the
land of the east.
7 And these are all the years of Aḇraham’s life which
he lived: one hundred and seventy-five years.
8 And Aḇraham breathed his last and died in a good
old age, aged and satisfied, and was gathered to his
people.
9 And his sons Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl buried him in
the cave of Maḵpĕlah, which is before Mamrĕ, in the
field of Ephron son of Tsoḥar the Ḥittite,
10 the field which Aḇraham purchased from the sons
of Ḥĕth. There Aḇraham was buried with Sarah his
wife.
64

BERĔSHITH

And it came to be, after the death of Aḇraham, that
Elohim baraḵ his son Yitsḥaq. And Yitsḥaq dwelt at
Be’ĕr Laḥai Ro’i.
12 And this is the genealogy of Yishma’ĕl, Aḇraham’s
son, whom Haḡar the Mitsrite, Sarah’s female servant,
bore to Aḇraham.
13 And these were the names of the sons of
Yishma’ĕl, by their names, according to their
generations: The first-born of Yishma’ĕl, Neḇayoth;
then Qĕḏar, and Aḏbe’ĕl, and Miḇsam,
14 and Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
15 Ḥaḏaḏ, and Tĕma, Yetur, Naphish, and Qĕḏemah.
16 These were the sons of Yishma’ĕl and these were
their names, by their towns and their settlements,
twelve chiefs according to their tribes.
17 And these were the years of the life of Yishma’ĕl:
one hundred and thirty-seven years. And he breathed
his last and died, and was gathered to his people.
18 And they dwelt from Ḥawilah as far as Shur, which
is east of Mitsrayim as you go toward Ashshur. He
settled before all his brothers.
19 And this is the genealogy of Yitsḥaq, Aḇraham’s
son. Aḇraham brought forth Yitsḥaq.
20 And Yitsḥaq was forty years old when he took
Riḇqah as wife, the daughter of Bethu’ĕl the Aramean
of Paddan Aram, the sister of Laḇan the Aramean.
21 And Yitsḥaq prayed to HWHY for his wife, because
she was barren. And HWHY answered his prayer, and
Riḇqah his wife conceived.
22 And within her the children struggled together, and
she said, “If all is right, why am I this way?” So she
went to ask HWHY.
23 And HWHY said to her, “Two nations are in your
womb, and two peoples shall be separated from your
11

65

GENESIS

body. And one people shall be stronger than the other,
and the older serve the younger.”
24 And when the days were filled for her to give birth,
and see, twins were in her womb!
25 And the first came out reddish all over, like a hairy
garment, so they called his name Ĕsaw.
26 And afterward his brother came out, with his hand
holding on to Ĕsaw’s heel, so his name was called
Ya’aqoḇ. And Yitsḥaq was sixty years old when she
bore them.
27 And the boys grew up. And Ĕsaw became a man
knowing how to hunt, a man of the field, while Ya’aqoḇ
was a complete man, dwelling in tents.
28 And Yitsḥaq loved Ĕsaw because he ate of his wild
game, but Riḇqah loved Ya’aqoḇ.
29 And Ya’aqoḇ cooked a stew, and Ĕsaw came in
from the field, and he was weary.
30 And Ĕsaw said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Please feed me with
that same red stew, for I am weary.” That is why his
name was called Eḏom.
31 But Ya’aqoḇ said, “Sell me your birthright today.”
32 And Ĕsaw said, “Look, I am going to die, so why
should I have birthright?”
33 Then Ya’aqoḇ said, “Swear to me today.” And he
swore to him, and sold his birthright to Ya’aqoḇ.
34 Ya’aqoḇ then gave Ĕsaw bread and stew of lentils.
And he ate and drank, and rose up and left. Thus Ĕsaw
despised his birthright.

26 And there was a scarcity of food in the land,
besides the first scarcity of food which was in the days
of Aḇraham. And Yitsḥaq went to Aḇimeleḵ, sovereign
of the Pelishtites, in Gerar.

66

BERĔSHITH

And HWHY appeared to him and said, “Do not go
down to Mitsrayim, live in the land which I command
you.
3 “Sojourn in this land. And I shall be with you and
baraḵ you, for I give all these lands to you and your
seed. And I shall establish the oath which I swore to
Aḇraham your father.
4 “And I shall increase your seed like the stars of the
shamayim, and I shall give all these lands to your seed.
And in your seed all the nations of the earth shall be
baruḵ,
5 because Aḇraham obeyed My voice and guarded
My Charge: My Commands, My Laws, and My Torot.”
6 And Yitsḥaq dwelt in Gerar.
7 And when the men of the place asked about his
wife, he said, “She is my sister.” For he was afraid to
say, “She is my wife.” “Lest the men of the place should
kill me for Riḇqah, because she is good-looking.”
8 And it came to be, when he had been there a long
time, that Aḇimeleḵ sovereign of the Pelishtites looked
through a window, and he watched and saw Yitsḥaq
playing with Riḇqah his wife.
9 So Aḇimeleḵ called Yitsḥaq and said, “See, truly
she is your wife! So how could you say, ‘She is my
sister’?” And Yitsḥaq said to him, “Because I said, ‘Lest
I die on account of her.’ ”
10 And Aḇimeleḵ said, “What is this you have done to
us? One of the people had almost lain with your wife,
and you would have brought guilt on us.”
11 And Aḇimeleḵ commanded all his people, saying,
“He who touches this man or his wife shall certainly be
put to death.”
12 And Yitsḥaq sowed in that land, and reaped in the
same year a hundred-fold, and HWHY baraḵ him.
2

67

GENESIS

And the man grew great and went forward until he
became very great.
14 And he came to have possessions of flocks and
possessions of herds and a great body of servants,
and the Pelishtites envied him.
15 And the Pelishtites had stopped up all the wells
which his father’s servants had dug in the days of
Aḇraham his father, and filled them with dirt.
16 And Aḇimeleḵ said to Yitsḥaq, “Go away from us,
for you are much mightier than we.”
17 So Yitsḥaq went from there and pitched his tent in
the wadi Gerar, and dwelt there.
18 And Yitsḥaq dug again the wells of water which
they had dug in the days of Aḇraham his father, for the
Pelishtites had stopped them up after the death of
Aḇraham. And he called them by the names which his
father had called them.
19 But when Yitsḥaq’s servants dug in the wadi and
found a well of running water there,
20 the herdsmen of Gerar strove with Yitsḥaq’s
herdsmen, saying, “The water is ours.” And he called
the name of the well Ĕseq, because they strove with
him.
21 And they dug another well, and they strove over
that one too, and he called its name Sitnah.
22 And he moved from there and dug another well,
and they did not strive over it. And he called its name
Reḥoḇoth, and said, “For now HWHY has made room
for us, and we shall bear fruit in the land.”
23 And from there he went up to Be’ĕrsheḇa.
24 And HWHY appeared to him the same night and
said, “I am the Elohim of your father Aḇraham. Do not
fear, for I am with you, and shall baraḵ you and
increase your seed for My servant Aḇraham’s sake.”
13

68

BERĔSHITH

And he built an altar there, and called on the Name
of HWHY, and he pitched his tent there, and the
servants of Yitsḥaq dug a well there.
26 And Aḇimeleḵ came to him from Gerar, with
Aḥuzzath, one of his friends, and Piḵol the commander
of his army.
27 And Yitsḥaq said to them, “Why have you come to
me, seeing you have hated me and have sent me away
from you?”
28 But they said, “We have clearly seen that HWHY is
with you. And we said, ‘Please, let there be an oath
between us, between you and us. And let us make a
covenant with you,
29 that you do no evil to us, as we have not touched
you, and as we have done only good toward you, and
have sent you away in peace. You are now baruḵ by
HWHY.’ ”
30 And he made them a feast, and they ate and drank.
31 And they rose early in the morning and swore an
oath with one another. And Yitsḥaq let them go, and
they departed from him in peace.
32 And on the same day it came to be that the servants
of Yitsḥaq came and informed him about the well which
they had dug, and said to him, “We have found water.”
33 So he called it Shiḇah. Therefore the name of the
city is Be’ĕrsheḇa to this day.
34 And when Ĕsaw was forty years old, he took as
wives Yahuḏith the daughter of Be’ĕri the Ḥittite, and
Basemath the daughter of Ĕylon the Ḥittite.
35 And they were a bitterness of spirit to Yitsḥaq and
Riḇqah.
25

27And it came to be, when Yitsḥaq was old and his
eyes were too dim to see, that he called Ĕsaw his elder
69

GENESIS

son and said to him, “My son.” And he answered him,
“Here I am.”
2 And he said, “See now, I am old, I do not know the
day of my death.
3 “Now then, please take your weapons, your quiver
and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt wild
game for me.
4 “And make me a tasty dish, such as I love, and
bring it to me to eat, in order that my being may baraḵ
you before I die.”
5 And Riḇqah heard when Yitsḥaq spoke to Ĕsaw his
son. And Ĕsaw went to the field to hunt wild game and
to bring it.
6 And Riḇqah spoke to Ya’aqoḇ her son, saying,
“See, I heard your father speak to Ĕsaw your brother,
saying,
7 ‘Bring me wild game and make me a tasty dish to
eat, and baraḵ you in the presence of HWHY before my
death.’
8 “And now my son, listen to my voice according to
what I command you.
9 “Please go to the flock and bring me two choice
young goats, and I make a tasty dish from them for
your father, such as he loves.
10 “And you shall take it to your father, and he shall
eat it, so that he might baraḵ you before his death.”
11 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Riḇqah his mother, “See,
Ĕsaw my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smoothskinned man.
12 “What if my father touches me? Then I shall be like
a deceiver in his eyes, and shall bring a curse on
myself and not a beraḵah.”
13 But his mother said to him, “Let your curse be on
me, my son. Only obey my voice, and go, get them for
me.”
70

BERĔSHITH

And he went and fetched them and brought them to
his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, such as
his father loved.
15 And Riḇqah took the best garments of her elder son
Ĕsaw, which were with her in the house, and put them
on Ya’aqoḇ her younger son.
16 And she put the skins of the young goats on his
hands and on the smooth part of his neck.
17 Then she gave the tasty dish and the bread, which
she had prepared, into the hand of her son Ya’aqoḇ.
18 And he went to his father and said, “My father.” And
he said, “Here I am. Who are you, my son?”
19 And Ya’aqoḇ said to his father, “I am Ĕsaw your
first-born, I have done as you said to me. Please rise,
sit and eat of my wild game, so that your being might
baraḵ me.”
20 But Yitsḥaq said to his son, “How is it that you have
found it so quickly, my son?” And he said, “Because
HWHY your Elohim brought it to me.”
21 Then Yitsḥaq said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Please come near,
so that I feel you, my son, whether you truly are my
son Ĕsaw or not.”
22 And Ya’aqoḇ went near to Yitsḥaq his father, and
he felt him and said, “The voice is the voice of Ya’aqoḇ,
but the hands are the hands of Ĕsaw.”
23 And he did not recognise him, for his hands were
hairy like his brother Ĕsaw’s hands, and he baraḵ him.
24 And he said, “Are you truly my son Ĕsaw?” And he
said, “I am.”
25 And he said, “Bring it near to me, and let me eat of
my son’s wild game, so that my being might baraḵ
you.” So he brought it near to him, and he ate. And he
brought him wine, and he drank.
26 And his father Yitsḥaq said to him, “Please come
near and kiss me, my son.”
14

71

GENESIS

And he came near and kissed him. And he smelled
the smell of his garments, and baraḵ him and said,
“See, the smell of my son is like the smell of a field
which HWHY has baraḵ.
28 “And Elohim give you of the dew of the shamayim,
of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of grain and
wine.
29 “Let peoples serve you, and nations bow down to
you. Be master over your brothers, and let your
mother’s sons bow down to you. Cursed be those
cursing you, and baruḵ be those beraḵah you!”
30 And it came to be, as soon as Yitsḥaq had finished
beraḵah Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ had hardly left the
presence of Yitsḥaq his father, that Ĕsaw his brother
came in from his hunting.
31 And he too had made a tasty dish and brought it to
his father, and said to his father, “Let my father rise and
eat of his son’s wild game, so that your being might
baraḵ me.”
32 And his father Yitsḥaq said to him, “Who are you?”
And he said, “I am your son, your first-born, Ĕsaw.”
33 Then Yitsḥaq shuddered with exceedingly great
trembling, and said, “Who was it then who hunted wild
game and brought it to me? And I ate all of it before
you came, and I have baraḵ him. Even so, he is baruḵ.”
34 When Ĕsaw heard the words of his father, he cried
with an exceedingly great and bitter cry, and said to his
father, “Baraḵ me, me too, O my father!”
35 And he said, “Your brother came with deceit and
took your beraḵah.”
36 And Ĕsaw said, “Was his name, then, called
Ya’aqoḇ? For he has caught me by the heel these two
times. He took my birthright, and see, now he has
taken my beraḵah!” And he said, “Have you not
reserved a beraḵah for me?”
27

72

BERĔSHITH

Then Yitsḥaq answered and said to Ĕsaw, “See, I
have made him your master, and all his brothers I have
given to him as servants. And I have sustained him
with grain and wine. And what, then, shall I do for you,
my son?”
38 And Ĕsaw said to his father, “Have you only one
beraḵah, my father? Baraḵ me, me too, O my father!”
And Ĕsaw lifted up his voice and wept.
39 And Yitsḥaq his father answered and said to him,
“See, your dwelling is of the fatness of the earth, and
of the dew of the shamayim from above.
40 “And by your sword you are to live, and serve your
brother. And it shall be, when you grow restless, that
you shall break his yoke from your neck.”
41 And Ĕsaw hated Ya’aqoḇ because of the beraḵah
with which his father baraḵ him, and Ĕsaw said in his
heart, “The days of mourning for my father draw near,
then I am going to kill my brother Ya’aqoḇ.”
42 And the words of Ĕsaw her older son were reported
to Riḇqah, and she sent and called Ya’aqoḇ her
younger son, and said to him, “See, your brother Ĕsaw
comforts himself concerning you, to kill you.
43 “And now, my son, listen to my voice, and rise, flee
to my brother Laḇan in Ḥaran.
44 “And stay with him a few days, until your brother’s
wrath turns away,
45 until your brother’s displeasure turns away from
you, and he forgets what you have done to him. And I
shall send and bring you from there. Why should I be
bereaved of you both in one day?”
46 And Riḇqah said to Yitsḥaq, “I am disgusted with
my life because of the daughters of Ḥĕth. If Ya’aqoḇ
takes a wife from the daughters of Ḥĕth, like these who
are the daughters of the land, what is my life to me?”
37

73

GENESIS

28 And Yitsḥaq called Ya’aqoḇ and baraḵ him, and
commanded him, and said to him, “Do not take a wife
from the daughters of Kena’an.
2 “Arise, go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethu’ĕl
your mother’s father. And take a wife for yourself from
there, from the daughters of Laḇan your mother’s
brother.
3 “And Ĕl Shaddai baraḵ you, and make you bear fruit
and increase you, and you shall become an assembly
of peoples,
4 and give you the beraḵah of Aḇraham, to you and
your seed with you, so that you inherit the land of your
sojournings, which Elohim gave to Aḇraham.”
5 So Yitsḥaq sent Ya’aqoḇ away, and he went to
Paddan Aram, to Laḇan son of Bethu’ĕl the Aramean,
the brother of Riḇqah, the mother of Ya’aqoḇ and
Ĕsaw.
6 And Ĕsaw saw that Yitsḥaq had baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ and
sent him away to Paddan Aram to take himself a wife
from there, and that as he baraḵ him he gave him a
command, saying, “Do not take a wife from the
daughters of Kena’an,”
7 and that Ya’aqoḇ had obeyed his father and his
mother and had gone to Paddan Aram.
8 So Ĕsaw saw that the daughters of Kena’an did not
please his father Yitsḥaq,
9 and Ĕsaw went to Yishma’ĕl and took Maḥalath the
daughter of Yishma’ĕl, Aḇraham’s son, the sister of
Neḇayoth, to be his wife, besides the wives he had.
10 And Ya’aqoḇ went out from Be’ĕrsheḇa and went
toward Ḥaran.
11 And he came upon a place and stopped over for
the night, for the sun was down. And he took one of
74

BERĔSHITH

the stones of that place and put it at his head, and he
lay down in that place to sleep.
12 And he dreamed and saw a ladder standing on the
earth, and its top reached to the shamayim, and saw
messengers of Elohim going up and coming down on
it.
13 And see, HWHY stood above it and said, “I am HWHY
Elohim of Aḇraham your father and the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq. The land on which you are lying, I give it to
you and your seed.
14 “And your seed shall be as the dust of the earth,
and you shall break forth to the west and to the east,
to the north and the south. And all the clans of the earth
shall be baruḵ in you and in your seed.
15 “And see, I am with you and shall guard you
wherever you go, and shall bring you back to this land.
For I am not going to leave you until I have done what
I have spoken to you.”
16 And Ya’aqoḇ awoke from his sleep and said, “Truly,
HWHY is in this place, and I did not know it.”
17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this
place! This is none other than the house of Elohim, and
this is the gate of the shamayim!”
18 And Ya’aqoḇ rose early in the morning, and took
the stone that he had put at his head, put it up as a
standing column, and poured oil on top of it.
19 And he called the name of that place Bĕyth Ĕl,
however, the name of that city had been Luz
previously.
20 And Ya’aqoḇ made a vow, saying, “Seeing Elohim
is with me, and has kept me in this way that I am going,
and has given me bread to eat and a garment to put
on –
21 when I have returned to my father’s house in peace,
and HWHY shall be my Elohim,
75

GENESIS

then this stone which I have placed as a standing
column shall be Elohim’s house, and of all that You
give me, I shall certainly give a tenth to You.”

22

29 And Ya’aqoḇ moved on and came to the land of
the people of the East.
2 And he looked and saw a well in the field, and saw
three flocks of sheep lying by it, for out of that well they
watered the flocks, and a large stone was on the well’s
mouth.
3 And all the flocks would be gathered there, then
they would roll the stone from the well’s mouth and
water the sheep, and put the stone back in its place on
the well’s mouth.
4 So Ya’aqoḇ said to them, “My brothers, where are
you from?” And they said, “We are from Ḥaran.”
5 And he said to them, “Do you know Laḇan son of
Naḥor?” And they said, “We know him.”
6 So he said to them, “Is he well?” And they said,
“Well. And see, his daughter Raḥĕl is coming with the
sheep.”
7 And he said, “See, it is still high day, not the time
for the livestock to be gathered together. Water the
sheep, and go and feed them.”
8 But they said, “We are not allowed until all the
flocks are gathered together, and they have rolled the
stone from the well’s mouth, then we shall water the
sheep.”
9 While he was still speaking with them, Raḥĕl came
with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess.
10 And it came to be, when Ya’aqoḇ saw Raḥĕl the
daughter of Laḇan his mother’s brother, and the sheep
of Laḇan his mother’s brother, that Ya’aqoḇ went near
and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and
watered the flock of Laḇan his mother’s brother.
76

BERĔSHITH

And Ya’aqoḇ kissed Raḥĕl, and lifted up his voice
and wept.
12 And when Ya’aqoḇ told Raḥĕl that he was her
father’s relative and that he was Riḇqah’s son, she ran
and told her father.
13 And it came to be, when Laḇan heard the report
about Ya’aqoḇ his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him,
and embraced him and kissed him, and brought him to
his house. Then he told Laḇan all these matters.
14 And Laḇan said to him, “You are indeed my bone
and my flesh.” And he stayed with him for a month.
15 Then Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Because you are my
relative, should you therefore serve me for naught? Let
me know, what should your wages be?”
16 And Laḇan had two daughters, the name of the
elder was Lĕ’ah, and the name of the younger was
Raḥĕl.
17 And Lĕ’ah’s eyes were weak, but Raḥĕl was lovely
of form and appearance.
18 And Ya’aqoḇ loved Raḥĕl, so he said, “Let me
serve you seven years for Raḥĕl your younger
daughter.”
19 And Laḇan said, “It is better that I give her to you
than that I should give her to another man. Stay with
me.”
20 So Ya’aqoḇ served seven years for Raḥĕl, and they
seemed to him but a few days because of the love he
had for her.
21 Then Ya’aqoḇ said to Laḇan, “Give me my wife, for
my days are completed, and let me go in to her.”
22 And Laḇan gathered all the men of the place and
made a feast.
23 And it came to be in the evening, that he took Lĕ’ah
his daughter and brought her to Ya’aqoḇ. And he went
in to her.
11

77

GENESIS

And Laḇan gave his female servant Zilpah to his
daughter Lĕ’ah as a female servant.
25 And in the morning it came to be, that see, it was
Lĕ’ah. So he said to Laḇan, “What is this you have
done to me? Was it not for Raḥĕl that I served you?
Why then have you deceived me?”
26 And Laḇan said, “It is not done this way in our
place, to give the younger before the first-born.
27 “Complete the week of this one, then we give you
this one too, for the service which you shall serve with
me still another seven years.”
28 And Ya’aqoḇ did so and completed her week. Then
he gave him his daughter Raḥĕl too, as wife.
29 And Laḇan gave his female servant Bilhah to his
daughter Raḥĕl as a female servant.
30 And he also went in to Raḥĕl, and he also loved
Raḥĕl more than Lĕ’ah. And he served with Laḇan still
another seven years.
31 And HWHY saw that Lĕ’ah was unloved, and He
opened her womb, but Raḥĕl was barren.
32 And Lĕ’ah conceived and bore a son, and she
called his name Re’uḇĕn, for she said, “For HWHY has
looked on my affliction, because now my husband is
going to love me.”
33 And she conceived again and bore a son, and said,
“Because HWHY has heard that I am unloved, He gave
me this son too.” And she called his name Shim’on.
34 And she conceived again and bore a son, and said,
“Now this time my husband is joined to me, because I
have borne him three sons.” So his name was called
Lĕwi.
35 And she conceived again and bore a son, and said,
“Now I praise HWHY.” So she called his name Yahuḏah.
And she ceased bearing.
24

78

BERĔSHITH

30 And when Raḥĕl saw that she bore Ya’aqoḇ no
children, Raḥĕl envied her sister, and said to Ya’aqoḇ,
“Give me children, or else I am going to die!”
2 And Ya’aqoḇ’s displeasure burned against Raḥĕl,
and he said, “Am I in the place of Elohim, who has
withheld from you the fruit of the womb?”
3 And she said, “See, my female servant Bilhah; go
in to her, and let her bear over my knees, and let me
be built up from her as well.”
4 So she gave him Bilhah her female servant as wife,
and Ya’aqoḇ went in to her.
5 And Bilhah conceived and bore Ya’aqoḇ a son.
6 And Raḥĕl said, “Elohim has rightly ruled my case,
and has also heard my voice and given me a son.” So
she called his name Dan.
7 And Raḥĕl’s female servant Bilhah conceived again
and bore Ya’aqoḇ a second son.
8 And Raḥĕl said, “With great wrestlings I have
wrestled with my sister, and I have overcome.” So she
called his name Naphtali.
9 And Lĕ’ah saw that she had ceased bearing, and
she took Zilpah her female servant and gave her to
Ya’aqoḇ as wife.
10 And Lĕ’ah’s female servant Zilpah bore Ya’aqoḇ a
son.
11 And Lĕ’ah said, “What luck!” So she called his
name Gaḏ.
12 And Lĕ’ah’s female servant Zilpah bore Ya’aqoḇ a
second son.
13 And Lĕ’ah said, “I am baruḵ, for the daughters shall
call me baruḵ.” So she called his name Ashĕr.
14 And Re’uḇĕn went in the days of wheat harvest and
found love-apples in the field, and brought them to his
79

GENESIS

mother Lĕ’ah. And Raḥĕl said to Lĕ’ah, “Please give
me some of your son’s love-apples.”
15 But she said to her, “Is it a small matter that you
have taken away my husband? Would you take away
my son’s love-apples too?” And Raḥĕl said, “Therefore
let him lie with you tonight for your son’s love-apples.”
16 And when Ya’aqoḇ came out of the field in the
evening, Lĕ’ah went out to meet him and said, “Do
come in to me, for indeed, I have hired you with my
son’s love-apples.” And he lay with her that night.
17 And Elohim listened to Lĕ’ah, and she conceived
and bore Ya’aqoḇ a fifth son.
18 And Lĕ’ah said, “Elohim has given me my hire,
because I have given my female servant to my
husband.” So she called his name Yissasḵar.
19 And Lĕ’ah conceived again and bore Ya’aqoḇ a
sixth son.
20 And Lĕ’ah said, “Elohim has presented me with a
good present. Now my husband is going to dwell with
me, because I have borne him six sons.” So she called
his name Zeḇulun.
21 And afterward she bore a daughter, and called her
name Dinah.
22 And Elohim remembered Raḥĕl, and Elohim
listened to her and opened her womb.
23 And she conceived, and bore a son, and said,
“Elohim has taken away my reproach.”
24 So she called his name Yosĕph, and said, “HWHY
has added to me another son.”
25 And it came to be, when Raḥĕl had borne Yosĕph,
that Ya’aqoḇ said to Laḇan, “Send me on my way, to
go to my own place and to my land.
26 “Give my wives and my children for whom I have
served you, and let me go, for you yourself know my
service which I have done for you.”
80

BERĔSHITH

And Laḇan said to him, “If I have found favour in
your eyes, please stay, for I have diligently watched
that HWHY has baraḵ me for your sake.”
28 And he said, “Name me your wages, and I give it.”
29 So he said to him, “You know how I have served
you and how your livestock has been with me.
30 “For the little you had before I came has increased
greatly, and HWHY has baraḵ you since my coming. But
now, when am I to provide for my own house too?”
31 And he said, “What do I give you?” And Ya’aqoḇ
said, “Give me naught! If you do this for me, I shall
again feed and guard your flocks:
32 “Let me pass through all your flock today, removing
from there all the speckled and spotted sheep, and all
the black ones among the lambs, and the spotted and
speckled among the goats. And these shall be my
wages.
33 “And my righteousness shall answer for me in time
to come, when you come concerning my wages: every
one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats,
and black among the lambs, it is stolen if it is with me.”
34 And Laḇan said, “See, let it be according to your
word!”
35 And on that day he put aside the male goats that
were speckled and spotted, and all the female goats
that were speckled and spotted, every one that had
some white in it, and all the black ones among the
lambs, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
36 And he put three days’ journey between himself
and Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ fed the rest of Laḇan’s
flocks.
37 And Ya’aqoḇ took for himself rods of green poplar
and of the almond and chestnut trees, peeled white
strips in them, and exposed the white which was in the
rods.
27

81

GENESIS

And he put the rods which he had peeled before the
flocks in the gutters, in the watering troughs where the
flocks came to drink, and they conceived when they
came to drink.
39 So the flocks conceived before the rods, and the
flocks brought forth streaked, speckled, and spotted.
40 And Ya’aqoḇ separated the lambs, and made the
flocks face toward the streaked and all the black in the
flock of Laḇan, but he put his own flocks by themselves
and did not put them with Laḇan’s flock.
41 And it came to be, whenever the strong ones of the
flock conceived, that Ya’aqoḇ placed the rods before
the eyes of the flock in the gutters, so they would
conceive among the rods.
42 But when the flocks were weak, he did not put them
in, so the weak ones were Laḇan’s and the strong ones
Ya’aqoḇ’s.
43 Thus the man increased very much, and had many
flocks, and female and male servants, and camels and
donkeys.
38

31 And he heard the words of Laḇan’s sons, saying,
“Ya’aqoḇ has taken away all that was our father’s, and
from what belonged to our father he has made all this
wealth.”
2 And Ya’aqoḇ would look at the face of Laḇan and
see that it was not toward him as before.
3 And HWHY said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Return to the land of
your fathers and to your relatives. And I am with you.”
4 And Ya’aqoḇ sent and called Raḥĕl and Lĕ’ah to
the field, to his flock,
5 and said to them, “I see your father’s face, that it is
not toward me as before, but the Elohim of my father
has been with me.
82

BERĔSHITH

“And you know that I have served your father with
all my strength.
7 “Yet your father has deceived me and changed my
wages ten times, but Elohim did not allow him to do
evil to me.
8 “When he said this, ‘The speckled are your wages,’
then all the flocks bore speckled. And when he said
this, ‘The streaked are your wages,’ then all the flocks
bore streaked.
9 “So Elohim has taken away the livestock of your
father and given them to me.
10 “And it came to be, at the time when the flocks
conceived, that I lifted my eyes and looked in a dream
and saw the rams which leaped upon the flocks were
streaked, speckled, and mottled.
11 “And the Messenger of Elohim spoke to me in a
dream, saying, ‘Ya’aqoḇ.’ And I said, ‘Here I am.’
12 “And He said, ‘Lift your eyes now and see, all the
rams which leap on the flocks are streaked, speckled,
and mottled, for I have seen all that Laḇan is doing to
you.
13 ‘I am the Ĕl of Bĕyth Ĕl, where you anointed the
standing column and where you made a vow to Me. Now
rise up, get out of this land, and return to the land of your
relatives.’ ”
14 And Raḥĕl and Lĕ’ah answered and said to him,
“Do we still have any portion or inheritance in our
father’s house?
15 “Are we not reckoned by him as strangers? For he
has sold us, and also entirely consumed our silver.
16 “For all the wealth which Elohim has taken from our
father are ours and our children’s. Now then, do
whatever Elohim has told you.”
17 So Ya’aqoḇ rose and put his sons and his wives on
camels,
6

83

GENESIS

and he drove off all his livestock and all his
possessions which he had acquired, his property of the
livestock which he had acquired in Paddan Aram, to
go to his father Yitsḥaq in the land of Kena’an.
19 And when Laḇan had gone to shear his sheep,
Raḥĕl stole the house idols that were her father’s.
20 And Ya’aqoḇ stole the heart of Laḇan the Aramean,
because he did not inform him that he was about to
flee.
21 And he fled with all that he had. And he rose up and
passed over the river, and headed toward the
mountains of Gil’aḏ.
22 And on the third day Laḇan was told that Ya’aqoḇ
had fled.
23 Then he took his brothers with him and pursued him
for seven days’ journey, and he overtook him in the
mountains of Gil’aḏ.
24 But in a dream by night Elohim came to Laḇan the
Aramean, and said to him, “Guard yourself, that you
do not speak to Ya’aqoḇ either good or evil.”
25 Then Laḇan overtook Ya’aqoḇ. Now Ya’aqoḇ had
pitched his tent in the mountains, and Laḇan with his
brothers pitched in the mountains of Gil’aḏ.
26 And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “What have you done,
that you have stolen my heart, and driven my
daughters off like captives taken with the sword?
27 “Why did you flee secretly and deceive me, and not
inform me, and I would have sent you away with joy
and songs, with tambourine and lyre?
28 “And you did not allow me to kiss my sons and my
daughters. Now you have been foolish to do this.
29 “It is in the power of my hand to do evil to you, but
the Elohim of your father spoke to me last night,
saying, ‘Guard yourself, that you do not speak to
Ya’aqoḇ either good or evil.’
18

84

BERĔSHITH

“And now you have gone because you greatly long
for your father’s house, but why did you steal my
mighty ones?”
31 And Ya’aqoḇ answered and said to Laḇan,
“Because I was afraid, for I said, ‘Lest you tear your
daughters away from me.’
32 “With whomever you find your mighty ones, let him
not live. In the presence of our brothers, see for
yourself what is with me and take it with you.” For
Ya’aqoḇ did not know that Raḥĕl had stolen them.
33 And Laḇan went into Ya’aqoḇ’s tent, and into
Lĕ’ah’s tent, and into the tents of the two female
servants, but he did not find them. And he came out of
Lĕ’ah’s tent and entered Raḥĕl’s tent.
34 Now Raḥĕl had taken the house idols and put them
in the camel’s saddle, and sat on them. And Laḇan
searched all about the tent but did not find them.
35 And she said to her father, “Let it not displease my
master that I am unable to rise before you, for the way
of women is with me.” And he searched but did not find
the house idols.
36 And Ya’aqoḇ was wroth and contended with Laḇan,
and Ya’aqoḇ answered and said to Laḇan, “What is my
transgression? What is my sin, that you have hotly
pursued me?
37 “Now that you have searched all my goods what
have you found of all your household goods? Put it
here before my brothers and your brothers, and let
them decide between the two of us!
38 “These twenty years I have been with you. Your
ewes and your female goats have not miscarried their
young, and I have not eaten the rams of your sheep.
39 “That which was torn by beasts I did not bring to
you, I myself bore the loss of it. You required it from
my hand, whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
30

85

GENESIS

“I was! By day the heat consumed me, and the frost
by night, and my sleep fled from my eyes.
41 “These twenty years I have been in your house. I
served you fourteen years for your two daughters, and
six years for your flock, and you have changed my
wages ten times.
42 “Unless the Elohim of my father, the Elohim of
Aḇraham and the Awe of Yitsḥaq, had been with me,
you would now have sent me away empty-handed.
Elohim has seen my affliction and the labour of my
hands, and rendered judgment last night.”
43 And Laḇan answered and said to Ya’aqoḇ, “These
daughters are my daughters, and these children are
my children, and this flock is my flock, and all that you
see is mine. But what shall I do today to these, my
daughters or to their children whom they have borne?
44 “And now, come, let us make a covenant, you and
I, and it shall be a witness between you and me.”
45 So Ya’aqoḇ took a stone and put it up as a standing
column.
46 And Ya’aqoḇ said to his brothers, “Gather stones.”
And they took stones and made a heap, and they ate
there on the heap.
47 And Laḇan called it Yeḡar Sahaḏutha, but Ya’aqoḇ
called it Gal’ĕḏ.
48 And Laḇan said, “This heap is a witness between
you and me today.” That is why its name was called
Gal’ĕḏ,
49 also Mitspah, because he said, “Let HWHY watch
between you and me when we are out of each other’s
sight.
50 “If you afflict my daughters, or if you take other
wives besides my daughters, although no man is with
us; see, Elohim is witness between you and me!”
40

86

BERĔSHITH

And Laḇan said to Ya’aqoḇ, “See this heap and see
this standing column, which I have placed between
you and me.
52 “This heap is a witness, and this standing column
is a witness, that I do not pass beyond this heap to you,
and you do not pass beyond this heap and this
standing column to me, for evil.
53 “The Elohim of Aḇraham, the Elohim of Naḥor, and
the Elohim of their father rightly rule between us!” And
Ya’aqoḇ swore by the Awe of his father Yitsḥaq.
54 And Ya’aqoḇ brought an offering on the mountain,
and called his brothers to eat bread. And they ate
bread and spent the night on the mountain.
55 And Laḇan rose up early in the morning, and kissed
his sons and daughters and baraḵ them. And Laḇan
left and returned to his place.
51

32 And Ya’aqoḇ went on his way, and the
messengers of Elohim met him.
2 And when Ya’aqoḇ saw them, he said, “This is the
camp of Elohim.” And he called the name of that place
Maḥanayim.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ sent messengers before him to Ĕsaw
his brother in the land of Sĕ’ir, the field of Eḏom
4 and he commanded them, saying, “Say this to my
master Ĕsaw, ‘Your servant Ya’aqoḇ said this, “I have
sojourned with Laḇan and stayed there until now.
5 “And I have bulls, and donkeys, flocks, and male
and female servants. And I have sent to inform my
master, to find favour in your eyes.” ’ ”
6 So the messengers returned to Ya’aqoḇ, saying,
“We came to your brother Ĕsaw, and he also is coming
to meet you, and four hundred men with him.”

87

GENESIS

And Ya’aqoḇ was greatly afraid and distressed. So
he divided the people that were with him, and the
flocks and herds and camels, into two groups,
8 and he said, “If Ĕsaw comes to the one group and
attacks it, then the other group which is left shall
escape.”
9 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “O Elohim of my father Aḇraham
and Elohim of my father Yitsḥaq, HWHY who said to me,
‘Return to your land and to your relatives, and I do
good to you,’
10 “I do not deserve the least of all the kind acts and
all the truth which You have shown Your servant, for I
passed over this Yardĕn with my staff, and now I have
become two groups.
11 “Deliver me, I pray, from the hand of my brother,
from the hand of Ĕsaw, for I fear him, lest he come and
shall smite me and the mother with the children.
12 “For You said, ‘I shall certainly do good to you, and
shall make your seed as the sand of the sea, which are
too numerous to count.’ ”
13 And he spent the night there, and took what came
to his hand as a present for Ĕsaw his brother –
14 two hundred female goats and twenty male goats,
two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
15 thirty milk camels with their colts, forty cows and ten
bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten foals.
16 And he gave into the hand of his servants, every
drove by itself, and said to his servants, “Pass over
before me, and put some distance between drove and
drove.”
17 And he commanded the first one, saying, “When
Ĕsaw my brother meets you and asks you, saying, ‘To
whom do you belong, and where are you going? And
whose are these in front of you?’
7

88

BERĔSHITH

then you shall say, ‘They are your servant
Ya’aqoḇ’s. It is a present sent to my master Ĕsaw. And
see, he also is behind us.’ ”
19 So he commanded the second, and the third, and
all who followed the droves, saying, “Speak to Ĕsaw
this same word when you find him,
20 and you shall say, ‘Also look, your servant Ya’aqoḇ
is behind us.’ ” For he said, “Let me appease him with
the present that goes before me, and after that see his
face. He might accept me.”
21 And the present passed over before him, but he
himself spent the night in the camp.
22 And he rose up that night and took his two wives,
and his two female servants, and his eleven sons, and
passed over the ford of Yabboq.
23 And he took them and sent them over the stream,
and sent over what he had.
24 And Ya’aqoḇ was left alone. And a Man wrestled
with him until the breaking of day.
25 And when He saw that He did not overcome him,
He touched the socket of his hip. And the socket of
Ya’aqoḇ’s hip was dislocated as he wrestled with Him.
26 And He said, “Let Me go, for the day breaks.” But
he said, “I am not letting You go until You have baraḵ
me!”
27 So He asked him, “What is your name?” And he
said, “Ya’aqoḇ.”
28 And He said, “Your name is no longer called
Ya’aqoḇ, but Yisra’ĕl, because you have striven with
Elohim and with men, and have overcome.”
29 And Ya’aqoḇ asked Him, saying, “Please let me
know Your Name.” And He said, “Why do you ask
about My Name?” And He baraḵ him there.
18

89

GENESIS

And Ya’aqoḇ called the name of the place Peni’ĕl,
“For I have seen Elohim face to face, and my life is
preserved.”
31 And the sun rose on him as he passed over
Penu’ĕl, and he limped on his hip.
32 That is why the children of Yisra’ĕl to this day do
not eat the sinew of the hip, which is on the socket of
the thigh, because He touched the socket of the thigh
of Ya’aqoḇ, in the sinew of the hip.
30

33 And Ya’aqoḇ lifted his eyes and looked and saw
Ĕsaw coming, and with him four hundred men. And he
divided the children among Lĕ’ah, and Raḥĕl, and the
two female servants.
2 And he put the female servants and their children
in front, and Lĕ’ah and her children behind, and Raḥĕl
and Yosĕph last.
3 And he himself passed over before them and
bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he
came near to his brother.
4 And Ĕsaw ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
fell on his neck and kissed him, and they wept.
5 And he lifted his eyes and saw the women and
children, and said, “Who are these with you?” And he
said, “The children with whom Elohim has favoured
your servant.”
6 Then the female servants came near, they and their
children, and bowed themselves.
7 And Lĕ’ah also came near with her children, and
they bowed themselves. And Yosĕph and Raḥĕl came
near, and they bowed themselves.
8 Then Ĕsaw said, “What do you mean by all this
company which I met?” And he said, “To find favour in
the eyes of my master.”
90

BERĔSHITH

But Ĕsaw said, “I have enough, my brother, let what
you have remain yours.”
10 And Ya’aqoḇ said, “No, please, if I have now found
favour in your eyes, then receive my present from my
hand, because I have seen your face like seeing the
face of Elohim, and you were pleased with me.
11 “Please, take my beraḵah that is brought to you,
because Elohim has favoured me, and because I have
all.” And he urged him, and he took it.
12 And he said, “Let us depart and go, and let me go
before you.”
13 But he said to him, “My master knows that the
children are weak, and the flocks and herds which are
nursing are with me. And if the men should drive them
hard one day, all the flocks shall die.
14 “Please let my master go before his servant, and let
me lead on slowly according to the pace of the
livestock that go before me, and according to the pace
of the children, until I come to my master in Sĕ’ir.”
15 And Ĕsaw said, “Please let me leave with you some
of the people who are with me.” But he said, “Why this?
Let me find favour in the eyes of my master.”
16 And Ĕsaw returned that day on his way to Sĕ’ir.
17 And Ya’aqoḇ departed to Sukkoth, and built himself
a house, and made booths for his livestock. That is
why the name of the place is called Sukkoth.
18 And Ya’aqoḇ came safely to the city of Sheḵem,
which is in the land of Kena’an, when he came from
Paddan Aram. And he pitched his tent before the city.
19 And he bought the portion of the field where he had
pitched his tent, from the children of Ḥamor, Sheḵem’s
father, for one hundred qesitah.
20 And he put up an altar there and called it Ĕl Elohĕy
Yisra’ĕl.
9

91

GENESIS

34 And Dinah, the daughter of Lĕ’ah, whom she had
borne to Ya’aqoḇ, went out to see the daughters of the
land.
2 And Sheḵem, son of Ḥamor the Ḥiwwite, prince of
the land, saw her and took her and lay with her, and
humbled her.
3 And his being clung to Dinah the daughter of
Ya’aqoḇ, and he loved the girl and spoke kindly to the
girl.
4 And Sheḵem spoke to his father Ḥamor, saying,
“Take this girl for me for a wife.”
5 And Ya’aqoḇ heard that he had defiled Dinah his
daughter. Now his sons were with his livestock in the
field, so Ya’aqoḇ kept silent until they came.
6 And Ḥamor, the father of Sheḵem, went out to
Ya’aqoḇ to speak with him.
7 And the sons of Ya’aqoḇ came in from the field
when they heard it. And the men were grieved and very
wroth, because he had done a senseless deed in
Yisra’ĕl by lying with Ya’aqoḇ’s daughter, which should
not be done.
8 But Ḥamor spoke with them, saying, “My son
Sheḵem’s being longs for your daughter. Please give
her to him for a wife.
9 “And intermarry with us, give us your daughters and
take our daughters for yourselves,
10 and dwell with us, and let the land be before you.
Dwell and move about in it, and have possessions in
it.”
11 And Sheḵem said to her father and her brothers,
“Let me find favour in your eyes, and whatever you say
to me I give.

92

BERĔSHITH

“Ask of me a bride price and gift ever so high, and
I give according to what you say to me, but give me the
girl for a wife.”
13 But the sons of Ya’aqoḇ answered Sheḵem and
Ḥamor his father, and spoke with deceit, because he
had defiled Dinah their sister.
14 And they said to them, “We are not able to do this
matter, to give our sister to one who is uncircumcised,
for that would be a reproach to us.
15 Only on this would we agree to you: If you become
as we are, to have every male of you circumcised,
16 then we shall give our daughters to you, and take
your daughters to us. And we shall dwell with you, and
shall become one people.
17 “But if you do not listen to us and be circumcised,
we shall take our daughter and go.”
18 And their words pleased Ḥamor and Sheḵem,
Ḥamor’s son.
19 And the young man did not delay to do this because
he delighted in Ya’aqoḇ’s daughter. Now he was more
respected than all the household of his father.
20 And Ḥamor and Sheḵem his son came to the gate
of their city, and spoke with the men of their city,
saying,
21 “These men are at peace with us, so let them dwell
in the land and move about in it. And see, the land is
large enough for them. Let us take their daughters for
us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
22 “Only on this would the men agree to dwell with us,
to be one people: if every male among us is
circumcised as they are circumcised.
23 “Their herds and their possessions, and all their
beasts, should they not be ours? Only let us agree with
them, and let them dwell with us.”
12

93

GENESIS

And all who went out of the gate of his city listened
to Ḥamor and Sheḵem his son; every male was
circumcised, all who went out of the gate of his city.
25 And it came to be on the third day, when they were
in pain, that two of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, Shim’on and
Lĕwi, Dinah’s brothers, each took his sword and came
boldly upon the city and killed all the males.
26 And they killed Ḥamor and Sheḵem his son with the
edge of the sword, and took Dinah from Sheḵem’s
house, and went out.
27 The sons of Ya’aqoḇ came upon the slain, and
plundered the city, because they had defiled their
sister.
28 They took their flocks and their herds, and their
donkeys, and that which was in the city and that which
was in the field,
29 and all their wealth. And all their little ones and their
wives they took captive, and they plundered all that
was in the houses.
30 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Shim’on and Lĕwi, “You have
troubled me by making me a stench among the
inhabitants of the land, among the Kena’anites and the
Perizzites. And I am few in number, they shall gather
themselves against me and shall smite me, and I shall
be destroyed, my household and I.”
31 But they said, “Should he treat our sister like a
whore?”
24

35 And Elohim said to Ya’aqoḇ, “Arise, go up to
Bĕyth Ĕl and dwell there. And make an altar there to
Ĕl who appeared to you when you fled from the face of
Ĕsaw your brother.”
2 And Ya’aqoḇ said to his household and to all who
were with him, “Put away the foreign mighty ones that
94

BERĔSHITH

are among you, and cleanse yourselves, and change
your garments.
3 “And let us arise and go up to Bĕyth Ĕl, and let me
make there an altar to Ĕl, who answered me in the day
of my distress, and has been with me in the way which
I have gone.”
4 So they gave Ya’aqoḇ all the foreign mighty ones
which were in their hands, and all their earrings which
were in their ears. And Ya’aqoḇ hid them under the
terebinth tree which was near Sheḵem.
5 And they departed, and the fear of Elohim was
upon the cities that were all around them, and they did
not pursue the sons of Ya’aqoḇ.
6 And Ya’aqoḇ came to Luz, that is Bĕyth Ĕl, which
is in the land of Kena’an, he and all the people who
were with him.
7 And he built there an altar and called the place Ĕl
Bĕyth Ĕl, because there Elohim appeared to him when
he fled from the face of his brother.
8 And Deḇorah, Riḇqah’s nurse, died, and she was
buried below Bĕyth Ĕl under the terebinth tree. So the
name of it was called Allon Baḵuth.
9 And Elohim appeared to Ya’aqoḇ again, when he
came from Paddan Aram, and baraḵ him.
10 And Elohim said to him, “Your name is Ya’aqoḇ,
your name is no longer called Ya’aqoḇ, but Yisra’ĕl is
your name.” So He called his name Yisra’ĕl.
11 And Elohim said to him, “I am Ĕl Shaddai. Bear fruit
and increase, a nation and a company of nations shall
be from you, and sovereigns come from your body.
12 “And the land which I gave Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq I
give to you. And to your seed after you I give this land.”
13 And Elohim went up from him in the place where
He had spoken with him.
95

GENESIS

And Ya’aqoḇ put up a standing column in the place
where He had spoken with him, a monument of stone.
And he poured a drink offering on it, and he poured oil
on it.
15 And Ya’aqoḇ called the name of the place where
Elohim spoke with him, Bĕyth Ĕl.
16 Then they departed from Bĕyth Ĕl. And it came to
be, when there was but a little distance to go to
Ephrath, that Raḥĕl began to give birth, and had great
difficulty giving birth.
17 And it came to be, as she was having great difficulty
giving birth, that the midwife said to her, “Do not fear,
for it is another son for you.”
18 And it came to be, as her life was going out - for
she died - that she called his name Ben-Oni. But his
father called him Binyamin.
19 So Raḥĕl died and was buried on the way to
Ephrath, that is Bĕyth Leḥem.
20 And Ya’aqoḇ put a standing column on her grave,
which is the monument of Raḥĕl’s grave to this day.
21 And Yisra’ĕl departed and pitched his tent beyond
the tower of Ĕḏer.
22 And it came to be, when Yisra’ĕl dwelt in that land,
that Re’uḇĕn went and lay with Bilhah his father’s
concubine. And Yisra’ĕl heard about it. Now the sons
of Ya’aqoḇ were twelve:
23 The sons of Lĕ’ah were Re’uḇĕn, Ya’aqoḇ’s firstborn, and Shim’on, and Lĕwi, and Yahuḏah, and
Yissasḵar, and Zeḇulun;
24 the sons of Raḥĕl were Yosĕph and Binyamin;
25 the sons of Bilhah, Raḥĕl’s female servant, were
Dan and Naphtali;
26 and the sons of Zilpah, Lĕ’ah’s female servant,
were Gaḏ and Ashĕr. These were the sons of Ya’aqoḇ
who were born to him in Paddan Aram.
14

96

BERĔSHITH

And Ya’aqoḇ came to his father Yitsḥaq at Mamrĕ,
or Qiryath Arba, that is Ḥeḇron, where Aḇraham and
Yitsḥaq had dwelt.
28 And the days of Yitsḥaq were one hundred and
eighty years.
29 So Yitsḥaq breathed his last and died, and was
gathered to his people, aged and satisfied of days. And
his sons Ĕsaw and Ya’aqoḇ buried him.
27

36 And this is the genealogy of Ĕsaw, who is Eḏom.
Ĕsaw took his wives from the daughters of
Kena’an: Aḏah the daughter of Ĕylon the Ḥittite, and
Oholiḇamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of
Tsiḇ’on the Ḥiwwite;
3 and Basemath, Yishma’ĕl’s daughter, sister of
Neḇayoth.
4 And Aḏah bore Eliphaz to Ĕsaw, and Basemath
bore Re’uw’ĕl.
5 And Oholiḇamah bore Ye’ush, and Ya’lam, and
Qoraḥ. These were the sons of Ĕsaw who were born
to him in the land of Kena’an.
6 And Ĕsaw took his wives, and his sons, and his
daughters, and all the beings of his household, and his
herds and all his beasts, and all his possessions which
he had gained in the land of Kena’an, and went to a
land away from the presence of his brother Ya’aqoḇ.
7 For their possessions were too great for them to
dwell together, and the land of their sojournings could
not support them because of their herds.
8 So Ĕsaw dwelt in Mount Se’ir. Ĕsaw is Eḏom.
9 And this is the genealogy of Ĕsaw the father of the
Eḏomites in Mount Sĕ’ir.
10 These were the names of Ĕsaw’s sons: Eliphaz son
of Aḏah, wife of Ĕsaw, and Re’uw’ĕl son of Basemath,
wife of Ĕsaw.
2

97

GENESIS

And the sons of Eliphaz were Tĕman, Omar,
Tsepho, and Gatam, and Qenaz.
12 And Timna was the concubine of Eliphaz, Ĕsaw’s
son, and she bore Amalĕq to Eliphaz. These were the
sons of Aḏah, Ĕsaw’s wife.
13 These were the sons of Re’uw’ĕl: Naḥath and
Zeraḥ, Shammah and Mizzah. These were the sons of
Basemath, Ĕsaw’s wife.
14 These were the sons of Oholiḇamah, Ĕsaw’s wife,
the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Tsiḇ’on. And she
bore to Ĕsaw: Ye’ush, and Ya’lam, and Qoraḥ.
15 These were the chiefs of the sons of Ĕsaw. The
sons of Eliphaz, the first-born son of Ĕsaw, were Chief
Tĕman, Chief Omar, Chief Tsepho, Chief Qenaz,
16 Chief Qoraḥ, Chief Gatam, Chief Amalĕq. These
were the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Eḏom. They
were the sons of Aḏah.
17 And these were the sons of Re’uw’ĕl, Ĕsaw’s son:
Chief Naḥath, Chief Zeraḥ, Chief Shammah, and Chief
Mizzah. These were the chiefs of Re’uw’ĕl in the land
of Eḏom. These were the sons of Basemath, Ĕsaw’s
wife.
18 And these were the sons of Oholiḇamah, Ĕsaw’s
wife: Chief Ye’ush, Chief Ya’lam, and Chief Qoraḥ.
These were the chiefs from Oholiḇamah, Ĕsaw’s wife,
the daughter of Anah.
19 These were the sons of Ĕsaw, who is Eḏom, and
these were their chiefs.
20 These were the sons of Sĕ’ir the Ḥorite who
inhabited the land: Lotan, and Shoḇal, and Tsiḇ’on,
and Anah,
21 and Dishon, and Ĕtser, and Dishan. These were
the chiefs of the Ḥorites, the sons of Sĕ’ir, in the land
of Eḏom.
11

98

BERĔSHITH

And the sons of Lotan were Ḥori and Hĕmam.
Lotan’s sister was Timna.
23 And these were the sons of Shoḇal: Alwan, and
Manaḥath, and Ĕyḇal, Shepho, and Onam.
24 And these were the sons of Tsiḇ’on: both Ayah and
Anah. This was the Anah who found the water in the
wilderness as he fed the donkeys of his father Tsiḇ’on
25 And these were the children of Anah: Dishon and
Oholiḇamah the daughter of Anah.
26 And these were the sons of Dishon: Ḥemdan, and
Eshban, and Yithran, and Keran.
27 These were the sons of Ĕtser: Bilhan, and Za’awan,
and Aqan.
28 These were the sons of Dishan: Uts and Aran.
29 These were the chiefs of the Ḥorites: Chief Lotan,
Chief Shoḇal, Chief Tsiḇ’on, Chief Anah,
30 Chief Dishon, Chief Ĕtser, and Chief Dishan. These
were the chiefs of the Ḥorites, according to their chiefs
in the land of Sĕ’ir.
31 And these were the sovereigns who reigned in the
land of Eḏom before any sovereign reigned over the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
32 And Bela the son of Be’or reigned in Eḏom, and the
name of his city was Dinhaḇah.
33 And Bela died, and Yoḇaḇ son of Zeraḥ of Botsrah
reigned in his place.
34 And Yoḇaḇ died, and Ḥusham of the land of the
Tĕmanites reigned in his place.
35 And Ḥusham died, and Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ, who
smote Miḏyan in the field of Mo’aḇ, reigned in his
place. And the name of his city was Awith.
36 And Haḏaḏ died, and Samlah of Masrĕqah reigned
in his place.
37 And Samlah died, and Sha’ul of Reḥoḇoth
ha’Nahar reigned in his place.
22

99

GENESIS

And Sha’ul died, and Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor
reigned in his place.
39 And Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor died, and Haḏar
reigned in his place. And the name of his city was Pa’u.
And his wife’s name was Mehĕtab’ĕl, the daughter of
Matrĕḏ, the daughter of Mĕy-Zahaḇ.
40 And these were the names of the chiefs of Ĕsaw,
according to their clans and their places, by their
names: Chief Timnah, Chief Alwah, Chief Yethĕth,
41 Chief Oholiḇamah, Chief Ĕlah, Chief Pinon,
42 Chief Qenaz, Chief Tĕman, Chief Miḇtsar,
43 Chief Maḡdi’ĕl, Chief Iram. These were the chiefs
of Eḏom, according to their dwelling places in the land
of their possession. Ĕsaw was the father of the
Eḏomites.
38

37 And Ya’aqoḇ dwelt in the land of his father’s
sojournings, in the land of Kena’an.
2 This is the genealogy of Ya’aqoḇ. Yosĕph, being
seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his
brothers. And the young man was with the sons of
Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, his father’s wives. And
Yosĕph brought an evil report of them to his father.
3 And Yisra’ĕl loved Yosĕph more than all his
children, because he was the son of his old age. And
he made him a long robe.
4 But when his brothers saw that their father loved
him more than all his brothers, they hated him and
were not able to speak peaceably to him.
5 And Yosĕph dreamed a dream, and told it to his
brothers. So they hated him even more.
6 And he said to them, “Please listen to this dream
which I have dreamed:
7 “See, we were binding sheaves in the midst of the
field, and see, my sheaf rose up and also stood up.
100

BERĔSHITH

And see, your sheaves stood all around and bowed
down to my sheaf.”
8 And his brothers said to him, “Shall you indeed
reign over us? Shall you indeed rule over us?” So they
hated him even more for his dreams and for his words.
9 And he dreamed still another dream and related it
to his brothers, and said, “See, I have dreamed
another dream, and see, the sun and the moon and
the eleven stars bowed down to me.”
10 And he related it to his father and his brothers. And
his father rebuked him and said to him, “What is this
dream that you have dreamed? Shall we, your mother
and I and your brothers, indeed come to bow down to
the earth before you?”
11 And his brothers envied him, but his father guarded
the word.
12 And his brothers went to feed their father’s flock in
Sheḵem.
13 And Yisra’ĕl said to Yosĕph, “Are not your brothers
feeding in Sheḵem? Come, I send you to them.” So he
said to him, “Here I am.”
14 And he said to him, “Please go and see if it is well
with your brothers and well with the sheep, and bring
back word to me.” So he sent him out of the Valley of
Ḥeḇron, and he went to Sheḵem.
15 And a certain man found him, and see, he was
wandering in the field. And the man asked him, saying,
“What do you seek?”
16 And he said, “I am seeking my brothers. Please
inform me where they are feeding their sheep.”
17 And the man said, “They have left here, for I heard
them say, ‘Let us go towards Dothan.’ ” So Yosĕph
went after his brothers and found them in Dothan.
18 And they saw him from a distance, and before he
came near them, they plotted against him, to kill him.
101

GENESIS

And they said to each other, “See, this master of
dreams is coming!
20 “Now, then, come and let us now kill him and throw
him into some pit, and shall say, ‘Some wild beast has
devoured him.’ Let us then see what comes of his
dreams!”
21 But Re’uḇĕn heard and rescued him from their
hands, and said, “Let us not take his life.”
22 And Re’uḇĕn said to them, “Shed no blood. Throw
him into this pit which is in the wilderness and do not
lay a hand on him” - in order to rescue him out of their
hands, and bring him back to his father.
23 So it came to be, when Yosĕph had come to his
brothers, that they stripped Yosĕph of his robe, the
long robe which was on him.
24 And they took him and threw him into a pit. And the
pit was empty, there was no water in it.
25 And they sat down to eat a meal. And they lifted
their eyes and looked and saw a company of
Yishma’ĕlites, coming from Gil’aḏ with their camels,
bearing spices, and balm, and myrrh, going to take
them down to Mitsrayim.
26 And Yahuḏah said to his brothers, “What would we
gain if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?
27 “Come and let us sell him to the Yishma’ĕlites, and
let not our hand be upon him, for he is our brother, our
flesh.” And his brothers listened.
28 And men, Miḏyanite traders passed by, so they
pulled Yosĕph up and lifted him out of the pit, and sold
him to the Yishma’ĕlites for twenty pieces of silver. And
they took Yosĕph to Mitsrayim.
29 And Re’uḇĕn returned to the pit, and see, Yosĕph
was not in the pit. And he tore his garments.
30 And he returned to his brothers and said, “The boy
is gone! And I, where am I to go?”
19

102

BERĔSHITH

So they took Yosĕph’s robe, killed a male goat, and
dipped the robe in the blood,
32 and sent the long robe and brought it to their father
and said, “We have found this. Please look, is it the
robe of your son or not?”
33 And he recognised it and said, “It is my son’s robe.
An evil beast has devoured him. Yosĕph is torn, torn
to pieces.”
34 And Ya’aqoḇ tore his garments, and put sackcloth
on his waist, and mourned for his son many days.
35 And all his sons and all his daughters arose to
comfort him, but he refused to be comforted, and he
said, “Now let me go down into the grave to my son in
mourning.” So his father wept for him.
36 And the Miḏanites had sold him in Mitsrayim to
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and captain of the
guard.
31

38 And at that time it came to be that Yahuḏah left
his brothers, and turned aside to a man, an Aḏullamite
whose name was Ḥirah.
2 And Yahuḏah saw there a daughter of a certain
Kena’anite whose name was Shuwa. And he took her
and went in to her.
3 So she conceived and bore a son, and he called his
name Ĕr.
4 And she conceived again and bore a son, and she
called his name Onan.
5 And she conceived yet again and bore a son, and
called his name Shĕlah. And he was at Keziḇ when
she bore him.
6 And Yahuḏah took a wife for Ĕr his first-born, and
her name was Tamar.
7 But Ĕr, Yahuḏah’s first-born, was evil in the eyes of
HWHY, and HWHY took his life.
103

GENESIS

And Yahuḏah said to Onan, “Go in to your brother’s
wife and marry her, and raise up an heir to your
brother.”
9 And Onan knew that the offspring would not be his.
And it came to be, when he went in to his brother’s
wife, that he spilled on the ground, lest he should give
an offspring to his brother.
10 But what he did displeased HWHY, so He took his
life too.
11 Then Yahuḏah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law,
“Remain a widow in your father’s house until my son
Shĕlah is grown.” For he said, “Lest he also die as his
brothers did.” And Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s
house.
12 And after a long time the daughter of Shuwa,
Yahuḏah’s wife, died. And Yahuḏah was comforted,
and went up to his sheep-shearers at Timnah, he and
his friend Ḥirah the Aḏullamite.
13 And it was reported to Tamar, saying, “See, your
father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.”
14 And she took off her widow’s garments, and
covered herself with a veil and wrapped herself, and
sat at the entrance to Ĕnayim which was on the way to
Timnah. For she saw that Shĕlah was grown, and she
was not given to him as a wife.
15 And Yahuḏah saw her, and reckoned her for a
whore, for she had covered her face.
16 And he turned aside to her by the way, and said,
“Please let me come in to you,” for he did not know that
she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, “What do
you give me to come in to me?”
17 And he said, “Let me send you a young goat from
the flock.” And she said, “Do you give me a pledge until
you send it?”
8

104

BERĔSHITH

So he said, “What pledge should I give you?” And
she said, “Your seal and your cord and your staff that
is in your hand.” And he gave them to her, and went in
to her, and she conceived by him.
19 And she arose and went away, and removed her
veil and put on the garments of her widowhood.
20 And Yahuḏah sent the young goat by the hand of
his friend the Aḏullamite, to receive his pledge from the
woman’s hand, but he did not find her.
21 And he asked the men of that place, saying, “Where
is the cult prostitute who was beside the way to
Ĕnayim?” And they said, “There was no cult prostitute
in this place.”
22 And he returned to Yahuḏah and said, “I have not
found her. And the men of the place also said there
was no cult prostitute in this place.”
23 And Yahuḏah said, “Let her take them for herself,
lest we become despised, for I sent this young goat
and you have not found her.”
24 And it came to be, about three months after, that
Yahuḏah was informed, saying, “Tamar your daughterin-law has whored, and see, she has conceived by
whoring.” And Yahuḏah said, “Bring her out and let her
be burned!”
25 When she was brought out, she sent to her fatherin-law, saying, “By the man to whom these belong, I
am pregnant.” And she said, “Please examine whose
these are: the seal and the cord and the staff.”
26 And Yahuḏah examined and said, “She has been
more righteous than I, because I did not give her to
Shĕlah my son.” And he never knew her again.
27 And it came to be, at the time for giving birth, that
see, twins were in her womb.
28 And it came to be, when she was giving birth, that
the one put out his hand. And the midwife took a
18

105

GENESIS

scarlet thread and bound it on his hand, saying, “This
one came out first.”
29 And it came to be, as he drew back his hand, that
see, his brother came out! And she said, “How did you
break through? This breach be upon you!” So his name
was called Perets.
30 And afterward his brother came out who had the
scarlet thread on his hand. So his name was called
Zeraḥ.

39 And Yosĕph had been taken down to Mitsrayim.
And Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the
guard, a Mitsrite, bought him from the Yishma’ĕlites
who had taken him down there.
2 And it came to be that HWHY was with Yosĕph, and
he became a prosperous man, and was in the house
of his master the Mitsrite.
3 And his master saw that HWHY was with him and
that HWHY made all he did to prosper in his hand.
4 So Yosĕph found favour in his eyes, and served
him, and he appointed him over his house, and gave
into his hand all that he had.
5 And it came to be, from the time that he appointed
him over his house and all that he had, that HWHY baraḵ
the Mitsrite’s house for Yosĕph’s sake. And the
beraḵah of HWHY was on all that he had in the house
and in the field.
6 And he left in Yosĕph’s hand all that he had, and
he did not know what he had except for the bread
which he ate. And Yosĕph was handsome in form and
handsome appearance.
7 And after these events it came to be that his
master’s wife lifted up her eyes to Yosĕph and said,
“Lie with me.”
106

BERĔSHITH

But he refused and said to his master’s wife, “Look,
my master does not know what is with me in the house,
and he has given into my hand all that he has.
9 “No one is greater in this house than I, and he has
not withheld whatever from me but you, because you
are his wife. And how shall I do this great evil and sin
against Elohim?”
10 And it came to be, as she spoke to Yosĕph day by
day, that he did not listen to her, to lie with her, to be
with her.
11 And it came to be on a certain day, when Yosĕph
went into the house to do his work, and none of the
men of the house was inside,
12 that she caught him by his garment, saying, “Lie
with me.” But he left his garment in her hand, and fled
and ran outside.
13 And it came to be, when she saw that he had left
his garment in her hand and fled outside,
14 that she called to the men of her house and spoke
to them, saying, “See, he has brought in to us an Iḇri
to mock us. He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried
out with a loud voice.
15 “And it came to be, when he heard that I lifted my
voice and cried out, that he left his garment with me,
and fled and went outside.”
16 And she kept his garment with her until his master
came home.
17 And she spoke to him these same words, saying,
“The Iḇri servant whom you brought to us came in to
me, to mock me,
18 so it came to be, as I lifted my voice and cried out,
that he left his garment with me and fled outside.”
19 And it came to be, when his master heard the words
which his wife spoke to him, saying, “Your servant did
8

107

GENESIS

to me according to these words,” that his displeasure
burned.
20 Then Yosĕph’s master took him and put him into
the prison, a place where the sovereign’s prisoners
were confined. And he was there in the prison.
21 But HWHY was with Yosĕph and extended kindness
to him, and He gave him favour in the eyes of the
prison warden.
22 And the prison warden gave into the hand of
Yosĕph all the prisoners who were in the prison, and
whatever was done there was his doing.
23 The prison warden did not look into any point that
was under Yosĕph’s hand, because HWHY was with
him. And whatever he did, HWHY made it prosper.

40 And after these events it came to be that the
cupbearer and the baker of the sovereign of Mitsrayim
sinned against their master, the sovereign of
Mitsrayim.
2 And Pharaoh was wroth with his two officers, the
chief cupbearer and the chief baker.
3 So he put them in confinement in the house of the
captain of the guard, in the prison, the place where
Yosĕph was a prisoner.
4 And the captain of the guard put Yosĕph in charge
of them, and he served them. So they were in
confinement for some time.
5 Then the cupbearer and the baker of the sovereign
of Mitsrayim, who were confined in the prison,
dreamed a dream, both of them, each man’s dream in
one night and each man’s dream with its own
interpretation.
6 And Yosĕph came in to them in the morning and
looked at them and saw that they were sad.
108

BERĔSHITH

And he asked Pharaoh’s officers who were with him
in confinement of his master’s house, saying, “Why do
you look so sad today?”
8 And they said to him, “We each have dreamed a
dream, and there is no one to interpret it.” And Yosĕph
said to them, “Do not interpretations belong to Elohim?
Relate them to me, please.”
9 So the chief cupbearer related his dream to
Yosĕph, and said to him, “See, in my dream a vine was
before me,
10 and in the vine were three branches, and it was as
though it budded – its blossoms shot forth, and its
clusters brought forth ripe grapes.
11 “And Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand. So I took the
grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and
placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.”
12 And Yosĕph said to him, “This is the interpretation
of it: The three branches are three days.
13 “Yet, within three days Pharaoh is going to lift up
your head and restore you to your place, and you shall
put Pharaoh’s cup in his hand according to the former
ruling, when you were his cupbearer.
14 “But remember me when it is well with you, and
please show kindness to me. And mention me to
Pharaoh, and get me out of this house.
15 “For truly I was stolen away from the land of the
Iḇrim. And also I have done naught that they should
put me into the dungeon.”
16 And the chief baker saw that the interpretation was
good, and he said to Yosĕph, “I also was in my dream
and saw three white baskets were on my head,
17 and in the uppermost basket all kinds of baked
goods for Pharaoh, and the birds ate them out of the
basket on my head.”
7

109

GENESIS

And Yosĕph answered and said, “This is the
interpretation of it: The three baskets are three days.
19 “Yet, within three days Pharaoh is going to lift off
your head from you and hang you on a tree. And the
birds shall eat your flesh from you.”
20 And on the third day, Pharaoh’s birthday, it came to
be that he made a feast for all his servants. And he
lifted up the head of the chief cupbearer and of the
chief baker among his servants,
21 and he restored the chief cupbearer to his post of
cupbearer again, and he placed the cup in Pharaoh’s
hand,
22 but he hanged the chief baker, as Yosĕph had
interpreted to them.
23 And the chief cupbearer did not remember Yosĕph,
but forgot him.
18

41 And it came to be, at the end of two years’ time,
that Pharaoh had a dream, and saw him standing by
the river,
2 and saw seven cows coming up out of the river, fine
looking and fat, and they fed amongst the reeds,
3 then saw seven other cows coming up after them
out of the river, ugly and lean of flesh, and stood by the
other cows on the bank of the river.
4 And the ugly and lean of flesh cows ate up the
seven fine looking and fat cows. Then Pharaoh awoke.
5 And he slept and dreamed a second time and saw
seven heads of grain coming up on one stalk, plump
and good,
6 and saw seven lean heads, scorched by the east
wind, coming up after them.
7 And the seven lean heads swallowed the seven
plump and complete heads. Then Pharaoh awoke and
saw it was a dream.
110

BERĔSHITH

And it came to be in the morning that his spirit was
moved, and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Mitsrayim and all its wise men. And Pharaoh related to
them his dreams, but there was no one who could
interpret them for Pharaoh.
9 Then the chief cupbearer spoke to Pharaoh,
saying, “I remember my crimes this day.
10 “When Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and
put me in confinement in the house of the captain of
the guard, both me and the chief baker,
11 each one of us dreamed a dream in one night, he
and I. Each of us dreamed according to the
interpretation of his own dream.
12 “And there was with us an Iḇri youth, a servant of
the captain of the guard. And we related to him, and
he interpreted our dreams for us. To each man he
interpreted according to his own dream.
13 “And it came to be, as he interpreted for us, so it
came to be. He restored me to my office, and he
hanged him.”
14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Yosĕph, and they
hurriedly brought him out of the dungeon. And he
shaved and changed his garments, and came to
Pharaoh.
15 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “I have dreamed a
dream, and there is no one to interpret it. Now I myself
have heard it said of you that you understand a dream,
to interpret it.”
16 And Yosĕph answered Pharaoh, saying, “It is not in
me, let Elohim answer Pharaoh with peace.”
17 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “See, in my dream I
stood on the bank of the river
18 and saw seven cows coming up out of the river, fine
looking and fat, and they fed amongst the reeds,
8

111

GENESIS

then saw seven other cows coming up after them,
poor and very ugly and lean of flesh, such ugliness as
I have never seen in all the land of Mitsrayim.
20 “And the lean of flesh and ugly cows ate up the first
seven, the fat cows.
21 “Yet when they had eaten them up, no one would
have known that they had eaten them, for they were
as ugly as at the beginning. Then I awoke.
22 “Also, I looked in my dream and saw seven heads
coming up on one stalk, complete and good,
23 then saw seven heads, withered, lean, scorched by
the east wind, coming up after them.
24 “And the lean heads swallowed the seven good
heads. And I spoke to the magicians, but there was no
one who could explain it to me.”
25 And Yosĕph said to Pharaoh, “The dream of
Pharaoh is one. Elohim has shown Pharaoh what He
is about to do:
26 “The seven good cows are seven years, and the
seven good heads are seven years - it is one dream.
27 “And the seven lean and ugly cows which came up
after them are seven years, and the seven empty
heads scorched by the east wind are seven years of
scarcity of food.
28 “This is the word which I spoke to Pharaoh: Elohim
has shown Pharaoh what He is about to do.
29 “See, seven years of great plenty are coming in all
the land of Mitsrayim,
30 but after them seven years of scarcity of food shall
arise and all the plenty be forgotten in the land of
Mitsrayim. And the scarcity of food shall destroy the
land,
31 and the plenty shall not be remembered in the land,
because of the scarcity of food following, for it is very
severe.
19

112

BERĔSHITH

“And the dream was repeated to Pharaoh twice
because the word is established by Elohim, and
Elohim is hastening to do it.
33 “And now, let Pharaoh look for a discerning and
wise man, and appoint him over the land of Mitsrayim.
34 “Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint overseers
over the land, to take up one-fifth of the land of
Mitsrayim in the seven years of plenty.
35 “And let them gather all the food of those good
years that are coming, and store up grain under the
hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
36 “And the food shall be for a store for the land for the
seven years of scarcity of food which shall be in the
land of Mitsrayim, and do not let the land be cut off by
the scarcity of food.”
37 And the word was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and
in the eyes of all his servants.
38 And Pharaoh said to his servants, “Could we find
another like him, a man in whom is the Ruaḥ of
Elohim?”
39 Then Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “Since Elohim has
shown you all this, there is no one as discerning and
wise as you.
40 “Be over my house, you yourself, and at your word
all my people shall be equipped - only in the throne I
am greater than you.”
41 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “See, I have
appointed you over all the land of Mitsrayim.”
42 And Pharaoh took his seal-ring off his hand and put
it on Yosĕph’s hand. And he dressed him in garments
of fine linen and put a gold chain around his neck.
43 And he had him ride in the second chariot which he
had. And they cried out before him, “Bow the knee!”
And he appointed him over all the land of Mitsrayim.
32

113

GENESIS

And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “I am Pharaoh, and
without you let no man lift his hand or foot in all the
land of Mitsrayim.”
45 And Pharaoh called Yosĕph’s name TsaphnathPa’nĕaḥ. And he gave him as a wife Asenath, the
daughter of Poti-Phera priest of On. And Yosĕph went
out over all the land of Mitsrayim.
46 Now Yosĕph was thirty years old when he stood
before Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim. And Yosĕph
went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went
throughout all the land of Mitsrayim.
47 And in the seven years of plenty the ground brought
forth generously.
48 And he gathered all the food of the seven years
which were in the land of Mitsrayim, and laid up the
food in the cities. He laid up in every city the food of
the fields which surrounded them.
49 Thus Yosĕph gathered very much grain, as the
sand of the sea, until he ceased counting, for it was
without number.
50 And to Yosĕph were born two sons before the years
of scarcity of food came, whom Asenath, the daughter
of Poti-Phera priest of On, bore to him.
51 And Yosĕph called the name of the first-born
Menashsheh, “For Elohim has made me forget all my
toil and all my father’s house.”
52 And the name of the second he called Ephrayim,
“For Elohim has caused me to bear fruit in the land of
my affliction.”
53 And the seven years of plenty which were in the
land of Mitsrayim came to an end,
54 and the seven years of scarcity of food began to
come, as Yosĕph had said. And the scarcity of food
was in all lands, but in all the land of Mitsrayim there
was bread.
44

114

BERĔSHITH

But when all the land of Mitsrayim hungered, and
the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, Pharaoh said to
all the Mitsrites, “Go to Yosĕph, do whatever he says
to you.”
56 And the scarcity of food was over all the face of the
earth, and Yosĕph opened all the storehouses and
sold to the Mitsrites. And the scarcity of food was
severe in the land of Mitsrayim.
57 And all the earth came to Yosĕph in Mitsrayim to
buy grain, because the scarcity of food was severe in
all the earth.
55

42 And when Ya’aqoḇ saw that there was grain in
Mitsrayim, Ya’aqoḇ said to his sons, “Why do you look
at each other?”
2 And he said, “See, I have heard that there is grain
in Mitsrayim. Go down to that place and buy for us
there, and let us live and not die.”
3 And Yosĕph’s ten brothers went down to buy grain
in Mitsrayim.
4 But Ya’aqoḇ did not send Yosĕph’s brother
Binyamin with his brothers, for he said, “Lest some
harm come to him.”
5 And the sons of Yisra’ĕl went to buy grain among
those who journeyed, for the scarcity of food was in the
land of Kena’an.
6 And Yosĕph was the governor over the land, he
was the one who sold to all the people of the land. And
Yosĕph’s brothers came and bowed down before him
with their faces to the earth.
7 And Yosĕph saw his brothers and recognised
them, but he acted as a stranger to them and spoke to
them harshly, and said to them, “Where do you come
from?” And they said, “From the land of Kena’an to buy
food.”
115

GENESIS

So Yosĕph recognised his brothers, but they did
not recognise him.
9 And Yosĕph remembered the dreams which he had
dreamed about them, and said to them, “You are spies!
You have come to see the nakedness of the land!”
10 And they said to him, “No, my master, but your
servants have come to buy food.
11 “We are all one man’s sons, we are trustworthy,
your servants are not spies.”
12 But he said to them, “No, but you have come to see
the nakedness of the land.”
13 And they said, “Your servants are twelve brothers,
the sons of one man in the land of Kena’an. And see,
the youngest is with our father today, and one is no
more.”
14 And Yosĕph said to them, “It is as I spoke to you,
saying, ‘You are spies!’
15 “By this you shall be proven: By the life of Pharaoh,
you do not leave this place unless your youngest
brother comes here.
16 “Send one of you, and let him bring your brother,
while you are kept in prison. So let your words be
proven to see whether there is any truth in you, or else,
by the life of Pharaoh, you are spies!”
17 And he put them all together in prison for three
days.
18 Now Yosĕph said to them the third day, “Do this
and live, for I revere Elohim:
19 “If you are trustworthy, let one of your brothers be
confined to your prison house, and you, go, bring grain
for the scarcity of food of your houses.
20 “And bring your youngest brother to me, and let
your words be confirmed, and you do not die.” And so
they did.
8

116

BERĔSHITH

And they said to each other, “Truly, we are guilty
concerning our brother, for we saw the distress of his
life when he pleaded with us, yet we did not listen, that
is why this distress has come upon us.”
22 And Re’uḇĕn answered them, saying, “Did I not
speak to you, saying, ‘Do not sin against the boy,’ and
you would not listen? And see, his blood is now
required of us.”
23 And they did not know that Yosĕph understood
them, for he spoke to them through an interpreter.
24 And he turned himself away from them and wept,
but came back to them and spoke to them. And he took
Shim’on from them and bound him before their eyes.
25 And Yosĕph commanded and they filled their sacks
with grain, also to put back every man’s silver into his
sack, and to give them food for the journey. And thus
it was done for them.
26 So they loaded their donkeys with the grain and
went from there.
27 And as one of them opened his sack to give his
donkey fodder at the lodging place, he saw his silver,
for there it was in the mouth of his sack!
28 And he said to his brothers, “My silver has been
returned, and there it is, in my sack!” And their hearts
sank and they were afraid, saying to each other, “What
is this that Elohim has done to us?”
29 So they came to Ya’aqoḇ their father in the land of
Kena’an and reported to him all that befell them,
saying,
30 “The man, the master of the land, spoke to us
harshly, and took us for spies of the land.
31 “But we said to him, ‘We are trustworthy, we are not
spies.
21

117

GENESIS

‘We are twelve brothers, sons of our father. One is
no more, and the youngest is today with our father in
the land of Kena’an.’
33 “And the man, the master of the land, said to us,
‘By this I know that you are trustworthy: Leave one of
your brothers here with me, and take food for the
scarcity of food of your households, and go.
34 ‘And bring your youngest brother to me, then I know
that you are not spies, but that you are trustworthy - I
give your brother to you, and you move about in the
land.’ ”
35 And it came to be as they emptied their sacks, that
look, the bundle of each man’s silver was in his sack!
And when they and their father saw the bundles of
silver, they were afraid.
36 And Ya’aqoḇ their father said to them, “You have
bereaved me - Yosĕph is no more, and Shim’on is no
more, and you would take Binyamin! All this is against
me.”
37 So Re’uḇĕn spoke to his father, saying, “Take the
lives of my two sons if I do not bring him back to you.
Put him in my hands, and I myself bring him back to
you.”
38 But he said, “My son is not going down with you, for
his brother is dead, and he is left alone. If any harm
should come to him along the way in which you go,
then you would bring down my grey hair with sorrow to
the grave.”
32

43 But the scarcity of food was severe in the land.
And it came to be, when they had eaten up the
grain which they had brought from Mitsrayim, that their
father said to them, “Go back, buy us a little food.”

2

118

BERĔSHITH

But Yahuḏah spoke to him, saying, “The man
vehemently warned us, saying, ‘You do not see my
face unless your brother is with you.’ ”
4 "If you let our brother go with us, we go down and
buy you food.
5 “But if you do not let him go, we do not go down,
because the man said to us, ‘You do not see my face
unless your brother is with you.’ ”
6 And Yisra’ĕl said, “Why did you do evil to me to
inform the man that you still had a brother?”
7 And they said, “The man kept asking about us and
our relatives, saying, ‘Is your father still alive? Have
you a brother?’ And we informed him according to
these words. How could we know that he would say,
‘Bring your brother down’?”
8 And Yahuḏah said to Yisra’ĕl his father, “Send the
boy with me, and let us arise and go, and live and not
die, both we and you and also our little ones.
9 “I myself shall stand guarantor for him - from my
hand you are to require him. If I do not bring him back
to you and put him before you, then let me bear the
blame forever.
10 “For if we had not delayed, truly by now we could
have returned this second time.”
11 And their father Yisra’ĕl said to them, “If so, then do
this: Take some of the best fruit of the land in your
vessels and bring a present down for the man, a little
balm and a little honey, spices and myrrh, nuts and
almonds.
12 “And take double silver in your hand, and take back
in your hand the silver that was returned in the mouth
of your sacks. It could have been a mistake.
13 “And take your brother, and arise, go back to the
man.
3

119

GENESIS

“And Ĕl Shaddai give to you compassion before the
man, so that he shall release your other brother and
Binyamin. And I, if I am bereaved, I am bereaved!”
15 And the men took that present and Binyamin, and
they took double the amount of silver in their hand, and
arose and went down to Mitsrayim, and stood before
Yosĕph.
16 And Yosĕph saw Binyamin with them, and said to
the one over his house, “Bring the men home, and
make a great slaughter, and prepare, for these men
are to eat with me at noon.”
17 And the man did as Yosĕph said, and the man
brought the men into Yosĕph’s house.
18 And the men were afraid because they were
brought into Yosĕph’s house. And they said, “It is
because of the silver, which was put back into our
sacks the first time, that we are brought in, to throw
himself upon us and fall upon us, to take us as slaves,
our donkeys too.”
19 So they came near to the man over the house of
Yosĕph, and spoke to him at the door of the house,
20 and said, “O my master, we indeed came down the
first time to buy food,
21 but it came to be, when we came to the lodging
place, that we opened our sacks and saw each man’s
silver in the mouth of his sack, our silver in its weight.
And we have brought it back in our hand.
22 And we have brought down other silver in our
hands to buy food. We do not know who put our silver
in our sacks.”
23 But he said, “Peace be with you, do not be afraid.
Your Elohim and the Elohim of your father has given
you treasure in your sacks - your silver had come to
me!” And he brought Shim’on out to them.
14

120

BERĔSHITH

And the man brought the men into Yosĕph’s house
and gave them water, and they washed their feet. And
he gave their donkeys fodder.
25 And they made the present ready for Yosĕph’s
coming at noon, for they heard that they were to eat
there.
26 And when Yosĕph came home, they brought him
the present which was in their hand, into the house,
and bowed down before him to the earth.
27 And he asked them about their welfare, and said,
“Is your father well, the old man of whom you spoke?
Is he still alive?”
28 And they said, “Your servant our father is in good
health, he is still alive.” And they bowed their heads
down and did obeisance.
29 And he lifted his eyes and saw his brother
Binyamin, his mother’s son, and said, “Is this your
younger brother of whom you spoke to me?” And he
said, “Elohim show favour to you, my son.”
30 And Yosĕph hurried, for his emotions were deeply
moved towards his brother, and he looked to weep,
and went into his room and wept there.
31 Then he washed his face and came out, and
controlled himself, and said, “Serve the food.”
32 And they placed him by himself, and them by
themselves, and the Mitsrites who ate with him by
themselves, for the Mitsrites could not eat food with the
Iḇrim, for that is an abomination to the Mitsrites.
33 And they sat before him, the first-born according to
his birthright and the youngest according to his youth,
and the men looked at each other in astonishment.
34 And he took portions to them from before him, but
Binyamin’s portion was five times as much as any of
theirs. And they feasted and they drank with him.
24

121

GENESIS

44 And he commanded the one over his house,
saying, “Fill the men’s sacks with food, as they are able
to bear, and put each man’s silver in the mouth of his
sack.
2 “And put my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the
sack of the youngest, and the silver for his grain.” And
he did according to the word of Yosĕph which he
spoke.
3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were
sent away, they and their donkeys.
4 And when they had gone out of the city, not having
gone far, Yosĕph said to the one over his house, “Rise
up, follow the men, and when you overtake them, say
to them, ‘Why have you repaid evil for good?
5 ‘Is this not the one from which my master drinks,
and with which he indeed divines? You have done evil
in what you have done.’ ”
6 So he overtook them and spoke these words to
them.
7 And they said to him, “Why does my master say
these words? Far be it from us that your servants
should do according to this word.
8 “See, we brought back to you from the land of
Kena’an the silver which we found in the mouth of our
sacks. How then should we steal silver or gold from
your master’s house?
9 “With whomever of your servants it is found - he
shall die and we shall become my master’s slaves as
well.”
10 And he said, “Now also let it be according to your
words: he with whom it is found becomes my slave,
and you are innocent.”
11 And they hurried, each man let down his sack to the
ground, and each opened his sack.
122

BERĔSHITH

And he searched, with the oldest first and with the
youngest last, and the cup was found in Binyamin’s
sack.
13 And they tore their garments, and each man loaded
his donkey and went back to the city.
14 And Yahuḏah and his brothers came to Yosĕph’s
house, and he was still there. And they fell before him
on the ground.
15 And Yosĕph said to them, “What deed is this you
have done? Did you not know that a man like me
indeed divines?”
16 And Yahuḏah said, “What do we say to my master?
What do we speak? Or how do we clear ourselves?
Elohim has found out the wickedness of your servants.
See, we are my master’s slaves, both we and he also
with whom the cup was found.”
17 But he said, “Far be it from me to do this. The man
in whose hand the cup was found, he becomes my
slave. And you, go up in peace to your father.”
18 And Yahuḏah came near to him and said, “O my
master, please let your servant speak a word in my
master’s hearing, and do not let your displeasure burn
against your servant, for you are like Pharaoh.
19 “My master asked his servants, saying, ‘Have you
a father or a brother?’
20 “And we said to my master, ‘We have a father, an
old man, and a young child of his old age, and his
brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother’s
children, and his father loves him.’
21 “And you said to your servants, ‘Bring him down to
me, and let me lay my eyes on him.’
22 “And we said to my master, ‘The boy is not able to
leave his father, for if he leaves his father, his father
shall die.’
12

123

GENESIS

“But you said to your servants, ‘Unless your
youngest brother comes down with you, you do not see
my face again.’
24 “And it came to be, when we went up to your
servant my father, that we told him the words of my
master.
25 “And our father said, ‘Go back and buy us a little
food.’
26 “But we said, ‘We are not able to go down. If our
youngest brother is with us, then we shall go down, for
we are not able to see the man’s face unless our
youngest brother is with us.’
27 “Then your servant my father said to us, ‘You know
that my wife bore me two sons,
28 and the one went out from me, and I said, “Truly,
he is torn, torn to pieces!” And I have not seen him
since.
29 ‘And if you take this one from me too, and harm
comes to him, you shall bring down my grey hair with
evil to the grave.’
30 “And now, if I come to your servant my father and
the boy is not with us - since his own life is bound up
in his life –
31 then it shall be, when he sees that the boy is not
with us, that he shall die. So your servants shall bring
down the grey hair of your servant our father with
sorrow to the grave.
32 “For your servant went guarantor for the boy to my
father, saying, ‘If I do not bring him back to you, then I
shall be a sinner before my father forever.’
33 “And now, please let your servant remain instead of
the boy as a slave to my master, and let the boy go up
with his brothers.
23

124

BERĔSHITH

“For how do I go up to my father if the boy is not
with me, lest I see the evil that would come upon my
father?”

34

45 And Yosĕph was unable to restrain himself
before all those who stood by him, and he called out,
“Have everyone go out from me!” So no one stood with
him while Yosĕph made himself known to his brothers.
2 And he wept aloud, and the Mitsrites and the house
of Pharaoh heard it.
3 And Yosĕph said to his brothers, “I am Yosĕph, is
my father still alive?” But his brothers were unable to
answer him, for they trembled before him.
4 Then Yosĕph said to his brothers, “Please come
near to me.” And when they came near, he said, “I am
Yosĕph your brother, whom you sold into Mitsrayim.
5 “And now, do not be grieved nor displeased with
yourselves because you sold me here, for Elohim sent
me before you to preserve life.
6 “For two years now the scarcity of food has been in
the land, and there are still five years in which there is
neither ploughing nor harvesting.
7 “And Elohim sent me before you to preserve for you
a remnant in the earth, and to give life to you by a great
escape.
8 “So then, you did not send me here, but Elohim.
And He has appointed me for a father to Pharaoh, and
master of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the
land of Mitsrayim.
9 “Hurry and go up to my father, and say to him, ‘Thus
says your son Yosĕph, “Elohim has made me master
of all Mitsrayim. Come down to me, do not delay.
10 “And you shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and be
near to me, you and your children, your children’s
125

GENESIS

children, your flocks and your herds, and all that you
have.
11 “And I shall provide for you there, lest you and your
household, and all that you have, come to poverty,
because five years of scarcity of food are still to come.”
’
12 “And look, your eyes and the eyes of my brother
Binyamin see that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
13 “And you shall inform my father of all my esteem in
Mitsrayim, and of all that you have seen. And you shall
hurry and bring my father down here.”
14 And he fell on his brother Binyamin’s neck and
wept, and Binyamin wept on his neck.
15 And he kissed all his brothers and wept over them,
and after that his brothers spoke with him.
16 And the report of it was heard by the house of
Pharaoh, saying, “The brothers of Yosĕph have
come.” And it was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and in
the eyes of his servants.
17 And Pharaoh said to Yosĕph, “Say to your brothers,
‘Do this: Load your beasts and go, enter the land of
Kena’an,
18 and take your father and your households and
come to me, and I give you the best of the land of
Mitsrayim, and you eat the fatness of the land.
19 ‘And you have been commanded, do this: Take
wagons out of the land of Mitsrayim for your little ones
and your wives. And you shall bring your father, and
come.
20 ‘And do not be concerned about your goods, for the
best of all the land of Mitsrayim is yours.’ ”
21 And the sons of Yisra’ĕl did so. And Yosĕph gave
them wagons, according to the command of Pharaoh,
and he gave them food for the journey.
126

BERĔSHITH

He gave to all of them, to each man, changes of
garments, but to Binyamin he gave three hundred
pieces of silver and five changes of garments.
23 And he sent to his father this: ten donkeys loaded
with the best of Mitsrayim, and ten female donkeys
loaded with grain, and bread, and food for his father for
the journey.
24 So he sent his brothers away, and they left. And he
said to them, “Do not quarrel along the way.”
25 And they went up out of Mitsrayim, and came to the
land of Kena’an to Ya’aqoḇ their father.
26 And they told him, saying, “Yosĕph is still alive, and
he is governor over all the land of Mitsrayim.” And
Ya’aqoḇ’s heart ceased, for he did not believe them.
27 But when they spoke to him all the words which
Yosĕph had spoken to them, and when he saw the
wagons which Yosĕph had sent to transport him, the
spirit of Ya’aqoḇ their father revived.
28 And Yisra’ĕl said, “Enough! My son Yosĕph is still
alive. Let me go and see him before I die.”
22

46 And Yisra’ĕl departed with all that he had, and
came to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and brought offerings to the
Elohim of his father Yitsḥaq.
2 And Elohim spoke to Yisra’ĕl in the visions of the
night, and said, “Ya’aqoḇ, Ya’aqoḇ!” And he said,
“Here I am.”
3 And He said, “I am the Ĕl, Elohim of your father. Do
not be afraid to go down to Mitsrayim, for I shall make
you there into a great nation.
4 “I Myself am going down with you to Mitsrayim and
I Myself shall certainly bring you up again. And let
Yosĕph put his hand on your eyes.”
5 And Ya’aqoḇ rose up from Be’ĕrsheḇa. And the
sons of Yisra’ĕl brought their father Ya’aqoḇ, and their
127

GENESIS

little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which
Pharaoh had sent to transport him.
6 And they took their livestock and their property
which they had acquired in the land of Kena’an, and
came into Mitsrayim, Ya’aqoḇ and all his seed with
him.
7 His sons and his sons’ sons, his daughters and his
sons’ daughters, and all his seed he brought with him
to Mitsrayim.
8 And these were the names of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, Ya’aqoḇ and his sons, who came into
Mitsrayim: Re’uḇĕn was Ya’aqoḇ’s first-born.
9 And the sons of Re’uḇĕn: Ḥanoḵ, and Pallu, and
Ḥetsron, and Karmi.
10 And the sons of Shim’on: Yemu’ĕl, and Yamin, and
Ohaḏ, and Yaḵin, and Tsoḥar, and Sha’ul, son of a
Kena’anite woman.
11 And the sons of Lĕwi: Gĕreshon, Qehath, and
Merari.
12 And the sons of Yahuḏah: Ĕr, and Onan, and
Shĕlah, and Perets, and Zeraḥ - but Ĕr and Onan died
in the land of Kena’an. And the sons of Perets were
Ḥetsron and Ḥamul.
13 And the sons of Yissasḵar: Tola, and Puw’ah, and
Yoḇ, and Shimron.
14 And the sons of Zeḇulun: Sereḏ, and Ĕlon, and
Yaḥle’ĕl.
15 These were the sons of Lĕ’ah, whom she bore to
Ya’aqoḇ in Paddan Aram, with his daughter Dinah. All
the beings, his sons and his daughters, were thirtythree.
16 And the sons of Gaḏ: Tsiphyon and Ḥaggi, Shuni
and Etsbon, Ĕri and Aroḏi, and Arĕli.

128

BERĔSHITH

And the sons of Ashĕr: Yimnah, and Yishwah, and
Yishwi, and Beri’ah, and Seraḥ, their sister. And the
sons of Beri’ah: Ḥeber and Malki’ĕl.
18 These were the sons of Zilpah, whom Laḇan gave
to Lĕ’ah his daughter. And these she bore to Ya’aqoḇ:
sixteen beings.
19 The sons of Raḥĕl, Ya’aqoḇ’s wife: Yosĕph and
Binyamin.
20 And to Yosĕph in the land of Mitsrayim were born
Menashsheh and Ephrayim, whom Asenath, the
daughter of Poti-Phera priest of On, bore to him.
21 And the sons of Binyamin: Belah, and Beḵer, and
Ashbĕl, Gĕra and Na’aman, Ĕḥi and Rosh, Muppim
and Ḥuppim, and Ard.
22 These were the sons of Raḥĕl who were born to
Ya’aqoḇ: fourteen beings in all.
23 And the son of Dan: Ḥushim.
24 And the sons of Naphtali: Yaḥtse’ĕl, and Guni, and
Yĕtser, and Shillĕm.
25 These were the sons of Bilhah, whom Laḇan gave
to Raḥĕl his daughter, and she bore these to Ya’aqoḇ:
seven beings in all.
26 All the beings who went with Ya’aqoḇ to Mitsrayim,
who came from his body, besides Ya’aqoḇ’s sons’
wives, were sixty-six beings in all.
27 And the sons of Yosĕph who were born to him in
Mitsrayim were two beings. All the beings of the house
of Ya’aqoḇ who went to Mitsrayim were seventy.
28 And he sent Yahuḏah before him to Yosĕph, to
point out before him the way to Goshen. And they
came to the land of Goshen.
29 And Yosĕph made ready his chariot and went up to
Goshen to meet his father Yisra’ĕl. And he appeared
to him, and fell on his neck and wept on his neck a long
time.
17

129

GENESIS

And Yisra’ĕl said to Yosĕph, “Now let me die, since
I have seen your face, that you are still alive.”
31 And Yosĕph said to his brothers and to his father’s
household, “I am going up to inform Pharaoh, and say
to him, ‘My brothers and those of my father’s house,
who were in the land of Kena’an, have come to me.
32 ‘And the men are shepherds, that they have been
men of livestock, and they have brought their flocks
and their herds, and all that they have.’
33 “And it shall be, when Pharaoh calls you and says,
‘What is your occupation?’
34 that you shall say, ‘Your servants have been men
of livestock from our youth even till now, both we and
also our fathers,’ so that you dwell in the land of
Goshen, for every shepherd is an abomination to the
Mitsrites.”
30

47 Then Yosĕph went and spoke to Pharaoh, and
said, “My father and my brothers, their flocks and their
herds and all that they possess, have come from the
land of Kena’an. And see, they are in the land of
Goshen.”
2 And he took five men from among his brothers and
presented them to Pharaoh.
3 And Pharaoh said to his brothers, “What is your
occupation?” And they said to Pharaoh, “Your servants
are shepherds, both we and also our fathers.”
4 And they said to Pharaoh, “We have come to dwell
in the land, because there is no pasture for your
servant’s flocks, for the scarcity of food is severe in the
land of Kena’an. And now, please let your servants
dwell in the land of Goshen.”
5 And Pharaoh spoke to Yosĕph, saying, “Your father
and your brothers have come to you.
130

BERĔSHITH

“The land of Mitsrayim is before you. Settle your
father and brothers in the best of the land, let them
dwell in the land of Goshen. And if you know of capable
men among them, then make them chief herdsmen
over my livestock.”
7 And Yosĕph brought in his father Ya’aqoḇ and
stood him before Pharaoh. And Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ
Pharaoh.
8 And Pharaoh said to Ya’aqoḇ, “How many are the
days of your life?”
9 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Pharaoh, “The days of the
years of my sojournings are one hundred and thirty
years. Few and evil have been the days of the years
of my life, and they have not reached the days of the
years of the life of my fathers in the days of their
sojournings.”
10 And Ya’aqoḇ baraḵ Pharaoh, and went out from
before Pharaoh.
11 So Yosĕph settled his father and his brothers, and
gave them a possession in the land of Mitsrayim, in the
best of the land, in the land of Ra’meses, as Pharaoh
had commanded.
12 And Yosĕph provided his father, and his brothers,
and all his father’s household with bread for the mouth
of the little ones.
13 Now there was no bread in all the land, because
the scarcity of food was very severe, and the land of
Mitsrayim and all the land of Kena’an became
exhausted from the scarcity of food.
14 And Yosĕph gathered up all the silver that was
found in the land of Mitsrayim and in the land of
Kena’an, for the grain which they bought. And Yosĕph
brought the silver into Pharaoh’s house.
15 And when the silver was all spent in the land of
Mitsrayim and in the land of Kena’an, all the Mitsrites
6

131

GENESIS

came to Yosĕph and said, “Give us bread, for why
should we die in your presence? For the silver is gone!”
16 And Yosĕph said, “Give your livestock, and I give
you bread for your livestock, if the silver is gone.”
17 So they brought their livestock to Yosĕph, and
Yosĕph gave them bread in exchange for the horses,
and for the flocks they owned, and for the herds they
owned, and for the donkeys. Thus he fed them with
bread in exchange for all their livestock that year.
18 And when that year had ended, they came to him
the next year and said to him, “We do not hide from my
master that our silver is all spent, and my master also
has the livestock we owned. There has not any been
left before my master but our bodies and our lands.
19 “Why should we die before your eyes, both we and
our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and let us and
our land be servants of Pharaoh. And give us seed,
and let us live and not die, and let the land not lie
waste.”
20 And Yosĕph bought the entire land of Mitsrayim for
Pharaoh, because every man of the Mitsrites sold his
field, because the scarcity of food was severe upon
them. And the land came to be Pharaoh’s.
21 And as for the people, he moved them into the
cities, from one end of the borders of Mitsrayim to the
other end.
22 Only the ground of the priests he did not buy, for
the priests had allotments from Pharaoh, and they ate
their allotments which Pharaoh gave them. Therefore
they did not sell their ground.
23 And Yosĕph said to the people, “Look, I have
bought you and your land today for Pharaoh. Look,
here is seed for you, and you shall sow the land.
24 “And it shall be that in the harvest you shall give
one-fifth to Pharaoh. And four-fifths is your own, as
132

BERĔSHITH

seed for the field and for your food, for those of your
households and as food for your little ones.”
25 And they said, “You have saved our lives. Let us
find favour in the eyes of my master, and we shall
become Pharaoh’s servants.”
26 And Yosĕph made it a law over the land of
Mitsrayim to this day, that Pharaoh should have onefifth, except for the ground of the priests only, which
did not become Pharaoh’s.
27 And Yisra’ĕl dwelt in the land of Mitsrayim, in the
land of Goshen. And they had possessions there and
bore fruit and increased exceedingly.
28 And Ya’aqoḇ lived in the land of Mitsrayim
seventeen years. So the length of Ya’aqoḇ’s life was
one hundred and forty-seven years.
29 And the time for Yisra’ĕl to die drew near, and he
called his son Yosĕph and said to him, “Now if I have
found favour in your eyes, please put your hand under
my thigh, and show kindness and truth to me. Please
do not bury me in Mitsrayim,
30 but I shall lie with my fathers, and you shall take me
up out of Mitsrayim and bury me in their burial place.”
And he said, “I do as you have said.”
31 And he said, “Swear to me.” And he swore to him,
and Yisra’ĕl bowed himself on the head of the bed.

48 And after these events it came to be that it was
said to Yosĕph, “See, your father is sick.” And he took
with him his two sons, Menashsheh and Ephrayim.
2 And Ya’aqoḇ was told, “See, your son Yosĕph is
coming to you.” And Yisra’ĕl strengthened himself and
sat up on the bed.
3 And Ya’aqoḇ said to Yosĕph, “Ĕl Shaddai appeared
to me at Luz in the land of Kena’an and baraḵ me,
133

GENESIS

and said to me, ‘See, I am making you bear fruit
and shall increase you and make of you an assembly
of peoples, and give this land to your seed after you as
an everlasting possession.’
5 “And now, your two sons, Ephrayim and
Menashsheh, who were born to you in the land of
Mitsrayim before I came to you in Mitsrayim, are mine
- as Re’uḇĕn and Shim’on, they are mine.
6 “Your offspring whom you shall bring forth after
them are yours, and let them be called by the name of
their brothers in their inheritance.
7 “And I, when I came from Paddan, Raḥĕl died
beside me in the land of Kena’an on the way, when
there was but a little distance to go to Ephrath. And I
buried her there on the way to Ephrath, that is Bĕyth
Leḥem.”
8 And Yisra’ĕl saw Yosĕph’s sons, and said, “Who
are these?”
9 And Yosĕph said to his father, “They are my sons,
whom Elohim has given me in this place.” And he said,
“Please bring them to me, and let me baraḵ them.”
10 And the eyes of Yisra’ĕl were dim with age, and he
was unable to see. And he drew them near him, and
he kissed them and embraced them.
11 And Yisra’ĕl said to Yosĕph, “I had not thought to
see your face. But see, Elohim has also shown me
your seed!”
12 So Yosĕph brought them from between his knees,
and he bowed down with his face to the earth.
13 And Yosĕph took them both, Ephrayim with his
right hand toward Yisraĕl’s left hand, and Menashsheh
with his left hand toward Yisraĕl’s right hand, and
brought them near him.
14 And Yisra’ĕl stretched out his right hand and laid it
on Ephrayim’s head, who was the younger, and his left
4

134

BERĔSHITH

hand on Menashsheh’s head, consciously directing his
hands, for Menashsheh was the first-born.
15 And he baraḵ Yosĕph, and said, “The Elohim
before whom my fathers Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq walked,
the Elohim who has fed me all my life long to this day,
16 the Messenger who has redeemed me from all evil
- baraḵ the youths! And let my name be called upon
them, and the name of my fathers Aḇraham and
Yitsḥaq. And let them increase to a multitude in the
midst of the earth.”
17 And when Yosĕph saw that his father laid his right
hand on the head of Ephrayim, it was evil in his eyes;
and he took hold of his father’s hand to remove it from
the head of Ephrayim to the head of Menashsheh.
18 And Yosĕph said to his father, “Not so, my father,
for this one is the first-born, put your right hand on his
head.”
19 But his father refused and said, “I know, my son, I
know. He also becomes a people, and he also is great.
And yet, his younger brother is greater than he, and
his seed is to become the completeness of the
nations.”
20 And he baraḵ them on that day, saying, “In you
Yisra’ĕl shall baraḵ, saying, ‘Elohim make you as
Ephrayim and as Menashsheh!’ ” Thus he put
Ephrayim before Menashsheh.
21 And Yisra’ĕl said to Yosĕph, “See, I am dying, but
Elohim shall be with you and bring you back to the land
of your fathers.
22 “And I, I have given to you one portion above your
brothers, which I took from the hand of the Amorite with
my sword and with my bow.”

135

GENESIS

49 And Ya’aqoḇ called his sons and said, “Gather
together, so that I declare to you what is to befall you
in the last days:
2 “Gather together and hear, you sons of Ya’aqoḇ,
and listen to Yisra’ĕl your father.
3 “Re’uḇĕn, you are my first-born, my power and the
beginning of my strength, the excellency of exaltation
and the excellency of power.
4 “Unstable as the waters, you do not excel, because
you went up to your father’s bed, then you defiled it he went up to my couch.
5 “Shim’on and Lĕwi are brothers, their weapons are
implements of violence.
6 “Let my being not enter their council, let my esteem
not be united to their assembly; because they slew a
man in their displeasure, and they lamed an ox in
pleasure.
7 “Cursed be their displeasure for it is fierce, and their
wrath for it is cruel! I divide them in Ya’aqoḇ and scatter
them in Yisra’ĕl.
8 “You, Yahuḏah, your brothers praise you; your
hand is on the neck of your enemies; your father’s
children bow down before you.
9 “Yahuḏah is a lion’s cub; from the prey you have
gone up, my son! He bowed down, he crouched like a
lion. And like a lion, who rouses him?
10 “The sceptre shall not turn aside from Yahuḏah, nor
a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh comes,
and to Him is the obedience of peoples.
11 “Binding his donkey to the vine, and his donkey’s
colt to the choice vine, he washed his garments in
wine, and his robes in the blood of grapes.
12 “His eyes are darker than wine, and his teeth whiter
than milk.
136

BERĔSHITH

“Zeḇulun dwells at the seashore, he is a haven for
ships, and his border is unto Tsiḏon.
14 “Yissasḵar is a strong donkey lying down between
two burdens,
15 and he saw that a resting place was good, and that
the land was pleasant, and he inclined his shoulder to
bear a burden, and became a subject to slave labour.
16 “Dan rightly rules his people as one of the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl.
17 “Dan is a serpent by the way, an adder by the path,
that bites the horse’s heels so that its rider falls
backward.
18 “I have waited for your deliverance, O HWHY!
19 “Gaḏ, a raiding band raids him, but he raids its heel.
20 “Bread from Ashĕr is rich, and he gives delicacies
of a sovereign.
21 “Naphtali is a deer let loose, he gives words of
elegance.
22 “Yosĕph is an offshoot of a fruit-bearing tree, an
offshoot of a fruit-bearing tree by a fountain, his
branches run over a wall.
23 “And the archers have bitterly grieved him, shot at
him and hated him.
24 “But his bow remained in strength, and the arms of
his hands were made strong by the hands of the
Mighty One of Ya’aqoḇ - from there is the Shepherd,
the Stone of Yisra’ĕl 25 from the Ĕl of your father who helps you, and by Ĕl
Shaddai who baraḵ you with bireḵoth of the shamayim
above, bireḵoth of the deep that lies beneath, bireḵoth
of the breasts and of the womb.
26 “The bireḵoth of your father have excelled the
bireḵoth of my ancestors, up to the limit of the
everlasting hills. They are on the head of Yosĕph, and
13

137

GENESIS

on the crown of the head of him who was separated
from his brothers.
27 “Binyamin is a wolf that tears, in the morning he
eats prey, and at night he divides the spoil.”
28 All these are the twelve tribes of Yisra’ĕl, and this
is what their father spoke to them. And he baraḵ them,
he baraḵ each one according to his own beraḵah.
29 And he commanded them, and said to them, “I am
to be gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers
in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Ḥittite,
30 in the cave that is in the field of Maḵpĕlah, which is
before Mamrĕ in
the land of Kena’an, which Aḇraham bought with the
field of Ephron the Ḥittite as a possession for a burial
site.
31 There they buried Aḇraham and Sarah his wife,
there they buried Yitsḥaq and Riḇqah his wife, and
there I buried Lĕ’ah,
32 the field purchased, and the cave which is in it, from
the sons of Ḥĕth.”
33 And when Ya’aqoḇ ended commanding his sons,
he drew his feet up into the bed and breathed his last,
and was gathered to his people.

50 And Yosĕph fell on his father’s face, and wept
over him, and kissed him.
2 And Yosĕph commanded his servants the
physicians to embalm his father. So the physicians
embalmed Yisra’ĕl.
3 And forty days were completed for him, for so are
completed the days of embalming. And the Mitsrites
wept for him seventy days.
4 And when the days of weeping for him were past,
Yosĕph spoke to the household of Pharaoh, saying, “If,
138

BERĔSHITH

now, I have found favour in your eyes, please speak in
the hearing of Pharaoh, saying,
5 ‘My father made me swear, saying, “See, I am dying,
bury me in my grave which I dug for myself in the land of
Kena’an.” And now, please let me go up and bury my
father, and return.’ ”
6 And Pharaoh said, “Go up and bury your father, as
he made you swear.”
7 And Yosĕph went up to bury his father. And with
him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of
his house, and all the elders of the land of Mitsrayim,
8 and all the house of Yosĕph, and his brothers, and
his father’s house. Only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds they left in the land of Goshen.
9 And there went up with him both chariots and
horsemen, and it was a very great company.
10 And they came to the threshing-floor of Ataḏ, which
is beyond the Yardĕn, and they lamented there with a
great and very heavy lamentation. And he observed
seven days of mourning for his father.
11 And when the inhabitants of the land, the
Kena’anites, saw the mourning at the threshing-floor of
Ataḏ, they said, “This is a grievous mourning for the
Mitsrites.” That is why its name was called Aḇĕl
Mitsrayim, which is beyond the Yardĕn.
12 And his sons did to him as he had commanded
them,
13 for his sons brought him to the land of Kena’an, and
buried him in the cave of the field of Maḵpĕlah, before
Mamrĕ, which Aḇraham bought with the field from
Ephron the Ḥittite as property for a burial site.
14 And after he had buried his father, Yosĕph returned
to Mitsrayim, he and his brothers and all who went up
with him to bury his father.
139

GENESIS

And when Yosĕph’s brothers saw that their father
was dead, they said, “What if Yosĕph hates us, and
pays us back all the evil which we did to him?”
16 And they sent word to Yosĕph, saying, “Before your
father died he commanded, saying,
17 ‘This is what you are to say to Yosĕph, “I beg you,
please forgive the transgression of your brothers and
their sin, for they did evil to you.” ’ And now, please
forgive the transgression of the servants of the Elohim
of your father.” And Yosĕph wept when they spoke to
him.
18 And his brothers also went and fell down before his
face, and they said, “See, we are your servants.”
19 And Yosĕph said to them, “Do not fear, for am I in
the place of Elohim?
20 “And you, you intended evil against me, but Elohim
intended it for good, in order to do it as it is this day, to
keep a great many people alive.
21 “And now, do not fear, I provide for you and your
little ones.” So he comforted them and spoke kindly to
them.
22 And Yosĕph dwelt in Mitsrayim, he and his father’s
household. And Yosĕph lived one hundred and ten
years.
23 And Yosĕph saw Ephrayim’s children to the third
generation. The children of Maḵir, son of Menashsheh,
were also brought up on Yosĕph’s knees.
24 And Yosĕph said to his brothers, “I am dying, but
Elohim shall certainly visit you and bring you out of this
land to the land of which He swore to Aḇraham, to
Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ.”
25 And Yosĕph made the children of Yisra’ĕl swear,
saying, “Elohim shall certainly visit you, and you shall
bring up my bones from here.”
15

140

BERĔSHITH

And Yosĕph died, being one hundred and ten years
old. And they embalmed him, and he was placed in a
coffin in Mitsrayim.

26

141

EXODUS

SHEMOTH
‫ ׁשמות‬tWmv

1 And these are the names of the children of Yisra’ĕl
who came to Mitsrayim with Ya’aqoḇ, each one with
his household:
2 Re’uḇĕn, Shim’on, Lĕwi, and Yahuḏah;
3 Yissasḵar, Zeḇulun, and Binyamin;
4 Dan and Naphtali, Gaḏ and Ashĕr.
5 And all those who were descendants of Ya’aqoḇ
were seventy beings, as Yosĕph was already in
Mitsrayim.
6 And Yosĕph died, and all his brothers, and all that
generation.
7 And the children of Yisra’ĕl bore fruit and
increased very much, multiplied and became very
strong, and the land was filled with them.
8 Then a new sovereign arose over Mitsrayim, who
did not know Yosĕph,
9 and he said to his people, “See, the people of the
children of Yisra’ĕl are more and stronger than we,
10 come, let us act wisely towards them, lest they
increase, and it shall be when fighting befalls us, that
they shall join our enemies and fight against us, and
shall go up out of the land.”
11 So they appointed slave-masters over them to
afflict them with their burdens, and they built for
Pharaoh supply cities, Pithom and Ra’amses.
12 But the more they afflicted them, the more they
increased and grew, and they were in dread of the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
13 And the Mitsrites made the children of Yisra’ĕl
serve with harshness,
142

SHEMOTH

and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage,
in mortar, and in brick, and in all kinds of work in the
field, all their work which they made them do was with
harshness.
15 Then the sovereign of Mitsrayim spoke to the Iḇri
midwives, of whom the name of one was Shiphrah
and the name of the other Pu’ah,
16 and he said, “When you deliver the Iḇri women,
and see them on the birth-stools, if it is a son, then
you shall put him to death, but if it is a daughter, then
she shall live.”
17 But the midwives revered Elohim, and did not do
as the sovereign of Mitsrayim commanded them, and
kept the male children alive.
18 So the sovereign of Mitsrayim called for the
midwives and said to them, “Why have you done this,
and kept the male children alive?”
19 And the midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the
Iḇri women are not like the Mitsrite women. For they
are lively and give birth before the midwives come to
them.”
20 So Elohim was good to the midwives, and the
people increased and became very numerous.
21 And it came to be, because the midwives revered
Elohim, that He provided households for them.
22 And Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying,
“Throw every son who is born into the river, and keep
alive every daughter.”
14

2 And a man of the house of Lĕwi went and married
a daughter of Lĕwi.
2 And the woman conceived and bore a son. And
she saw that he was a lovely child, and she hid him
three months.
143

EXODUS

And when she could hide him no longer, she took
an ark of papyrus for him, and coated it with tar and
pitch, and put the child in it, and laid it in the reeds by
the edge of the river.
4 And his sister stood at a distance, to know what
would be done to him.
5 And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash
herself at the river, and her young women were
walking by the river-side. And when she saw the ark
among the reeds, she sent her female servant to get
it,
6 and opened it and saw the child, and see, the child
wept. So she had compassion on him, and said, “This
is one of the children of the Iḇrim.”
7 And his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I
go and call a nurse for you from the Iḇri women to
nurse the child for you?”
8 And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” And the
girl went and called the child’s mother.
9 And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this
child away and nurse him for me, then I shall pay your
wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed him.
10 And the child grew, and she brought him to
Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. And
she called his name Mosheh, saying, “Because I have
drawn him out of the water.”
11 And in those days it came to be, when Mosheh
was grown, that he went out to his brothers and
looked at their burdens. And he saw a Mitsrite beating
an Iḇri, one of his brothers.
12 So he turned this way and that way, and when he
saw no one, he smote the Mitsrite and hid him in the
sand.
3

144

SHEMOTH

And he went out the second day and saw two Iḇrim
fighting, and he said to the one who did the wrong,
“Why do you smite your neighbour?”
14 And he said, “Who made you a head and a judge
over us? Do you intend to slay me as you slew the
Mitsrite?” And Mosheh feared and said, “Truly, the
matter is known!”
15 And Pharaoh heard of this matter, and he sought
to kill Mosheh. But Mosheh fled from the face of
Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Miḏyan. And he sat
down by a well.
16 And the kohĕn of Miḏyan had seven daughters.
And they came and drew water, and they filled the
troughs to water their father’s flock,
17 but the shepherds came and drove them away.
Then Mosheh stood up and came to their rescue, and
watered their flock.
18 And they came to Re’uw’ĕl their father, and he
said, “How is it that you have come so soon today?”
19 And they said, “A Mitsrite rescued us from the
hand of the shepherds, and he also drew enough
water for us and watered the flock.”
20 And he said to his daughters, “And where is he?
Why did you leave the man? Call him and let him eat
bread.”
21 And Mosheh agreed to dwell with the man, and he
gave Tsipporah his daughter to Mosheh.
22 And she bore him a son, and he called his name
Gĕreshom, for he said, “I have become a sojourner in
a foreign land.”
23 And it came to be after these many days that the
sovereign of Mitsrayim died. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl groaned because of the slavery, and they
cried out. And their cry came up to Elohim because of
the slavery.
13

145

EXODUS

And Elohim heard their groaning, and Elohim
remembered His Covenant with Aḇraham, with
Yitsḥaq, and with Ya’aqoḇ.
25 And Elohim looked on the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
Elohim knew!
24

3 And Mosheh was shepherding the flock of Yithro his
father-in-law, the kohĕn of Miḏyan. And he led the flock
to the back of the wilderness, and came to Ḥorĕḇ, the
mountain of Elohim.
2 And the Messenger of HWHY appeared to him in a
flame of fire from the midst of a bush. And he looked
and saw the bush burning with fire, but the bush was
not consumed.
3 And Mosheh said, “Let me turn aside now, and see
this great sight, why the bush does not burn.”
4 And HWHY saw that he turned aside to see, and
Elohim called to him from the midst of the bush and
said, “Mosheh! Mosheh!” And he said, “Here I am.”
5 And He said, “Do not come near here. Take your
sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are
standing is qodesh ground.”
6 And He said, “I am the Elohim of your father, the
Elohim of Aḇraham, the Elohim of Yitsḥaq, and the
Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.” And Mosheh hid his face, for he
was afraid to look at Elohim.
7 And HWHY said, “I have indeed seen the
oppression of My people who are in Mitsrayim, and
have heard their cry because of their slave-drivers,
for I know their sorrows.
8 “And I have come down to deliver them from the
hand of the Mitsrites, and to bring them up from that
land to a good and spacious land, to a land flowing
with milk and honey, to the place of the Kena’anites
146

SHEMOTH

and the Ḥittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites
and the Ḥiwwites and the Yeḇusites.
9 “And now, see, the cry of the children of Yisra’ĕl
has come to Me, and I have also seen the oppression
with which the Mitsrites oppress them.
10 “And now, come, I am sending you to Pharaoh, to
bring My people, the children of Yisra’ĕl, out of
Mitsrayim.”
11 And Mosheh said to Elohim, “Who am I that I
should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring the
children of Yisra’ĕl out of Mitsrayim?”
12 And He said, “Because I am with you. And this is
to you the sign that I have sent you: When you have
brought the people out of Mitsrayim, you are to serve
Elohim on this mountain.”
13 And Mosheh said to Elohim, “See, when I come to
the children of Yisra’ĕl and say to them, ‘The Elohim
of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to
me, ‘What is His Name?’ what shall I say to them?”
14 And Elohim said to Mosheh, “I AM that which I
AM.” And He said, “Thus you shall say to the children
of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’ ”
15 And Elohim said further to Mosheh, “Thus you are
to say to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘HWHY Elohim of your
fathers, the Elohim of Aḇraham, the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq, and the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, has sent me to
you. This is My Name forever, and this is My
remembrance to all generations.’
16 “Go, and you shall gather the elders of Yisra’ĕl
together, and say to them, ‘HWHY Elohim of your
fathers, the Elohim of Aḇraham, of Yitsḥaq, and of
Ya’aqoḇ, appeared to me, saying, “I have indeed
visited you and seen what is done to you in Mitsrayim;
17 and I say: I am bringing you up out of the affliction
of Mitsrayim to the land of the Kena’anite and the
147

EXODUS

Ḥittite and the Amorite and the Perizzite and the
Ḥiwwite and the Yeḇusite, to a land flowing with milk
and honey.” ’
18 “And they shall listen to your voice. And you shall
come, you and the elders of Yisra’ĕl, to the sovereign
of Mitsrayim, and you shall say to him, ‘HWHY Elohim
of the Iḇrim has met with us. And now, please, let us
go three days’ journey into the wilderness to slaughter
to HWHY our Elohim.’
19 “But I know that the sovereign of Mitsrayim is not
going to let you go, not even by a strong hand.
20 “And I shall stretch out My hand and smite
Mitsrayim with all My wonders which I shall do in its
midst. And after that he shall let you go.
21 “And I shall give this people favour in the eyes of
the Mitsrites. And it shall be, that when you go, you
shall not go empty-handed.
22 “But every woman shall ask from her neighbour
and from the stranger in her house, objects of silver,
and objects of gold, and garments. And you shall put
them on your sons and on your daughters, and shall
plunder the Mitsrites.”

4 And Mosheh answered and said, “And if they do not
believe me, nor listen to my voice, and say, ‘HWHY has
not appeared to you?’ ”
2 And HWHY said to him, “What is that in your hand?”
And he said, “A rod.”
3 And He said, “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw
it on the ground, and it became a serpent. And
Mosheh fled from it.
4 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Reach out your hand
and catch it by the tail” - so he reached out his hand
and seized it, and it became a rod in his hand 148

SHEMOTH

so that they believe that HWHY Elohim of their
fathers, the Elohim of Aḇraham, the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq, and the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, has appeared to
you.”
6 And HWHY said to him again, “Now put your hand
in your bosom.” And he put his hand in his bosom,
and when he took it out, and see, his hand was
leprous, like snow.
7 And He said, “Put your hand in your bosom again.”
So he put his hand in his bosom again, and drew it
out of his bosom, and see, it was restored like his
other flesh.
8 “And it shall be, if they do not believe you, nor
listen to the voice of the first sign, they shall believe
the voice of the latter sign.
9 “And it shall be, if they do not believe even these
two signs, or listen to your voice, that you shall take
water from the river and pour it on the dry land. And
the water which you take from the river shall become
blood on the dry land.”
10 And Mosheh said to HWHY, “O HWHY, I am not a
man of words, neither before nor since You have
spoken to Your servant, for I am slow of speech and
slow of tongue.”
11 And HWHY said to him, “Who has made man’s
mouth? Or who makes dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or
blind? Is it not I, HWHY?
12 “And now, go, and I shall be with your mouth and
teach you what to say.”
13 But he said, “O HWHY, please send by the hand of
him whom You would send.”
14 And the displeasure of HWHY burned against
Mosheh, and He said, “Is not Aharon the Lĕwite your
brother? I know that he speaks well. And see, he is
5

149

EXODUS

also coming out to meet you. And when he sees you,
he shall be glad in his heart.
15 “And you shall speak to him and put the words in
his mouth. And I am with your mouth and with his
mouth, and I shall teach you what to do.
16 “And he shall speak for you to the people. And it
shall be that he shall be a mouth for you, and you shall
be an elohim for him.
17 “And take this rod in your hand, with which you
shall do the signs.”
18 Then Mosheh went and returned to Yithro his
father-in-law, and said to him, “Please let me go and
return to my brothers who are in Mitsrayim to see
whether they are still alive.” And Yithro said to
Mosheh, “Go in peace.”
19 And HWHY said to Mosheh in Miḏyan, “Go, return
to Mitsrayim, for all the men are dead who sought
your life.”
20 So Mosheh took his wife and his sons and put
them on a donkey, and he returned to the land of
Mitsrayim. And Mosheh took the rod of Elohim in his
hand.
21 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “As you go back to
Mitsrayim, see that you do all those wonders before
Pharaoh which I have put in your hand. But I am going
to harden his heart, so that he does not let the people
go.
22 “And you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus said HWHY,
“Yisra’ĕl is My son, My first-born,
23 so I say to you, let My son go to serve Me. But if
you refuse to let him go, see, I am killing your son,
your first-born.” ’ ”
24 And it came to be on the way, in the lodging place,
that HWHY met him and sought to kill him.
150

SHEMOTH

And Tsipporah took a sharp stone and cut off the
foreskin of her son and threw it at Mosheh’s feet, and
said, “You are indeed a bridegroom of blood to me!”
26 So He let him go. Then she said, “You are a
bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.
27 And HWHY said to Aharon, “Go to meet Mosheh in
the wilderness.” And he went and met him on the
mountain of Elohim, and kissed him.
28 Mosheh then told Aharon all the words of HWHY
who had sent him, and all the signs which He had
commanded him.
29 And Mosheh went with Aharon and gathered
together all the elders of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
30 And Aharon spoke all the words which HWHY had
spoken to Mosheh. Then he did the signs before the
eyes of the people.
31 And the people believed. And they heard that
HWHY had visited the children of Yisra’ĕl and that He
had looked on their affliction, and they bowed their
heads and did obeisance.
25

5 And afterwards Mosheh and Aharon went in and
said to Pharaoh, “Thus said HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘Let My people go, so that they celebrate a festival to
Me in the wilderness.’ ”
2 And Pharaoh said, “Who is HWHY, that I should
obey His voice to let Yisra’ĕl go? I do not know HWHY,
nor am I going to let Yisra’ĕl go.”
3 And they said, “The Elohim of the Iḇrim has met
with us. Please, let us go three days’ journey into the
wilderness and slaughter to HWHY our Elohim, lest He
fall upon us with pestilence or with the sword.”
4 But the sovereign of Mitsrayim said to them,
“Mosheh and Aharon, why do you take the people
from their work? Get back to your burdens.”
151

EXODUS

And Pharaoh said, “See, the people of the land are
many now, and you make them cease from their
burdens!”
6 And the same day Pharaoh commanded the
slave-drivers of the people and their foremen, saying,
7 “You are no longer to give the people straw to
make bricks as before. Let them go and gather straw
for themselves.
8 “And lay on them the required amount of bricks
which they made before, do not diminish it. For they
are idle, that is why they cry out, saying, ‘Let us go
and slaughter to our Elohim.’
9 “Let more work be laid on the men, so that they
labour in it, and not pay attention to words of
falsehood.”
10 And the slave-drivers of the people and their
foremen went out and spoke to the people, saying,
“Thus said Pharaoh, ‘I do not give you straw.
11 ‘Go, take straw for yourselves, wherever you find
it, for your work shall not be diminished.’ ”
12 And the people were scattered in all the land of
Mitsrayim - to gather stubble for straw.
13 And the slave-drivers were hurrying them on,
saying, “Complete your work, your daily amount, as
when there was straw.”
14 Also the foremen of the children of Yisra’ĕl, whom
Pharaoh’s slave-drivers had appointed over them,
were beaten and were asked, “Why have you not
completed your task in making bricks both yesterday
and today, as before?”
15 And the foremen of the children of Yisra’ĕl came
and cried out to Pharaoh, saying, “Why do you treat
your servants this way?
5

152

SHEMOTH

“There is no straw given to your servants, and they
say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ And see, your servants are
beaten, but your own people are at fault.”
17 But he said, “You are idle! You are idle! That is
why you say, ‘Let us go and slaughter to HWHY.’
18 “So now go, work. And straw is not given to you,
but deliver the amount of bricks.”
19 And the foremen of the children of Yisra’ĕl saw
that they were in trouble after it was said, “You are not
to diminish your daily amount of bricks.”
20 And when they came out from Pharaoh, they met
Mosheh and Aharon who stood there to meet them.
21 And they said to them, “Let HWHY look on you and
judge, because you have made us loathsome in the
eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of his servants, to
give a sword in their hand to kill us.”
22 And Mosheh returned to HWHY and said, “HWHY,
why have You done evil to this people? Why did You
send me?
23 “For ever since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Your
Name, he has done evil to this people. And You have
not delivered Your people at all.”
16

6 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Now see what I do to
Pharaoh, for with a strong hand he is going to let them
go, and with a strong hand he is going to drive them
out of his land.”
2 And Elohim spoke to Mosheh and said to him, “I
am HWHY.
3 “And I appeared to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to
Ya’aqoḇ, as Ĕl Shaddai. And by My Name, HWHY, was
I not known to them?
4 “And I also established My Covenant with them, to
give them the land of Kena’an, the land of their
sojournings, in which they have sojourned.
153

EXODUS

“And I have also heard the groaning of the children
of Yisra’ĕl whom the Mitsrites are enslaving, and I
have remembered My Covenant.
6 “Say, therefore, to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I am
HWHY, and I shall bring you out from under the
burdens of the Mitsrites, and shall deliver you from
their enslaving, and shall redeem you with an
outstretched arm, and with great judgments,
7 and shall take you as My people, and I shall be
your Elohim. And you shall know that I am HWHY your
Elohim who is bringing you out from under the
burdens of the Mitsrites.
8 ‘And I shall bring you into the land which I swore
to give to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ, to
give it to you as an inheritance. I am HWHY.’ ”
9 And Mosheh spoke thus to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
but they did not listen to Mosheh, because of
shortness of spirit, and from hard slavery.
10 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
11 “Go in, speak to Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim,
to let the children of Yisra’ĕl go out of his land.”
12 And Mosheh spoke before HWHY, saying, “The
children of Yisra’ĕl have not listened to me, and why
would Pharaoh listen to me, for I am of uncircumcised
lips?”
13 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon, and
gave them a command for the children of Yisra’ĕl and
for Pharaoh, sovereign of Mitsrayim, to bring the
children of Yisra’ĕl out of the land of Mitsrayim.
14 These are the heads of their fathers’ houses: The
sons of Re’uḇĕn, the first-born of Yisra’ĕl: Ḥanoḵ and
Pallu, Ḥetsron and Karmi. These are the clans of
Re’uḇĕn.
15 And the sons of Shim’on: Yemu’ĕl, and Yamin,
and Ohaḏ, and Yaḵin, and Tsoḥar, and Sha’ul the son
5

154

SHEMOTH

of a Kena’anite woman. These are the clans of
Shim’on.
16 These are the names of the sons of Lĕwi
according to their generations: Gĕreshon, and
Qehath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Lĕwi
were one hundred and thirty-seven.
17 The sons of Gĕreshon: Liḇni and Shim’i according
to their clans.
18 And the sons of Qehath: Amram, and Yitshar, and
Ḥeḇron, and Uzzi’ĕl. And the years of the life of
Qehath were one hundred and thirty-three.
19 And the sons of Merari: Maḥli and Mushi. These
are the clans of Lĕwi according to their generations.
20 And Amram took for himself Yoḵeḇeḏ, his father’s
sister, as wife. And she bore him Aharon and
Mosheh. And the years of the life of Amram were one
hundred and thirty-seven.
21 And the sons of Yitshar: Qoraḥ, and Nepheḡ, and
Ziḵri.
22 And the sons of Uzzi’ĕl: Misha’ĕl, and Eltsaphan,
and Sithri.
23 Aharon took to himself Elisheḇa, daughter of
Amminaḏaḇ, sister of Naḥshon, as wife. And she bore
him Naḏaḇ, and Aḇihu, El’azar, and Ithamar.
24 And the sons of Qoraḥ: Assir, Elqanah, and
Aḇiyasaph. These are the clans of the Qorḥites.
25 And El’azar, Aharon’s son, took for himself one of
the daughters of Puti’ĕl as wife. And she bore him
Pineḥas. These are the heads of the fathers of the
Lĕwites according to their clans.
26 This is Aharon, and Mosheh, to whom HWHY said,
“Bring out the children of Yisra’ĕl from the land of
Mitsrayim according to their divisions.”

155

EXODUS

They were the ones who spoke to Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, to bring out the children of
Yisra’ĕl from Mitsrayim. This is Mosheh, and Aharon.
28 And it came to be, on the day when HWHY spoke to
Mosheh in the land of Mitsrayim,
29 that HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying, “I am HWHY.
Speak to Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim all that I say
to you.”
30 And Mosheh said before HWHY, “See, I am of
uncircumcised lips, and why would Pharaoh listen to
me?”
27

7 So HWHY said to Mosheh, “See, I have made you an
elohim to Pharaoh, and Aharon your brother is your
naḇi.
2 “You shall speak all that I command you, and
Aharon your brother shall speak to Pharaoh, to let the
children of Yisra’ĕl go out of his land.
3 “But I am going to harden the heart of Pharaoh,
and shall increase My signs and My wonders in the
land of Mitsrayim.
4 “And Pharaoh is not going to listen to you, and I
shall lay My hand on Mitsrayim, and bring My
divisions and My people, the children of Yisra’ĕl, out
of the land of Mitsrayim by great judgments.
5 “And the Mitsrites shall know that I am HWHY, when
I stretch out My hand on Mitsrayim. And I shall bring
the children of Yisra’ĕl out from among them.”
6 And Mosheh and Aharon did as HWHY commanded
them, so they did.
7 Now Mosheh was eighty years old and Aharon
eighty-three years old when they spoke to Pharaoh.
8 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying,
156

SHEMOTH

“When Pharaoh speaks to you, saying, ‘Show a
miracle for yourselves,’ then you shall say to Aharon,
‘Take your rod and throw it before Pharaoh, and let it
become a serpent.’ ”
10 So Mosheh and Aharon went in to Pharaoh, and
they did so, as HWHY commanded. And Aharon threw
his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and
it became a serpent.
11 But Pharaoh also called the wise men and the
practisers of witchcraft. And they, the magicians of
Mitsrayim, also did so with their magic.
12 And they, each one, threw down his rod, and they
became serpents. But the rod of Aharon swallowed
up their rods.
13 And Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did
not listen to them, as HWHY had said.
14 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “The heart of Pharaoh
is hard, he refuses to let the people go.
15 “Go to Pharaoh in the morning, as he goes out to
the water, and you shall stand by the river’s bank to
meet him. And take in your hand the rod which was
turned into a serpent.
16 “And you shall say to him, ‘HWHY the Elohim of the
Iḇrim has sent me to you, saying, “Let My people go,
so that they serve Me in the wilderness,” but see, until
now you have not listened!
17 ‘Thus said HWHY, “By this you know that I am HWHY.
See, I am striking the waters which are in the river
with the rod that is in my hand, and they shall be
turned to blood,
18 and the fish in the river shall die. And the river shall
stink, and the Mitsrites shall find it impossible to drink
the water of the river.” ’ ”
19 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, “Say to Aharon,
‘Take your rod and stretch out your hand over the
9

157

EXODUS

waters of Mitsrayim, over their streams, over their
rivers, over their ponds, and over all their pools of
water, that they become blood. And there shall be
blood in all the land of Mitsrayim, both in wooden and
in stone containers.’ ”
20 And Mosheh and Aharon did so, as HWHY
commanded. And he lifted up the rod and struck the
waters that were in the river, in the eyes of Pharaoh
and in the eyes of his servants. And all the waters that
were in the river were turned to blood.
21 And the fish that were in the river died, and the
river stank, and the Mitsrites were unable to drink the
water of the river. And the blood was in all the land of
Mitsrayim.
22 And the magicians of Mitsrayim did the same with
their magic. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened,
and he did not listen to them, as HWHY had said.
23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and
his heart was not moved by this either.
24 And all the Mitsrites dug all around the river for
water to drink, for they were unable to drink the water
of the river.
25 And seven days were completed after HWHY had
struck the river.

8 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, “Go to Pharaoh and
say to him, ‘Thus said HWHY, “Let My people go, so that
they serve Me.
2 “But if you refuse to let them go, see, I am smiting
all your border with frogs.
3 “And the river shall swarm with frogs, which shall
go up and shall come into your house, and into your
bedroom, and on your bed, and into the houses of
your servants, and on your people, and into your
ovens, and into your kneading bowls,
158

SHEMOTH

and the frogs shall come up on you and on your
people and on all your servants.” ’ ”
5 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Say to Aharon,
‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the streams,
over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs
to come up on the land of Mitsrayim.’ ”
6 So Aharon stretched out his hand over the waters
of Mitsrayim, and the frogs came up, and covered the
land of Mitsrayim.
7 And the magicians did so with their magic, and
brought up frogs on the land of Mitsrayim.
8 Pharaoh then called for Mosheh and Aharon, and
said, “Pray to HWHY to take away the frogs from me
and from my people, and I shall let the people go to
slaughter to HWHY.”
9 And Mosheh said to Pharaoh, “Explain yourself to
me: When am I to pray for you, and for your servants,
and for your people, to destroy the frogs from you and
your houses, and remain only in the river?”
10 So he said, “Tomorrow.” And he said, “Let it be
according to your word, so that you know that there is
no one like HWHY our Elohim.
11 “And the frogs shall turn aside from you, and from
your houses, and from your servants, and from your
people - they shall remain in the river only.”
12 And Mosheh and Aharon went out from Pharaoh.
And Mosheh cried out to HWHY concerning the frogs
which He had brought against Pharaoh.
13 And HWHY did according to the word of Mosheh.
And the frogs died out of the houses, out of the
courtyards, and out of the fields.
14 And they gathered them together in heaps, and
the land stank.
4

159

EXODUS

And when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he
hardened his heart and did not listen to them, as HWHY
had said.
16 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Say to Aharon,
‘Stretch out your rod, and strike the dust of the land,
so that it becomes gnats in all the land of Mitsrayim.’
”
17 And they did so, and Aharon stretched out his
hand with his rod and struck the dust of the earth, and
it became gnats on man and beast. All the dust of the
land became gnats in all the land of Mitsrayim.
18 And the magicians did similarly with their magic to
bring forth gnats, but they were unable. And there
were gnats on man and beast.
19 The magicians then said to Pharaoh, “This is the
finger of Elohim!” But the heart of Pharaoh was
hardened, and he did not listen to them, as HWHY had
said.
20 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Rise early in the
morning and stand before Pharaoh as he comes out
to the water, and say to him, ‘Thus said HWHY, “Let My
people go, so that they serve Me.
21 “Or else, if you do not let My people go, see, I am
sending swarms of flies on you and your servants,
and on your people and into your houses. And the
houses of the Mitsrites shall be filled with swarms of
flies, and also the ground on which they stand.
22 “And in that day I shall separate the land of
Goshen, in which My people dwell, that no swarms of
flies shall be there, so that you know that I am HWHY
in the midst of the land.
23 “And I shall put a distinction between My people
and your people. Tomorrow this sign shall be.” ’ ”
24 And HWHY did so, and thick swarms of flies came
into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants’
15

160

SHEMOTH

houses, and into all the land of Mitsrayim, and the
land was ruined because of the swarms of flies.
25 Pharaoh then called for Mosheh and Aharon, and
said, “Go, slaughter to your Elohim in the land.”
26 And Mosheh said, “It is not right to do so, for we
would be slaughtering the abomination of the
Mitsrites to HWHY our Elohim. See, if we slaughter the
abomination of the Mitsrites before their eyes, would
they not stone us?
27 “Let us go three days’ journey into the wilderness,
then we shall slaughter to HWHY our Elohim, as He
commands us.”
28 And Pharaoh said, “I am letting you go, then you
shall slaughter to HWHY your Elohim in the wilderness.
Only, do not go very far away! Pray for me.”
29 And Mosheh said, “See, when I leave you I shall
pray to HWHY, and tomorrow the swarms of flies shall
depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people. But do not let Pharaoh again deceive, not to
let the people go to slaughter to HWHY.”
30 And Mosheh went out from Pharaoh and prayed
to HWHY.
31 And HWHY did according to the word of Mosheh
and removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from
his servants, and from his people. Not one remained.
32 But Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time too,
and did not let the people go.

9 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go in to Pharaoh and
speak to him, ‘Thus said HWHY Elohim of the Iḇrim, “Let
My people go, so that they serve Me.
2 “For if you refuse to let them go, and still hold
them,
3 see, the hand of HWHY is on your livestock in the
field, on the horses, on the donkeys, on the camels,
161

EXODUS

on the cattle, and on the sheep - a very grievous
pestilence.
4 “And HWHY shall separate between the livestock of
Yisra’ĕl and the livestock of Mitsrayim, and let no
matter die of all that belongs to the children of
Yisra’ĕl.” ’ ”
5 And HWHY made an appointed time, saying,
“Tomorrow HWHY is going to do this word in the land.”
6 And HWHY did this word on the next day, and all
the livestock of Mitsrayim died, but of the livestock of
the children of Yisra’ĕl, not one died.
7 Then Pharaoh sent, and see, not even one of the
livestock of the Yisra’ĕlites was dead. But the heart of
Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people
go.
8 And HWHY said to Mosheh and Aharon, “Fill your
hands with ashes from a furnace and let Mosheh
scatter it toward the shamayim before the eyes of
Pharaoh.
9 “And it shall become fine dust in all the land of
Mitsrayim, and it shall cause boils that break out in
sores on man and beast in all the land of Mitsrayim.”
10 So they took ashes from the furnace and stood
before Pharaoh, and Mosheh scattered them toward
the shamayim. And they caused boils, breaking out in
sores on man and beast.
11 And the magicians were unable to stand before
Mosheh because of the boils, for the boils were on the
magicians and on all the Mitsrites.
12 But HWHY hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he
did not listen to them, as HWHY had said to Mosheh.
13 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Rise early in the
morning and stand before Pharaoh, and say to him,
‘Thus said HWHY Elohim of the Iḇrim, “Let My people
go, so that they serve Me,
162

SHEMOTH

for at this time I am sending all My plagues unto
your heart, and on your servants and on your people,
so that you know that there is no one like Me in all the
earth.
15 “Now if I had stretched out My hand and struck you
and your people with pestilence, then you would have
been cut off from the earth.
16 “And for this reason I have raised you up, in order
to show you My power, and in order to declare My
Name in all the earth.
17 “You still exalt yourself against My people in that
you do not let them go!
18 “See, tomorrow about this time I am causing very
heavy hail to rain down, such as has not been in
Mitsrayim, from the day of its founding until now.
19 “And now send, bring your livestock to safety, and
all that you have in the field, for the hail shall come
down on every man and every beast which is found
in the field and is not brought home, and they shall
die.” ’ ”
20 Those among the servants of Pharaoh who
revered the word of HWHY made their servants and
livestock flee to the houses.
21 But those who did not lay their heart on the word
of HWHY left their servants and livestock in the field.
22 Then HWHY said to Mosheh, “Stretch out your hand
toward the shamayim, and let there be hail in all the
land of Mitsrayim - on man, and on beast, and on
every plant of the field, throughout the land of
Mitsrayim.”
23 Then Mosheh stretched out his rod toward the
shamayim. And HWHY sent thunder and hail, and fire
came down to the earth. And HWHY rained hail on the
land of Mitsrayim.
14

163

EXODUS

Thus there came to be hail, and fire flashing
continually in the midst of the hail, very heavy, such
as had not been in all the land of Mitsrayim since it
became a nation.
25 And the hail smote in all the land of Mitsrayim all
that was in the field, both man and beast. And the hail
smote every plant of the field and broke every tree of
the field.
26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of
Yisra’ĕl were, there was no hail.
27 Pharaoh then sent and called for Mosheh and for
Aharon, and said to them, “I have sinned this time.
HWHY is righteous, and my people and I are wicked.
28 “Pray to HWHY, for there has been enough of the
thunder and hail of Elohim. And I am letting you go,
so that you stay no longer.”
29 And Mosheh said to him, “As soon as I go out of
the city, let me spread out my hands to HWHY, let the
thunder cease and the hail be no more, so that you
know that the earth belongs to HWHY.
30 “But as for you and your servants, I know that you
do not yet fear before HWHY Elohim.”
31 And the flax and the barley were smitten, for the
barley was in the head and the flax was in bud.
32 But the wheat and the spelt were not smitten, for
they were late crops.
33 And Mosheh went out of the city from Pharaoh and
spread out his hands to HWHY, and the thunder and
the hail ceased, and the rain was not poured on the
earth.
34 And Pharaoh saw that the rain, and the hail, and
the thunder had ceased, yet he sinned again and he
hardened his heart, he and his servants.
24

164

SHEMOTH

And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he
did not let the children of Yisra’ĕl go, as HWHY had
said through Mosheh.

35

10 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go in to Pharaoh, for
I have hardened his heart and the hearts of his
servants, so that I show these signs of Mine before
him,
2 and that you relate in the hearing of your son and
your son’s son what I have done in Mitsrayim, and My
signs which I have done among them. And you shall
know that I am HWHY.”
3 And Mosheh and Aharon came in to Pharaoh and
said to him, “Thus said HWHY Elohim of the Iḇrim, ‘Till
when shall you refuse to humble yourself before Me?
Let My people go, so that they serve Me.
4 ‘Or else, if you refuse to let My people go, see,
tomorrow I am bringing locusts within your borders.
5 ‘And they shall cover the surface of the land, so
that no one is able to see the land. And they shall eat
the rest of what has escaped, which remains to you
from the hail, and they shall eat every tree which
grows up for you out of the field.
6 ‘And they shall fill your houses, and the houses of
all your servants, and the houses of all the Mitsrites,
which neither your fathers nor your fathers’ fathers
have seen, since the day that they were on the earth
to this day.’ ” Then he turned and went out from
Pharaoh.
7 And Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “Till when
would this one be a snare to us? Let the men go, so
that they serve HWHY their Elohim. Do you not yet
know that Mitsrayim is destroyed?”

165

EXODUS

And Mosheh and Aharon were brought back to
Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve HWHY your
Elohim. Who are the ones that are going?”
9 And Mosheh said, “We are going with our young
and our old, with our sons and our daughters, with our
flocks and our herds we are going, for we have a
festival to HWHY.”
10 And he said to them, “Let HWHY be with you as I let
you and your little ones go! Watch, for evil is before
your face!
11 “Not so! You men go now, and serve HWHY, for that
is what you desired.” And they were driven out from
the presence of Pharaoh.
12 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Stretch out your hand
over the land of Mitsrayim for the locusts to come
upon the land of Mitsrayim, and eat every plant of the
land - all that the hail has left.”
13 And Mosheh stretched out his rod over the land of
Mitsrayim, and HWHY brought an east wind on the land
all that day and all that night. Morning came, and the
east wind brought the locusts.
14 And the locusts went up over all the land of
Mitsrayim and settled within all the borders of
Mitsrayim, very grievous. There had never been
locusts like them before, nor would there again be like
them.
15 And they covered the surface of all the land, so
that the land was darkened. And they ate every plant
of the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail
had left, and no greenness was left on the trees or on
the plants of the field, in all the land of Mitsrayim.
16 Pharaoh then called for Mosheh and Aharon in
haste, and said, “I have sinned against HWHY your
Elohim and against you.
8

166

SHEMOTH

“And now, please bear my sin only this once, and
pray to HWHY your Elohim, that He would only turn
away this death from me.”
18 And he went out from Pharaoh and prayed to
HWHY.
19 And HWHY turned a very strong west wind, which
took the locusts away and blew them into the Sea of
Reeds. Not one locust was left within all the border of
Mitsrayim.
20 However, HWHY hardened the heart of Pharaoh,
and he did not let the children of Yisra’ĕl go.
21 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Stretch out your hand
toward the shamayim, and let there be darkness over
the land of Mitsrayim, even a darkness which is felt.”
22 And Mosheh stretched out his hand toward the
shamayim, and there was thick darkness in all the
land of Mitsrayim for three days.
23 They did not see one another, nor did anyone rise
from his place for three days, while all the children of
Yisra’ĕl had light in their dwellings.
24 And Pharaoh called to Mosheh and said, “Go,
serve HWHY, only leave your flocks and your herds
behind. Let your little ones go with you too.”
25 But Mosheh said, “You yourself are to provide us
with slaughterings and burnt offerings, to prepare for
HWHY our Elohim.
26 “And our livestock are to go with us too, not a hoof
is to be left behind, for we have to take some of them
to serve HWHY our Elohim, and we ourselves do not
know with what we are to serve HWHY until we come
there.”
27 However, HWHY hardened the heart of Pharaoh,
and he would not let them go.
17

167

EXODUS

And Pharaoh said to him, “Get away from me!
Watch yourself and see my face no more, for in the
day you see my face you die!”
29 And Mosheh said, “You have spoken rightly never again do I see your face!”
28

11 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “I am bringing yet one
more plague on Pharaoh and on Mitsrayim. After that
he is going to let you go from here. When he lets you
go, he shall drive you out from here altogether.
2 “Speak now in the hearing of the people, and let
every man ask from his neighbour and every woman
from her neighbour, objects of silver and objects of
gold.”
3 And HWHY gave the people favour in the eyes of
the Mitsrites. And the man Mosheh was very great in
the land of Mitsrayim, in the eyes of Pharaoh’s
servants and in the eyes of the people.
4 And Mosheh said, “Thus said HWHY, ‘About
midnight I am going out into the midst of Mitsrayim,
5 and all the first-born in the land of Mitsrayim shall
die, from the first-born of Pharaoh who sits on his
throne, even to the first-born of the female servant
who is behind the handmill, and all the first-born of
cattle.
6 ‘And there shall be a great cry throughout all the
land of Mitsrayim, such as has never been or ever be
again.
7 ‘But against any of the children of Yisra’ĕl no dog
shall move its tongue, against man or against beast,
so that you know that HWHY makes distinction
between Mitsrayim and Yisra’ĕl.’
8 “And all these servants of yours shall come down
to me and bow down to me, saying, ‘Get out, you and
all the people at your feet!’ And after that I shall go
168

SHEMOTH

out.” And he went out from Pharaoh in great
displeasure.
9 But HWHY said to Mosheh, “Pharaoh is not going
to listen to you, in order to multiply My wonders in the
land of Mitsrayim.”
10 And Mosheh and Aharon did all these wonders
before Pharaoh, however, HWHY hardened the heart
of Pharaoh, and he did not let the children of Yisra’ĕl
go out of his land.

12 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon in the
land of Mitsrayim, saying,
2 “This month is the beginning of months for you, it
is the first month of the year for you.
3 “Speak to all the congregation of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘On the tenth day of this month each one of them is to
take for himself a lamb, according to the house of his
father, a lamb for a household.
4 ‘And if the household is too small for the lamb, let
him and his neighbour next to his house take it
according to the number of the beings, according to
each man’s need you make your count for the lamb.
5 ‘Let the lamb be a perfect one, a year old male.
Take it from the sheep or from the goats.
6 ‘And you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of
the same month. Then all the assembly of the
congregation of Yisra’ĕl shall kill it between the
evenings.
7 ‘And they shall take some of the blood and put it
on the two doorposts and on the lintel of the houses
where they eat it.
8 ‘And they shall eat the flesh on that night, roasted
in fire - with unleavened bread and with bitter herbs
they shall eat it.
169

EXODUS

‘Do not eat it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but
roasted in fire, its head with its legs and its inward
parts.
10 ‘And do not leave of it until morning, and what
remains of it until morning you are to burn with fire.
11 ‘And this is how you eat it: your loins girded, your
sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand. And
you shall eat it in haste. It is the Pesaḥ of HWHY.
12 ‘And I shall pass through the land of Mitsrayim on
that night, and shall smite all the first-born in the land
of Mitsrayim, both man and beast. And on all the
mighty ones of Mitsrayim I shall execute judgment. I
am HWHY.
13 ‘And the blood shall be a sign for you on the
houses where you are. And when I see the blood, I
shall pass over you, and let the plague not come on
you to destroy you when I smite the land of Mitsrayim.
14 ‘And this day shall become to you a remembrance.
And you shall observe it as a Festival to HWHY
throughout your generations - observe it as a Festival,
an everlasting Law.
15 ‘Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread.
Indeed on the first day you cause leaven to cease
from your houses. For whoever eats leavened bread
from the first day until the seventh day, that being
shall be cut off from Yisra’ĕl.
16 ‘And on the first day is a qodesh gathering, and on
the seventh day you have a qodesh gathering. No
work at all is done on them, only that which is eaten
by every being, that alone is prepared by you.
17 ‘And you shall guard the Matstsoth, for on this
same day I brought your divisions out of the land of
Mitsrayim. And you shall guard this day throughout
your generations, an everlasting Law.
9

170

SHEMOTH

‘In the first, on the fourteenth day of the month, in
the evening, you shall eat unleavened bread until the
twenty-first day of the month in the evening.
19 ‘For seven days no leaven is to be found in your
houses, for if anyone eats what is leavened, that
same being shall be cut off from the congregation of
Yisra’ĕl, whether sojourner or native of the land.
20 ‘Do not eat that which is leavened - in all your
dwellings you are to eat unleavened bread.’ ”
21 And Mosheh called for all the elders of Yisra’ĕl and
said to them, “Go out and take lambs for yourselves
according to your clans, and slaughter the Pesaḥ.
22 “And you shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it
in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel
and the two doorposts with the blood that is in the
basin, and you, none of you shall go out of the door
of his house until morning.
23 “And HWHY shall pass on to smite the Mitsrites,
and shall see the blood on the lintel and on the two
doorposts, and HWHY shall pass over the door and not
allow the destroyer to come into your houses to smite
you.
24 “And you shall guard this word as a Law for you
and your sons, forever.
25 “And it shall be, when you come to the land which
HWHY gives you, as He promised, that you shall guard
this service.
26 “And it shall be, when your children say to you,
‘What does this service mean to you?’
27 then you shall say, ‘It is the Pesaḥ slaughtering of
HWHY, who passed over the houses of the children of
Yisra’ĕl in Mitsrayim when He smote the Mitsrites and
delivered our households.’ ” And the people bowed
their heads and did obeisance.
18

171

EXODUS

And the children of Yisra’ĕl went away and did so
- as HWHY had commanded Mosheh and Aharon, so
they did.
29 And it came to be at midnight that HWHY smote all
the first-born in the land of Mitsrayim, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the first-born
of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the
first-born of livestock.
30 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his
servants, and all the Mitsrites. And there was a great
cry in Mitsrayim, for there was not a house where
there was not a dead one.
31 Then he called for Mosheh and Aharon by night,
and said, “Arise, go out from the midst of my people,
both you and the children of Yisra’ĕl. And go, serve
HWHY as you have said.
32 “Take both your flocks and your herds, as you
have said, and go. Then you shall baraḵ me too.”
33 And the Mitsrites urged the people, to hasten to
send them away out of the land. For they said, “We
are all dying!”
34 And the people took their dough before it was
leavened, having their kneading bowls bound up in
their garments on their shoulders.
35 And the children of Yisra’ĕl had done according to
the word of Mosheh, and they had asked from the
Mitsrites objects of silver, and objects of gold, and
garments.
36 And HWHY gave the people favour in the eyes of
the Mitsrites, so that they gave them what they asked,
and they plundered the Mitsrites.
37 And the children of Yisra’ĕl departed from
Ra’meses to Sukkoth, about six hundred thousand
men on foot, besides the little ones.
28

172

SHEMOTH

And a mixed multitude went up with them too, also
flocks and herds, very much livestock.
39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough
which they had brought out of Mitsrayim, for it was not
leavened, since they were driven out of Mitsrayim,
and had not been able to delay, nor had they
prepared food for themselves.
40 And the sojourn of the children of Yisra’ĕl who
lived in Mitsrayim was four hundred and thirty years.
41 And it came to be at the end of the four hundred
and thirty years, on that same day it came to be that
all the divisions of HWHY went out from the land of
Mitsrayim.
42 It is a night to be observed unto HWHY for bringing
them out of the land of Mitsrayim. This night is unto
HWHY, to be observed by all the children of Yisra’ĕl
throughout their generations.
43 And HWHY said to Mosheh and Aharon, “This is the
Law of the Pesaḥ: No son of a stranger is to eat of it,
44 but any servant a man has bought for silver, when
you have circumcised him, then let him eat of it.
45 “A sojourner and a hired servant does not eat of it.
46 “It is eaten in one house, you are not to take any
of the flesh outside the house, nor are you to break
any bone of it.
47 “All the congregation of Yisra’ĕl are to perform it.
48 “And when a stranger sojourns with you and shall
perform the Pesaḥ to HWHY, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near and perform
it, and he shall be as a native of the land. But let no
uncircumcised eat of it.
49 “There is one Torah for the native-born and for the
stranger who sojourns among you.”
50 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl did as HWHY
commanded Mosheh and Aharon, so they did.
38

173

EXODUS

And it came to be on that same day that HWHY
brought the children of Yisra’ĕl out of the land of
Mitsrayim according to their divisions.

51

13 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Qadosh to Me all the first-born, the one opening
the womb among the children of Yisra’ĕl, among man
and among beast, it is Mine.”
3 And Mosheh said to the people, “Remember this
day in which you went out of Mitsrayim, out of the
house of slavery. For by strength of hand HWHY
brought you out of this place, and whatever is
leavened shall not be eaten.
4 “Today you are going out, in the month Aḇiḇ.
5 “And it shall be, when HWHY brings you into the
land of the Kena’anites, and the Ḥittites, and the
Amorites, and the Ḥiwwites, and the Yeḇusites, which
He swore to your fathers to give you, a land flowing
with milk and honey, that you shall keep this service
in this month.
6 “Seven days you eat unleavened bread, and on
the seventh day is a Festival to HWHY.
7 “Unleavened bread is to be eaten the seven days,
and whatever is leavened is not to be seen with you,
and leaven is not to be seen with you within all your
border.
8 “And you shall inform your son in that day, saying,
‘It is because of what HWHY did for me when I came
up from Mitsrayim.’
9 “And it shall be as a sign to you on your hand and
as a reminder between your eyes, that the Torah of
HWHY is to be in your mouth, for with a strong hand
HWHY has brought you out of Mitsrayim.
10 “And you shall guard this Law at its Appointed
Time from year to year.
2

174

SHEMOTH

“And it shall be, when HWHY brings you into the
land of the Kena’anites, as He swore to you and your
fathers, and gives it to you,
12 that you shall pass over to HWHY every one
opening the womb, and every first-born that comes
from your livestock, the males belong to HWHY.
13 “But every first-born of a donkey you are to ransom
with a lamb. And if you do not ransom it, then you
shall break its neck. And every first-born of man
among your sons you are to ransom.
14 “And it shall be, when your son asks you in time to
come, saying, ‘What is this?’ then you shall say to
him, ‘By strength of hand HWHY brought us out of
Mitsrayim, out of the house of bondage.
15 ‘And it came to be, when Pharaoh was too
hardened to let us go, that HWHY killed every first-born
in the land of Mitsrayim, both the first-born of man and
the first-born of beast. Therefore I am slaughtering to
HWHY every male that opens the womb, but every
first-born of my sons I ransom.’
16 “And it shall be as a sign on your hand and as
frontlets between your eyes, for by strength of hand
HWHY brought us out of Mitsrayim.”
17 And it came to be, when Pharaoh had let the
people go, that Elohim did not lead them by way of
the land of the Pelishtites, though that was nearer, for
Elohim said, “Lest the people regret when they see
fighting, and return to Mitsrayim.”
18 So Elohim led the people around by way of the
wilderness of the Sea of Reeds. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl went up armed from the land of Mitsrayim.
19 And Mosheh took the bones of Yosĕph with him,
for he certainly made the children of Yisra’ĕl swear,
saying, “Elohim shall certainly visit you, and you shall
bring my bones from here with you.”
11

175

EXODUS

And they departed from Sukkoth and camped in
Ĕtham at the edge of the wilderness.
21 And HWHY went before them by day in a column of
cloud to lead the way, and by night in a column of fire
to give them light, so as to go by day and night.
22 The column of cloud did not cease by day, nor the
column of fire by night, before the people.
20

14 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, that they turn
and camp before Pi ha’Ḥiroth, between Miḡdol and
the sea, opposite Ba’al Tsephon - camp before it by
the sea.
3 “For Pharaoh shall say of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
‘They are entangled in the land, the wilderness has
closed them in.’
4 “And I shall harden the heart of Pharaoh, and he
shall pursue them. But I am to be esteemed through
Pharaoh and over all his army, and the Mitsrites shall
know that I am HWHY.” And they did so.
5 And it was reported to the sovereign of Mitsrayim
that the people had fled, and the heart of Pharaoh and
his servants was turned against the people. And they
said, “Why have we done this, that we have let
Yisra’ĕl go from serving us?”
6 So he made his chariot ready and took his people
with him.
7 And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all
the chariots of Mitsrayim with officers over all of them.
8 And HWHY hardened the heart of Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and he pursued the children
of Yisra’ĕl, but the children of Yisra’ĕl went out with a
high hand.
9 And the Mitsrites pursued them, and all the horses
and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen and his
2

176

SHEMOTH

army, and reached them camping by the sea beside
Pi ha’Ḥiroth, before Ba’al Tsephon.
10 And when Pharaoh drew near, the children of
Yisra’ĕl lifted their eyes and saw the Mitsrites coming
up after them. And they were greatly afraid, so the
children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to HWHY.
11 And they said to Mosheh, “Did you take us away
to die in the wilderness because there are no graves
in Mitsrayim? What is this you have done to us, to
bring us up out of Mitsrayim?
12 “Is this not the word that we spoke to you in
Mitsrayim, saying, ‘Leave us alone and let us serve
the Mitsrites?’ For it would have been better for us to
serve the Mitsrites than to die in the wilderness.”
13 And Mosheh said to the people, “Do not be afraid.
Stand still, and see the deliverance of HWHY, which
He does for you today. For the Mitsrites whom you
see today, you are never, never to see again.
14 “HWHY fights for you, and you keep silent.”
15 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Why do you cry to Me?
Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and let them go
forward.
16 “And you, lift up your rod, and stretch out your
hand over the sea and divide it, and let the children of
Yisra’ĕl go on dry ground through the midst of the
sea.
17 “And I, see I am hardening the hearts of the
Mitsrites, and they shall follow them. And I am to be
esteemed through Pharaoh and over all his army, his
chariots, and his horsemen.
18 “And the Mitsrites shall know that I am HWHY, when
I am esteemed through Pharaoh, his chariots, and his
horsemen.”
19 And the Messenger of Elohim, who went before
the camp of Yisra’ĕl, moved and went behind them.
177

EXODUS

And the column of cloud went from before them and
stood behind them,
20 and came between the camp of the Mitsrites and
the camp of Yisra’ĕl. And it was the cloud and the
darkness, and it gave light by night, and the one did
not come near the other all the night.
21 And Mosheh stretched out his hand over the sea.
And HWHY caused the sea to go back by a strong east
wind all that night, and made the sea into dry land,
and the waters were divided.
22 And the children of Yisra’ĕl went into the midst of
the sea on dry ground, and the waters were a wall to
them on their right and on their left.
23 And the Mitsrites pursued and went after them into
the midst of the sea, all the horses of Pharaoh, his
chariots, and his horsemen.
24 And it came to be, in the morning watch, that HWHY
looked down upon the army of the Mitsrites through
the column of fire and cloud, and He brought the army
of the Mitsrites into confusion.
25 And He took off their chariot wheels, so that they
drove them with difficulty. And the Mitsrites said, “Let
us flee from the face of Yisra’ĕl, for HWHY fights for
them against the Mitsrites.”
26 Then HWHY said to Mosheh, “Stretch out your hand
over the sea, and let the waters come back upon the
Mitsrites, on their chariots, and on their horsemen.”
27 And Mosheh stretched out his hand over the sea,
and the sea returned to its usual flow, at the break of
day, with the Mitsrites fleeing into it. Thus HWHY
overthrew the Mitsrites in the midst of the sea,
28 and the waters returned and covered the chariots,
and the horsemen, and all the army of Pharaoh that
came into the sea after them, and not even one was
left of them.
178

SHEMOTH

And the children of Yisra’ĕl walked on dry ground
in the midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall to
them on their right and on their left.
30 Thus HWHY saved Yisra’ĕl that day out of the hand
of the Mitsrites, and Yisra’ĕl saw the Mitsrites dead
on the seashore.
31 And Yisra’ĕl saw the great work which HWHY had
done in Mitsrayim, and the people revered HWHY, and
believed HWHY and His servant Mosheh.
29

15 Then Mosheh and the children of Yisra’ĕl sang
this song to HWHY, and spoke, saying,
“I sing to HWHY, for He is highly exalted!
The horse and its rider
He has thrown into the sea!
2 “Yah is my strength and song, and He has
become my deliverance.
He is my Ĕl, and I praise Him Elohim of my father, and I exalt Him.
3 “HWHY is a man of battle,
HWHY is His Name.
4 “He has cast Pharaoh’s chariots and his army
into the sea,
And his chosen officers are drowned in the Sea of
Reeds.
5 “The depths covered them,
They went down to the bottom like a stone.
6 “Your right hand, O HWHY, has become great in
power.
Your right hand, O HWHY, has crushed the enemy.
7 “And in the greatness of Your excellence
You pulled down those who rose up against You.
You sent forth Your wrath, it consumed them like
stubble.
179

EXODUS

“And with the wind of Your nostrils the waters
were heaped up,
The floods stood like a wall,
The depths became stiff in the heart of the sea.
9 “The enemy said, ‘I pursue, I overtake,
I divide the spoil, my being is satisfied on them.
I draw out my sword, my hand destroys them.’
10 “You blew with Your wind, the sea covered them,
They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
11 “Who is like You, O HWHY, among the mighty
ones?
Who is like You, great in qodeshah?
Awesome in praises, working wonders.
12 “You stretched out Your right hand, the earth
swallowed them.
13 “In Your kindness You led the people whom You
have redeemed,
In Your strength You guided them to
Your qodesh dwelling.
14 “Peoples heard, they trembled,
Anguish gripped the inhabitants of Pelesheth.
15 “Then the chiefs of Eḏom were troubled,
The mighty men of Mo’aḇ, trembling grips them,
All the inhabitants of Kena’an melted.
16 “Fear and dread fell on them,
By the greatness of Your arm they are as silent as a
stone,
Until Your people pass over, O HWHY,
Until the people, whom You have bought, pass over.
17 “You bring them in and plant them in the
mountain of Your inheritance,
In the place, O HWHY, which You have made for
Your own dwelling,
The Miqdash, O HWHY, which Your hands have
prepared.
8

180

SHEMOTH

“HWHY reigns forever and ever.”
19 For the horses of Pharaoh went with his chariots
and his horsemen into the sea, and HWHY brought
back the waters of the sea upon them. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl went on dry ground in the midst of
the sea.
20 And Miryam the neḇiyah, the sister of Aharon, took
the timbrel in her hand. And all the women went out
after her with timbrels and with dances.
21 And Miryam answered them,
“Sing to HWHY, for He is highly exalted!
The horse and its rider He has thrown into the sea!”
22 And Mosheh brought Yisra’ĕl from the Sea of
Reeds, and they went out into the Wilderness of Shur.
And they went three days in the wilderness and found
no water.
23 And they came to Marah, and they were unable to
drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. So the
name of it was called Marah.
24 And the people grumbled against Mosheh, saying,
“What are we to drink?”
25 Then he cried out to HWHY, and HWHY showed him
a tree. And when he threw it into the waters, the
waters were made sweet. There He made a Law and
a Right-Ruling for them, and there He tried them.
26 And He said, “If you diligently obey the voice of
HWHY your Elohim and do what is right in His eyes,
and shall listen to His Commands and shall guard all
His Laws, I shall bring on you none of the diseases I
brought on the Mitsrites, for I am HWHY who heals
you.”
27 And they came to Ĕlim, where there were twelve
fountains of water and seventy palm trees. And they
camped there by the waters.
18

181

EXODUS

16 And they departed from Ĕlim, and all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl came to the
Wilderness of Sin, which is between Ĕlim and Sinai, on
the fifteenth day of the second month after their going
out of the land of Mitsrayim.
2 And all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
grumbled against Mosheh and Aharon in the
wilderness.
3 And the children of Yisra’ĕl said to them, “If only
we had died by the hand of HWHY in the land of
Mitsrayim, when we sat by the pots of meat and when
we ate bread to satisfaction! For you have brought us
out into this wilderness to put all this assembly to
death with hunger.”
4 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “See, I am raining
bread from the shamayim for you. And the people
shall go out and gather a day’s portion every day, in
order to try them, whether they walk in My Torah or
not.
5 “And it shall be on the sixth day that they shall
prepare what they bring in, and it shall be twice as
much as they gather daily.”
6 And Mosheh and Aharon said to all the children of
Yisra’ĕl, “At evening you shall know that HWHY has
brought you out of the land of Mitsrayim.
7 “And in the morning you shall see the esteem of
HWHY, for He hears your grumblings against HWHY.
And what are we, that you grumble against us?”
8 And Mosheh said, “In that HWHY gives you meat to
eat in the evening, and in the morning bread to
satisfaction, for HWHY hears your grumblings which
you make against Him. And what are we? Your
grumblings are not against us but against HWHY.”
182

SHEMOTH

And Mosheh said to Aharon, “Say to all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Come near
before HWHY, for He has heard your grumblings.’ ”
10 And it came to be, as Aharon spoke to all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl, that they
looked toward the wilderness and see, the esteem of
HWHY appeared in the cloud.
11 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
12 “I have heard the grumblings of the children of
Yisra’ĕl. Speak to them, saying, ‘Between the
evenings you are to eat meat, and in the morning you
are to be satisfied with bread. And you shall know that
I am HWHY your Elohim.’ ”
13 And it came to be that quails came up at evening
and covered the camp, and in the morning the dew
lay all around the camp.
14 And the layer of dew went up, and see, on the
surface of the wilderness, was a small round
substance, as fine as frost on the ground.
15 And the children of Yisra’ĕl saw, and they said to
each other, “What is it?” For they did not know what it
was. And Mosheh said to them, “It is the bread which
HWHY has given you to eat.
16 “This is the word which HWHY has commanded:
‘Let every man gather it according to each one’s
need, an omer for each being, according to the
number of beings. Let every man take for those who
are in his tent.’ ”
17 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did so and gathered,
some more, some less.
18 And they measured it by omers, and he who
gathered much did not have too much, and he who
gathered little did not have too little. Each one
gathered according to his need.
9

183

EXODUS

And Mosheh said, “Let no one leave any of it until
morning.”
20 And they did not listen to Mosheh, so some of
them left part of it until morning, and it bred worms
and stank. And Mosheh was wroth with them.
21 And they gathered it every morning, each one
according to his need. And when the sun became hot,
it melted.
22 And it came to be, on the sixth day, that they
gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each
one. And all the rulers of the congregation came and
told Mosheh.
23 And he said to them, “This is what HWHY has said,
‘Tomorrow is a rest, a Shabbath qodesh to HWHY.
That which you bake, bake; and that which you cook,
cook. And lay up for yourselves all that is left over, to
keep it until morning.’ ”
24 And they laid it up till morning, as Mosheh
commanded. And it did not stink, and no worm was in
it.
25 And Mosheh said, “Eat it today, for today is a
Shabbath to HWHY, today you do not find it in the field.
26 “Gather it six days, but on the seventh day, which
is the Shabbath, there is none.”
27 And it came to be that some of the people went
out on the seventh day to gather, but they found none.
28 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “How long shall you
refuse to guard My Commands and My Torot?
29 “See, because HWHY has given you the Shabbath,
therefore He is giving you bread for two days on the
sixth day. Let each one stay in his place, do not let
anyone go out of his place on the seventh day.”
30 So the people rested on the seventh day.
19

184

SHEMOTH

And the house of Yisra’ĕl called its name Manna.
And it was like white coriander seed, and the taste of
it was like thin cakes made with honey.
32 And Mosheh said, “This is the word which HWHY
has commanded: ‘Fill an omer with it, to keep for your
generations, so that they see the bread with which I
fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim.’ ”
33 And Mosheh said to Aharon, “Take a pot and put
an omer of manna in it, and put it down before HWHY,
to keep for your generations.”
34 As HWHY commanded Mosheh, so Aharon put it
down before the Witness, to keep.
35 And the children of Yisra’ĕl ate manna forty years,
until they came to an inhabited land. They ate manna
until they came to the border of the land of Kena’an.
36 And an omer is one-tenth of an ĕphah.
31

17 And all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
departed on their journey from the Wilderness of Sin,
according to the command of HWHY, and camped in
Rephiḏim. And there was no water for the people to
drink.
2 Therefore the people strove with Mosheh, and
said, “Give us water to drink.” And Mosheh said to
them, “Why do you strive with me? Why do you try
HWHY?”
3 And the people thirsted there for water, and the
people grumbled against Mosheh, and said, “Why did
you bring us out of Mitsrayim, to kill us and our
children and our livestock with thirst?”
4 Then Mosheh cried out to HWHY, saying, “What am
I to do with this people? Yet a little and they shall
stone me!”
185

EXODUS

And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Pass over before the
people, and take with you some of the elders of
Yisra’ĕl. And take in your hand your rod with which
you struck the river, and go.
6 “See, I am standing before you there on the rock
in Ḥorĕḇ. And you shall smite the rock, and water
shall come out of it, and the people shall drink.” And
Mosheh did so before the eyes of the elders of
Yisra’ĕl.
7 And he called the name of the place Massah and
Meriḇah, because of the ‘strife’ of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and because they ‘tried’ HWHY, saying, “Is
HWHY in our midst or not?”
8 And Amalĕq came and fought with Yisra’ĕl in
Rephiḏim.
9 And Mosheh said to Yahoshua, “Choose for us
men and go out, fight with Amalĕq. Tomorrow I am
stationing myself on the top of the hill with the rod of
Elohim in my hand.”
10 And Yahoshua did as Mosheh said to him, to fight
with Amalĕq. And Mosheh, Aharon, and Ḥur went up
to the top of the hill.
11 And it came to be, when Mosheh held up his hand,
that Yisra’ĕl prevailed. And when he let down his
hand, Amalĕq prevailed.
12 But Mosheh’s hands were heavy, so they took a
stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. And
Aharon and Ḥur supported his hands, one on one
side, and the other on the other side. And his hands
were steady until the going down of the sun.
13 And Yahoshua defeated Amalĕq and his people
with the edge of the sword.
14 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Write this for a
remembrance in the book and recite it in the hearing
5

186

SHEMOTH

of Yahoshua, that I shall completely blot out the
remembrance of Amalĕq from under the shamayim.”
15 And Mosheh built an altar and called its name,
HWHY Nissi,
16 for he said, “Because a hand is on the throne of
Yah, HWHY is to fight against Amalĕq, from generation
to generation.”

18 And Yithro, the kohĕn of Miḏyan, Mosheh’s
father-in-law, heard of all that Elohim had done for
Mosheh and for Yisra’ĕl His people, that HWHY had
brought Yisra’ĕl out of Mitsrayim.
2 And
Yithro, Mosheh’s father-in-law, took
Tsipporah, the wife of Mosheh - after he had sent her
back,
3 and her two sons, of whom the name of one was
Gĕreshom, for he said, “I have been a sojourner in a
foreign land,”
4 and the name of the other was Eli’ezer, for he said,
“The Elohim of my father was my help, and delivered
me from the sword of Pharaoh.”
5 Yithro, Mosheh’s father-in-law, came with his sons
and his wife to Mosheh in the wilderness, where he
was encamped at the mountain of Elohim.
6 And he had said to Mosheh, “I, your father-in-law
Yithro, am coming to you with your wife and her two
sons with her.”
7 And Mosheh went out to meet his father-in-law,
and bowed down, and kissed him. And they asked
each other about their welfare, and they went into the
tent.
8 And Mosheh told his father-in-law all that HWHY
had done to Pharaoh and to the Mitsrites for Yisra’ĕl’s
sake, all the hardship that had come upon them on
the way, and how HWHY had delivered them.
187

EXODUS

And Yithro rejoiced for all the good which HWHY
had done for Yisra’ĕl, whom He had delivered out of
the hand of the Mitsrites.
10 And Yithro said, “Baruḵ be HWHY, who has
delivered you out of the hand of the Mitsrites and out
of the hand of Pharaoh, and who has delivered the
people from under the hand of the Mitsrites.
11 “Now I know that HWHY is greater than all the
mighty ones, for in the matter in which they acted
proudly, above them.”
12 Then Yithro, the father-in-law of Mosheh, brought
a burnt offering and other slaughterings unto Elohim.
And Aharon came with all the elders of Yisra’ĕl to eat
bread with the father-in-law of Mosheh before Elohim.
13 And it came to be, on the next day, that Mosheh
sat to rightly rule the people. And the people stood
before Mosheh from morning until evening.
14 And when the father-in-law of Mosheh saw all that
he did for the people, he said, “What is this that you
are doing for the people? Why do you sit by yourself,
and all the people stand before you from morning until
evening?”
15 And Mosheh said to his father-in-law, “Because
the people come to me to seek Elohim.
16 “When they have a matter, they come to me, and
I rightly rule between one and another, and make
known the Laws of Elohim and His Torot.”
17 And the father-in-law of Mosheh said to him, “What
you are doing is not good.
18 “Both you and these people with you shall certainly
wear yourselves out. For the matter is too heavy for
you. You are not able to do it by yourself.
19 “Now listen to my voice. Let me counsel you and
Elohim be with you: Stand before Elohim for the
people, and you shall bring the matters to Elohim.
9

188

SHEMOTH

“And you shall warn them of the Laws and the
Torot, and show them the way in which they should
walk and the work which they do.
21 “But you yourself, seek out from all the people able
men, who revere Elohim, men of truth, hating unfair
gain. And place them over them to be rulers of
thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and
rulers of tens.
22 “And they shall rightly rule the people at all times.
And it shall be that they bring every great matter to
you, but they themselves rightly rule every small
matter. So, make it lighter for yourself, for they shall
bear with you.
23 “If you do this word, and Elohim shall command
you, then you shall be able to stand and all this people
also go to their place in peace.”
24 And Mosheh listened to the voice of his father-inlaw and did all that he said.
25 And Mosheh chose able men out of all Yisra’ĕl,
and made them heads over the people: rulers of
thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and
rulers of tens.
26 And they rightly ruled the people at all times - the
hard matters they brought to Mosheh, but they rightly
ruled every small matter themselves.
27 And Mosheh sent off his father-in-law, and he went
away to his own land.
20

19 In the third month after the children of Yisra’ĕl
had come out of the land of Mitsrayim, on this day they
came to the Wilderness of Sinai.
2 For they departed from Rephiḏim, and had come
to the Wilderness of Sinai, and camped in the
wilderness. So Yisra’ĕl camped there before the
mountain.
189

EXODUS

And Mosheh went up to Elohim, and HWHY called
to him from the mountain, saying, “This is what you
are to say to the house of Ya’aqoḇ, and declare to the
children of Yisra’ĕl:
4 ‘You have seen what I did to the Mitsrites, and how
I bore you on eagles’ wings and brought you to
Myself.
5 ‘And now, if you diligently obey My voice, and shall
guard My Covenant, then you shall be My treasured
possession above all the peoples - for all the earth is
Mine 6 ‘and you shall be to Me a reign of kohenim and a
qodesh nation.’ Those are the words which you are to
speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
7 And Mosheh came and called for the elders of the
people, and put before them all these words which
HWHY commanded him.
8 And all the people answered together and said,
“All that HWHY has spoken we shall do.” So Mosheh
brought back the words of the people to HWHY.
9 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “See, I am coming to
you in the thick cloud, so that the people hear when I
speak with you, and believe you forever.” And
Mosheh reported the words of the people to HWHY.
10 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go to the people and
qadosh them today and tomorrow. And they shall
wash their garments,
11 and shall be prepared by the third day. For on the
third day HWHY shall come down upon Mount Sinai
before the eyes of all the people.
12 “And you shall make a border for the people all
around, saying, ‘Take heed to yourselves that you do
not go up to the mountain or touch the border of it.
Whoever touches the mountain shall certainly be put
to death.
3

190

SHEMOTH

‘Not a hand is to touch it, but he shall certainly be
stoned or shot with an arrow, whether man or beast,
he shall not live.’ When the trumpet sounds long, let
them go up to the mountain.”
14 And Mosheh came down from the mountain to the
people and qadosh the people, and they washed their
garments.
15 And he said to the people, “Be prepared by the
third day. Do not come near a wife.”
16 And it came to be, on the third day in the morning,
that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick
cloud on the mountain. And the sound of the ram’s
horn was very loud, and all the people who were in
the camp trembled.
17 And Mosheh brought the people out of the camp
to meet with Elohim, and they stood at the foot of the
mountain.
18 And Mount Sinai was in smoke, all of it, because
HWHY descended upon it in fire. And its smoke went
up like the smoke of a furnace, and all the mountain
trembled exceedingly.
19 And when the blast of the ram’s horn sounded long
and became very strong, Mosheh spoke, and Elohim
answered him by voice.
20 And HWHY came down upon Mount Sinai, on the
top of the mountain. And HWHY called Mosheh to the
top of the mountain, and Mosheh went up.
21 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go down, warn the
people, lest they break through unto HWHY to see, and
many of them fall.
22 “And let the kohenim who come near HWHY
qadosh themselves too, lest HWHY break out against
them.”
23 And Mosheh said to HWHY, “The people are not
able to come up to Mount Sinai, for You warned us,
13

191

EXODUS

saying, ‘Make a border around the mountain and
qadosh it.’ ”
24 And HWHY said to him, “Come, go down and then
come up, you and Aharon with you. But do not let the
kohenim and the people break through to come up to
HWHY, lest He break out against them.”
25 And Mosheh went down to the people and spoke
to them.

20 And Elohim spoke all these Words, saying,
“I am HWHY your Elohim, who brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim, out of the house of slavery.
3 “You have no other mighty ones against My face.
4 “You do not make for yourself a carved image, or
any likeness of that which is in the shamayim above,
or which is in the earth beneath, or which is in the
waters under the earth,
5 you do not bow down to them nor serve them. For
I, HWHY your Elohim, am a jealous Ĕl, visiting the
wickedness of the fathers on the children to the third
and fourth generations of those who hate Me,
6 but showing kindness to thousands, to those who
love Me and guard My Commands.
7 “You do not bring the Name of HWHY your Elohim
to naught, for HWHY does not leave the one
unpunished who brings His Name to naught.
8 “Remember the Shabbath day, to qadosh it.
9 “Six days you labour, and shall do all your work,
10 but the seventh day is a Shabbath of HWHY your
Elohim. You do not do any work - you, nor your son,
nor your daughter, nor your male servant, nor your
female servant, nor your cattle, nor your stranger who
is within your gates.
11 “For in six days HWHY made the shamayim and the
earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the
2

192

SHEMOTH

seventh day. Therefore HWHY baraḵ the Shabbath
day and qadosh it.
12 “Respect your father and your mother, so that your
days are prolonged upon the land which HWHY your
Elohim is giving you.
13 “You do not murder.
14 “You do not commit adultery.
15 “You do not steal.
16 “You do not bear false witness against your
neighbour.
17 “You do not covet your neighbour’s house, you do
not covet your neighbour’s wife, nor his male servant,
nor his female servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, or
whatever belongs to your neighbour.”
18 And all the people saw the thunders, the lightning
flashes, the sound of the ram’s horn, and the
mountain smoking. And the people saw it, and they
trembled and stood at a distance,
19 and said to Mosheh, “You speak with us and we
hear, but let not Elohim speak with us, lest we die.”
20 And Mosheh said to the people, “Do not fear, for
Elohim has come to prove you, and in order that His
reverence be before you, so that you do not sin.”
21 So the people stood at a distance, but Mosheh
drew near the dense cloud where Elohim was.
22 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Say this to the children
of Yisra’ĕl: ‘You yourselves have seen that I have
spoken to you from the shamayim.
23 ‘You do not make besides Me mighty ones of
silver, and you do not make mighty ones of gold for
yourselves.
24 ‘Make an altar of earth for Me, and you shall
slaughter on it your burnt offerings and your peace
offerings, your sheep and your cattle. In every place
193

EXODUS

where I cause My Name to be remembered I shall
come to you and baraḵ you.
25 ‘And if you make Me an altar of stone, do not build
it of cut stone, for if you use your chisel on it, you have
profaned it.
26 ‘Nor do you go up by steps to My altar, lest your
nakedness be exposed on it.’

21 “And these are the Right-Rulings which you are
to put before them:
2 “When you buy an Iḇri servant, he serves six
years, and in the seventh he goes out free, for naught.
3 “If he comes in by himself, he goes out by himself;
if he comes in married, then his wife shall go out with
him.
4 “If his master has given him a wife, and she has
borne him sons or daughters, the wife and her
children are her master’s, and he goes out by himself.
5 “And if the servant truly says, ‘I love my master,
my wife, and my children, let me not go out free,’
6 then his master shall bring him before Elohim, and
shall bring him to the door, or to the doorpost, and his
master shall pierce his ear with an awl. And he shall
serve him forever.
7 “And when a man sells his daughter to be a female
servant, she does not go out as the male servants do.
8 “If she is displeasing in the eyes of her master who
has engaged her to himself, then he shall let her be
ransomed. He shall have no authority to sell her to a
foreign people, because of him deceiving her.
9 “And if he has engaged her to his son, he is to do
to her as is the right of daughters.
10 “If he takes another, her food, her covering, and
her marriage rights are not to be diminished.
194

SHEMOTH

“And if he does not do these three for her, then she
shall go out for naught, without silver.
12 “He who strikes a man so that he dies shall
certainly be put to death.
13 “But if he did not lie in wait, but Elohim delivered
him into his hand, then I shall appoint for you a place
where he is to flee.
14 “But when a man acts presumptuously against his
neighbour, to kill him by treachery, you are to take him
even from My altar to die.
15 “And he who smites his father or his mother shall
certainly be put to death.
16 “And he who kidnaps a man and sells him, or if he
is found in his hand, shall certainly be put to death.
17 “And he who curses his father or his mother shall
certainly be put to death.
18 “And when men strive together, and one smites
the other with a stone or with his fist, and he does not
die but is confined to his bed,
19 if he rises again and walks about outside with his
staff, then he who smote him shall be innocent. He
only pays for lost time and sees to it that he is
completely healed.
20 “And when a man smites his male or female
servant with a rod, so that he dies under his hand, he
shall certainly be avenged.
21 “But if he remains alive a day or two, he is not
avenged; for he is his property.
22 “And when men strive and they shall smite a
pregnant woman, and her children come out, yet
there is no injury, he shall certainly be punished
accordingly as the woman’s husband lays upon him.
And he shall pay by the judges.
23 “But if there is injury, then you shall give life for life,
11

195

EXODUS

eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot,
25 burn for burn, wound for wound, lash for lash.
26 “And when a man smites the eye of his male or
female servant, and destroys it, he is to let him go free
for the sake of his eye.
27 “And if he knocks out the tooth of his male or
female servant, he is to let him go free for the sake of
his tooth.
28 “And when an ox gores a man or a woman to
death, then the ox shall certainly be stoned, and its
flesh is not eaten, and the owner of the ox is innocent.
29 “However, if the ox was previously in the habit of
goring, and its owner has been warned, and he has
not kept it confined, so that it has killed a man or a
woman, the ox is stoned and its owner also is put to
death.
30 “If a sin-covering is laid upon him, then he shall
give the ransom of his life, whatever is laid on him.
31 “Whether it has gored a son or gored a daughter,
according to this Right-Ruling it is done to him.
32 “If the ox gores a male or female servant, he is to
give to their master thirty sheqels of silver, and the ox
is stoned.
33 “And when a man opens a pit, or if a man digs a
pit and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls
in it,
34 the owner of the pit is to repay, he is to give silver
to their owner, and the dead is his.
35 “And when the ox of a man smites the ox of his
neighbour and it dies, then they shall sell the live ox
and divide the silver from it, and also divide the dead
ox.
36 “Or if it was known that the ox was previously in
the habit of goring, and its owner has not kept it
24

196

SHEMOTH

confined, he shall certainly repay ox for ox, while the
dead is his.

22 “When a man steals an ox or a sheep, and shall
slaughter it or sell it, he repays five cattle for an ox and
four sheep for a sheep.
2 “If the thief is found breaking in, and he is smitten
so that he dies, there is no guilt for his bloodshed.
3 “If the sun has risen on him, there is guilt for his
bloodshed, he shall certainly repay. If he has not the
means, then he shall be sold for his theft.
4 “If the theft is indeed found alive in his hand,
whether it is an ox or donkey or sheep, he repays
double.
5 “When a man lets a field or vineyard be consumed,
and lets loose his livestock, and it feeds in another
man’s field, he repays from the best of his own field
and the best of his own vineyard.
6 “When fire breaks out and spreads to thorn
bushes, so that stacked grain, or standing grain, or
the field is consumed, he who kindled the fire shall
certainly repay.
7 “When a man gives silver or goods to his
neighbour to guard, and it is stolen out of the man’s
house, if the thief is found, he repays double.
8 “If the thief is not found, then the master of the
house shall be brought before Elohim to see whether
he has put his hand into his neighbour’s goods.
9 “For every matter of transgression, for ox, for
donkey, for sheep, for garment, or for whatever is lost
which another claims to be his, let the matter of them
both come before Elohim. And whomever Elohim
declares wrong repays double to his neighbour.

197

EXODUS

“When a man gives to his neighbour a donkey, or
ox, or sheep, or any beast to watch over, and it dies,
or is injured, or is driven away while no one is looking,
11 let an oath of HWHY be between them both, that he
has not put his hand into his neighbour’s goods. And
the owner of it shall accept that, and he does not
repay.
12 “But if it is indeed stolen from him, he repays to its
owner.
13 “If it is torn to pieces, then let him bring it for
evidence, he does not repay what was torn.
14 “And when a man borrows from his neighbour, and
it is injured or dies while the owner of it is not present,
he shall certainly repay.
15 “But if its owner was with it, he does not repay. If it
was hired, he is entitled to the hire.
16 “And when a man entices a maiden who is not
engaged, and lies with her, he shall certainly pay the
bride-price for her to be his wife.
17 “If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him,
he pays according to the bride-price of maidens.
18 “Do not allow a practiser of witchcraft to live.
19 “Anyone lying with a beast shall certainly be put to
death.
20 “He who slaughters to a mighty one, except to
HWHY only, is put under the ban.
21 “Do not tread down a sojourner or oppress him, for
you were sojourners in the land of Mitsrayim.
22 “Do not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
23 “If you do afflict them at all - if they cry out to Me
at all, I shall certainly hear their cry,
24 and My wrath shall burn and I shall slay you with
the sword, your wives shall be widows and your
children fatherless.
10

198

SHEMOTH

“If you do lend silver to any of My people, the poor
among you, you are not to be like one that lends on
interest to him. Do not lay interest on him.
26 “If you take your neighbour’s garment as a pledge
at all, you are to return it to him before the sun goes
down.
27 “For that is his only covering, it is his garment for
his skin. What does he sleep in? And it shall be that
when he cries to Me, I shall hear, for I show favour.
28 “Do not revile Elohim, nor curse a ruler of your
people.
29 “Do not withhold your produce and your juice. Give
Me the first-born of your sons.
30 “Likewise you are to do with your oxen, with your
sheep. It is to be with its mother seven days. On the
eighth day you give it to Me.
31 “And you are qodesh men to Me, and you do not
eat any meat which is torn to pieces in the field, you
throw it to the dogs.
25

23 “Do not bring a false report. Do not put your
hand with the wicked to be a malicious witness.
2 “Do not follow a crowd to do evil, nor bear witness
in a strife so as to turn aside after many, to pervert.
3 “And do not favour a poor man in his strife.
4 “When you meet your enemy’s ox or his donkey
going astray, you shall certainly return it to him.
5 “When you see the donkey of him who hates you,
lying under its burden, you shall refrain from leaving
it to him, you shall certainly help him.
6 “Do not turn aside the right-ruling of your poor in
his strife.
7 “Keep yourself far from a false matter, and do not
kill the innocent and the righteous, for I do not declare
the wicked right.
199

EXODUS

“And do not take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the
seeing one and twists the words of the righteous.
9 “And do not oppress a sojourner, as you
yourselves know the life of a sojourner, because you
were sojourners in the land of Mitsrayim.
10 “And for six years you are to sow your land, and
shall gather its increase,
11 but the seventh year you are to let it rest, and shall
leave it, and the poor of your people shall eat. And
what they leave, the beasts of the field eat. Do the
same with your vineyard and your oliveyard.
12 “Six days you are to do your work, and on the
seventh day you rest, in order that your ox and your
donkey might rest, and the son of your female servant
and the sojourner be refreshed.
13 “And in all that I have said to you take heed. And
make no mention of the name of other mighty ones,
let it not be heard from your mouth.
14 “Three times in the year you are to celebrate a
Festival to Me:
15 “Guard the Festival of Matstsoth. Seven days you
eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the
time appointed in the month of Aḇiḇ - for in it you
came out of Mitsrayim - and do not appear before Me
empty-handed;
16 and the Festival of the Harvest, the first-fruits of
your labours which you have sown in the field; and
the Festival of the Ingathering at the outgoing of the
year, when you have gathered in the fruit of your
labours from the field.
17 “Three times in the year all your males are to
appear before the Aḏon HWHY.
18 “Do not offer the blood of My slaughtering with
leavened bread, and the fat of My Festival shall not
remain until morning.
8

200

SHEMOTH

“Bring the first of the first-fruits of your land into the
House of HWHY your Elohim. Do not cook a young
goat in its mother’s milk.
20 “See, I am sending a Messenger before you to
guard you in the way and to bring you into the place
which I have prepared.
21 “Be on guard before Him and obey His voice. Do
not rebel against Him, for He is not going to pardon
your transgression, for My Name is in Him.
22 “But if you diligently obey His voice and shall do all
that I speak, then I shall be an enemy to your enemies
and a distresser to those who distress you.
23 “For My Messenger shall go before you and shall
bring you in to the Amorites and the Ḥittites and the
Perizzites and the Kena’anites and the Ḥiwwites and
the Yeḇusites, and I shall cut them off.
24 “Do not bow down to their mighty ones, nor serve
them, nor do according to their works, but without fail
overthrow them and without fail break down their
pillars.
25 “And you shall serve HWHY your Elohim, and He
shall baraḵ your bread and your water. And I shall
remove sickness from your midst.
26 “None shall miscarry or be barren in your land. I
shall fill the number of your days.
27 “I shall send My fear before you, and cause
confusion among all the people to whom you come,
and make all your enemies turn their backs to you.
28 “And I shall send hornets before you, which shall
drive out the Ḥiwwite, the Kena’anite, and the Ḥittite
from before you.
29 “I shall not drive them out from before you in one
year, lest the land become a waste and the beast of
the field become too numerous for you.
19

201

EXODUS

“Little by little I shall drive them out from before
you, until you have increased, and you inherit the
land.
31 “And I shall appoint your border from the Sea of
Reeds to the Sea of the Pelishtites, and from the
wilderness to the River, for I shall give the inhabitants
of the land into your hand, and you shall drive them
out before you.
32 “Do not make a covenant with them nor with their
mighty ones.
33 “Let them not dwell in your land, lest they make
you sin against Me when you serve their mighty ones,
when it becomes a snare to you.”
30

24 And to Mosheh He said, “Come up to HWHY, you
and Aharon, Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu, and seventy of the
elders of Yisra’ĕl, and you shall bow yourselves from a
distance.
2 “But Mosheh shall draw near to HWHY by himself,
and let them not draw near, nor let the people go up
with him.”
3 And Mosheh came and related to the people all
the Words of HWHY and all the Right-Rulings. And all
the people answered with one voice and said, “All the
Words which HWHY has spoken we shall do.”
4 And Mosheh wrote down all the Words of HWHY,
and rose up early in the morning, and built an altar at
the foot of the mountain, and twelve standing columns
for the twelve tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
5 And he sent young men of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and they offered burnt offerings and slaughtered
peace slaughterings of bulls to HWHY.
6 And Mosheh took half the blood and put it in
basins, and half the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
202

SHEMOTH

And he took the Book of the Covenant and read in
the hearing of the people. And they said, “All that
HWHY has spoken we shall do, and obey.”
8 And Mosheh took the blood and sprinkled it on the
people, and said, “See, the blood of the Covenant
which HWHY has made with you concerning all these
Words.”
9 And Mosheh went up, also Aharon, Naḏaḇ, and
Aḇihu, and seventy of the elders of Yisra’ĕl,
10 and they saw the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and under His
feet like a paved work of sapphire stone, and like the
shamayim for brightness.
11 Yet He did not stretch out His hand against the
chiefs of the children of Yisra’ĕl! And they saw
Elohim, and they ate and drank.
12 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Come up to Me on the
mountain and be there, while I give you tablets of
stone, and the Torah and the Command which I have
written, to teach them.”
13 And Mosheh arose with his assistant Yahoshua,
and Mosheh went up to the mountain of Elohim.
14 And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until
we come back to you. And see, Aharon and Ḥur are
with you. Whoever has matters, let him go to them.”
15 And Mosheh went up into the mountain, and a
cloud covered the mountain.
16 And the esteem of HWHY dwelt on Mount Sinai,
and the cloud covered it for six days. And on the
seventh day He called to Mosheh out of the midst of
the cloud.
17 And the appearance of the esteem of HWHY was
like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain,
before the eyes of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
18 And Mosheh went into the midst of the cloud and
went up into the mountain. And it came to be that
7

203

EXODUS

Mosheh was on the mountain forty days and forty
nights.

25 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, that they take up
a contribution for Me. From everyone whose heart
moves him you shall take up My contribution.
3 “And this is the contribution which you take up
from them: gold, and silver, and bronze,
4 and blue and purple and scarlet, and fine linen,
and goats’ hair,
5 and rams’ skins dyed red, and fine leather, and
acacia wood,
6 oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for
the sweet incense,
7 shoham stones, and stones to be put in the
shoulder garment and in the breastplate.
8 “And they shall make Me a Miqdash, and I shall
dwell in their midst.
9 “According to all that I show you - the pattern of
the Mishkan and the pattern of all its furnishings make it exactly so.
10 “And they shall make an ark of acacia wood two
and a half ammah long, an ammah and a half wide,
and an ammah and a half high.
11 “And you shall overlay it with clean gold, inside
and outside you shall overlay it. And you shall make
on it a moulding of gold all around.
12 “And you shall cast four rings of gold for it, and put
them in its four corners, two rings on one side, and
two rings on the other side.
13 “And you shall make poles of acacia wood, and
overlay them with gold,
14 and shall put the poles into the rings on the sides
of the ark, to lift up the ark by them.
2

204

SHEMOTH

“The poles are in the rings of the ark, they are not
taken from it.
16 “And into the ark you shall put the Witness which I
give you.
17 “And you shall make a lid of atonement of clean
gold, two and a half ammah long and an ammah and
a half wide.
18 “And you shall make two keruḇim of gold, make
them of beaten work, at the two ends of the lid of
atonement.
19 “And make one keruḇ at one end, and the other
keruḇ at the other end. Make the keruḇim from the lid
of atonement, at its two ends.
20 “And the keruḇim shall be spreading out their
wings above, covering the lid of atonement with their
wings, with their faces toward each other, the faces
of the keruḇim toward the lid of atonement.
21 “And you shall put the lid of atonement on top of
the ark, and put into the ark the Witness which I give
you.
22 “And I shall meet with you there, and from above
the lid of atonement, from between the two keruḇim
which are on the ark of the Witness, I shall speak to
you all that which I command you concerning the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
23 “And you shall make a table of acacia wood two
ammah long, an ammah wide, and an ammah and a
half high.
24 “And you shall overlay it with clean gold, and shall
make a moulding of gold all around,
25 and shall make for it a rim of a tophaḥ all around,
and shall make a gold moulding for the rim all around.
26 “And you shall make for it four rings of gold, and
put the rings on the four corners that are at its four
legs.
15

205

EXODUS

“The rings are close to the rim, as holders for the
poles to lift the table.
28 “And you shall make the poles of acacia wood, and
overlay them with gold, and the table shall be lifted
with them.
29 “And you shall make its dishes, and its ladles, and
its jars, and its bowls for pouring. Make them of clean
gold.
30 “And you shall put the showbread on the table
before Me, continually.
31 “And you shall make a lampstand of clean gold the lampstand is made of beaten work. Its base and
its shaft, its cups, its ornamental knobs and blossoms
are from it,
32 and six branches shall come out of its sides: three
branches of the lampstand out of one side, and three
branches of the lampstand out of the other side;
33 three cups made like almond flowers on one
branch, with ornamental knob and blossom, and three
cups made like almond flowers on the other branch,
with ornamental knob and blossom - so for the six
branches coming out of the lampstand.
34 “And on the lampstand itself are four cups made
like almond flowers, with ornamental knob and
blossom,
35 and a knob under the first two branches of the
same, and a knob under the second two branches of
the same, and a knob under the third two branches of
the same, according to the six branches coming out
of the lampstand.
36 “Their knobs and their branches are of the same all of it one beaten work of clean gold.
37 “And you shall make seven lamps for it, and they
shall mount its lamps so that they give light in front of
it.
27

206

SHEMOTH

“And its snuffers and their trays are of clean gold.
39 “It is made of a kiḵar of clean gold, with all these
utensils.
40 “So see, and do according to the pattern which
was shown to you on the mountain.
38

26 “And make the Mishkan with ten curtains of fine
woven linen and blue and purple and scarlet. Make
them, with keruḇim, the work of a skilled workman.
2 “The length of each curtain is twenty-eight
ammah, and the width of each curtain four ammah,
all the curtains having one measure.
3 “Five curtains are joined to each other, and five
curtains are joined to each other.
4 “And you shall make loops of blue on the edge of
the end on one curtain, and do the same on the edge
of the end of the second curtain.
5 “Make fifty loops in the one curtain and make fifty
loops on the edge of the seam of the second curtain,
the loops being opposite to each other.
6 “And you shall make fifty hooks of gold, and shall
join the curtains together with the hooks, and the
Mishkan shall be one.
7 “And you shall make curtains of goats’ hair, for a
Tent over the Mishkan, make eleven curtains.
8 “The length of each curtain is thirty ammah, and
the width of each curtain four ammah, one measure
to the eleven curtains.
9 “And you shall join the five curtains by themselves,
and the six curtains by themselves, and you shall
double over the six curtains at the front of the Tent.
10 “And you shall make fifty loops on the edge of the
curtain that is outermost, and fifty loops on the edge
of the second curtain.
207

EXODUS

“And you shall make fifty bronze hooks, and put
the hooks into the loops, and join the Tent together,
and it shall be one.
12 “And the overlapping part of the rest of the curtains
of the Tent, the half curtain that remains, shall hang
over the back of the Mishkan.
13 “And an ammah on one side and an ammah on
the other side, of what remains of the length of the
curtains of the Tent, is to hang over the sides of the
Mishkan, on this side and on that side, to cover it.
14 “And you shall make a covering of ram skins dyed
red for the Tent, and a covering of fine leather above
that.
15 “And for the Mishkan you shall make the boards of
acacia wood, standing up.
16 “Ten ammah is the length of a board, and an
ammah and a half the width of each board,
17 two tenons in each board for binding one to
another. Do the same for all the boards of the
Mishkan.
18 “And you shall make the boards for the Mishkan,
twenty boards for the south side.
19 “And make forty sockets of silver under the twenty
boards, two sockets under each of the boards for its
two tenons.
20 “And for the second side of the Mishkan, on the
north side, twenty boards,
21 and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under
each of the boards.
22 “And for the rear parts of the Mishkan, westward,
make six boards,
23 and make two boards for the corners of the
Mishkan in the rear.
11

208

SHEMOTH

“And they are double beneath and similarly they
are complete to the top, to the one ring. So it is for
both of them, they are for the two corners.
25 “And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets
of silver, sixteen sockets - two sockets under the one
board, and two sockets under the other board.
26 “And you shall make bars of acacia wood, five for
the boards on one side of the Mishkan,
27 and five bars for the boards on the other side of
the Mishkan, and five bars for the boards of the side
of the Mishkan, for the rear parts westward,
28 with the middle bar in the midst of the boards,
going through from end to end.
29 “And overlay the boards with gold, and make their
rings of gold as holders for the bars, and overlay the
bars with gold.
30 “And you shall raise up the Mishkan according to
its pattern which you were shown on the mountain.
31 “And you shall make a veil of blue and purple and
scarlet, and fine woven linen, the work of a skilled
workman, made with keruḇim.
32 “And you shall put it on the four columns of acacia
wood overlaid with gold, their hooks of gold, upon four
sockets of silver.
33 “And you shall hang the veil from the hooks, and
shall bring the ark of the Witness there, behind the
veil. And the veil shall make a separation for you
between the Qodesh and the Most Qodesh Place.
34 “And you shall put the lid of atonement upon the
ark of the Witness in the Most Qodesh Place.
35 “And you shall put the table outside the veil, and
the lampstand opposite the table on the side of the
Mishkan toward the south, and put the table on the
north side.
24

209

EXODUS

“And you shall make a covering for the door of the
Tent, of blue and purple and scarlet, and fine woven
linen, made by a weaver.
37 “And you shall make for the covering five columns
of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold, their
hooks of gold, and you shall cast five sockets of
bronze for them.
36

27 “And you shall make an altar of acacia wood, five
ammah long and five ammah wide - the altar is square
- and its height three ammah.
2 “And you shall make its horns on its four corners,
its horns are of the same. And you shall overlay it with
bronze.
3 “And you shall make its pots to receive its ashes,
and its shovels and its basins and its forks and its fire
holders. Make all its utensils of bronze.
4 “And you shall make a grating for it, a bronze
network, and shall make on the network four bronze
rings at its four corners,
5 and shall put it under the rim of the altar beneath,
so that the network is halfway up the altar.
6 “And you shall make poles for the altar, poles of
acacia wood, and shall overlay them with bronze.
7 “And the poles shall be put in the rings, and the
poles shall be on the two sides of the altar for lifting it.
8 “Make it hollow with boards. As it was shown to
you on the mountain, so they are to make it.
9 “And you shall make the courtyard of the Mishkan:
for the south side screens for the courtyard made of
fine woven linen, one hundred ammah long for one
side,
10 and its twenty columns and their twenty sockets of
bronze, the hooks of the columns and their bands of
silver,
210

SHEMOTH

and so for the north side in length, screens one
hundred long, with its twenty columns and their
twenty sockets of bronze, and the hooks of the
columns and their bands of silver.
12 “And the width of the courtyard on the west side
screens of fifty ammah, with their ten columns and
their ten sockets.
13 “And the width of the courtyard on the east side
fifty ammah.
14 “And the screens on one side of the gate fifteen
ammah, with their three columns and their three
sockets.
15 “And on the other side screens of fifteen, with their
three columns and their three sockets.
16 “And for the gate of the courtyard a covering
twenty ammah long, of blue and purple and scarlet,
and fine woven linen, made by a weaver - four
columns and four sockets.
17 “All the columns around the courtyard have bands
of silver, their hooks silver and their sockets bronze.
18 “The length of the courtyard is one hundred
ammah, and the width fifty by fifty, and the height five
ammah, woven of fine linen thread, and its sockets of
bronze.
19 “All the utensils of the Mishkan for all its service,
all its pegs, and all the pegs of the courtyard, are
bronze.
20 “And you, you are to command the children of
Yisra’ĕl to bring you clear oil of pressed olives for the
light, to cause the lamp to burn continually.
21 “In the Tent of Appointment, outside the veil which
is before the Witness, Aharon and his sons are to
tend it from evening until morning before HWHY - a
Law forever to their generations, from the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
11

211

EXODUS

28 “And you, bring near Aharon your brother and his
sons with him, from among the children of Yisra’ĕl, for
serving as kohĕn to Me: Aharon, Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu,
El’azar and Ithamar, the sons of Aharon.
2 “And you shall make qodesh garments for Aharon
your brother, for esteem and for comeliness.
3 “And you, speak to all the wise of heart, whom I
have filled with a spirit of wisdom, and they shall make
the garments of Aharon, to qadosh him, for him to
serve as kohĕn to Me.
4 “And these are the garments which they make: a
breastplate, a shoulder garment, a robe, an
embroidered long shirt, a turban, and a girdle. And
they shall make qodesh garments for Aharon your
brother and his sons, for him to serve as kohĕn to Me.
5 “And they shall take the gold, and the blue and the
purple and the scarlet, and the fine linen,
6 and shall make the shoulder garment of gold, of
blue and purple and scarlet, and fine woven linen, the
work of a skilled workman.
7 “It is to have two shoulder pieces joined at its two
edges, and so it is joined together.
8 “And the embroidered band of the shoulder
garment, which is on it, is of the same workmanship,
made of gold, of blue and purple and scarlet, and fine
woven linen.
9 “And you shall take two shoham stones and
engrave on them the names of the sons of Yisra’ĕl,
10 six of their names on one stone, and the remaining
six names on the other stone, according to their birth.
11 “With the work of an engraver in stone, like the
engravings of a signet, engrave the two stones with
the names of the sons of Yisra’ĕl. Put them in
mountings of gold.
212

SHEMOTH

“And you shall put the two stones on the shoulder
pieces of the shoulder garment as stones of
remembrance for the sons of Yisra’ĕl. And Aharon
shall bear their names before HWHY on his two
shoulders, for a remembrance.
13 “And you shall make mountings of gold,
14 and two chains of clean gold like braided cords,
and fasten the braided chains to the mountings.
15 “And you shall make a breastplate of right-ruling,
a work of a skilled workman, like the work of the
shoulder garment. Make it of gold, of blue and purple
and scarlet, and fine woven linen.
16 “It is square, doubled, a zereth its length, and a
zereth its width.
17 “And you shall put mountings of stones in it, four
rows of stones: The first row is a ruby, a topaz, and
an emerald;
18 and the second row is a turquoise, a sapphire, and
a diamond;
19 and the third row is a jacinth, an agate, and an
amethyst;
20 and the fourth row is a beryl, and a shoham, and
a jasper. They are put in gold mountings.
21 “And the stones are according to the names of the
sons of Yisra’ĕl, twelve according to their names, like
the engravings of a signet, each one with its own
name, for the twelve tribes.
22 “And you shall make braided chains of corded
work for the breastplate at the end, of clean gold.
23 “And you shall make two rings of gold for the
breastplate, and shall put the two rings on the two
ends of the breastplate.
24 “And you shall put the two cords of gold in the two
rings which are on the ends of the breastplate,
12

213

EXODUS

and the other two ends of the two cords you fasten
to the two mountings, and put them on the shoulder
pieces of the shoulder garment in the front.
26 “And you shall make two rings of gold, and shall
put them on the two ends of the breastplate, on the
edge of it, which is on the inner side of the shoulder
garment.
27 “And you shall make two rings of gold, and put
them on the two shoulder pieces, underneath the
shoulder garment, on the front of it, close to the seam
above the embroidered band of the shoulder
garment,
28 and they bind the breastplate by means of its rings
to the rings of the shoulder garment, using a blue
cord, so that it is above the embroidered band of the
shoulder garment, so that the breastplate does not
come loose from the shoulder garment.
29 “And Aharon shall bear the names of the sons of
Yisra’ĕl on the breastplate of right-ruling over his
heart, when he goes into the qodesh place, for a
remembrance before HWHY, continually.
30 “And into the breastplate of right-ruling you shall
put the Urim and the Tummim, and they shall be on
the heart of Aharon when he goes in before HWHY.
And Aharon shall bear the right-ruling of the children
of Yisra’ĕl on his heart before HWHY, continually.
31 “And you shall make the robe of the shoulder
garment all of blue.
32 “And the opening for his head shall be in the
middle of it, a woven binding all around its opening,
like the opening in scaled armour, so that it does not
tear.
33 “And on its hem you shall make pomegranates of
blue and purple and scarlet, all around its hem, and
bells of gold between them all around:
25

214

SHEMOTH

a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell
and a pomegranate, on the hem of the robe all
around.
35 “And it shall be upon Aharon to attend in, and its
sound shall be heard when he goes into the qodesh
place before HWHY and when he comes out, so that
he does not die.
36 “And you shall make a plate of clean gold and
engrave on it, like the engraving of a signet:
QODESHAH TO HWHY.
37 “And you shall put it on a blue cord, and it shall be
on the turban - it is to be on the front of the turban.
38 “And it shall be on the forehead of Aharon, and
Aharon shall bear the guilt of the qodesh gifts which
the children of Yisra’ĕl qadosh in all their qodesh gifts.
And it shall always be on his forehead, for acceptance
for them before HWHY.
39 “And you shall weave the long shirt of fine linen,
and shall make the turban of fine linen, and you shall
make the girdle of woven work.
40 “And make long shirts for Aharon’s sons. And you
shall make girdles for them, and you shall make
turbans for them, for esteem and comeliness.
41 “And you shall put them on Aharon your brother
and on his sons with him, and shall anoint them, and
shall ordain them, and shall qadosh them, and they
shall serve as kohenim to Me.
42 “And make linen trousers for them, to cover their
nakedness, reaching from the waist to the thighs.
43 “And they shall be on Aharon and on his sons
when they come into the Tent of Appointment, or
when they come near the altar to attend in the qodesh
place, so that they do not bear wickedness and die a Law forever to him, and to his seed after him.
34

215

EXODUS

29 “And this is the task you shall do to them to
qadosh them to serve Me as kohenim: Take one young
bull and two rams, perfect ones,
2 and unleavened bread, and unleavened cakes
mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with
oil - make these of wheat flour.
3 “And you shall put them in one basket and bring
them in the basket, along with the bull and the two
rams.
4 “Then you shall bring Aharon and his sons to the
door of the Tent of Appointment, and wash them with
water.
5 “And you shall take the garments, and shall put on
Aharon the long shirt, and the robe of the shoulder
garment, and the shoulder garment, and the
breastplate, and shall gird him with the embroidered
band of the shoulder garment,
6 and shall put the turban on his head, and shall put
the qodesh sign of dedication on the turban,
7 and shall take the anointing oil, and pour it on his
head and anoint him.
8 “Then you shall bring his sons and put long shirts
on them,
9 and shall gird them with girdles - Aharon and his
sons - and put the turbans on them. And the
kehunnah shall be theirs for an everlasting Law. So
you shall ordain Aharon and his sons.
10 “And you shall bring near the bull before the Tent
of Appointment, and Aharon and his sons shall lay
their hands on the head of the bull.
11 “And you shall slaughter the bull before HWHY, by
the door of the Tent of Appointment,

216

SHEMOTH

and take some of the blood of the bull and put it
on the horns of the altar with your finger, and pour all
the blood beside the base of the altar.
13 “And you shall take all the fat that covers the
entrails, and the appendage on the liver, and the two
kidneys and the fat that is on them, and burn them on
the altar.
14 “But the flesh of the bull, and its skin and its dung,
you shall burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin
offering.
15 “And take one ram, and Aharon and his sons shall
lay their hands on the head of the ram,
16 and you shall slaughter the ram, and you shall take
its blood and sprinkle it all around on the altar.
17 “And cut the ram in pieces, and wash its entrails
and its legs, and place them upon its pieces and on
its head.
18 “And you shall burn the entire ram on the altar. It
is a burnt offering to HWHY, it is a sweet fragrance, an
offering made by fire to HWHY.
19 “And you shall take the second ram, and Aharon
and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the
ram,
20 and you shall slaughter the ram, and take some of
its blood and put it on the tip of the right ear of Aharon
and on the tip of the right ear of his sons, on the thumb
of their right hand and on the big toe of their right foot,
and sprinkle the blood all around on the altar.
21 “And you shall take some of the blood that is on
the altar, and some of the anointing oil, and sprinkle
it on Aharon and on his garments, on his sons and on
the garments of his sons with him. And he and his
garments shall be qodesh, and his sons and the
garments of his sons with him.
12

217

EXODUS

“And you shall take the fat of the ram, and the fat
tail, and the fat that covers the entrails, and the
appendage on the liver, and the two kidneys and the
fat on them, and the right thigh - it is for a ram of
ordination 23 and one loaf of bread, and one cake made with oil,
and one thin cake from the basket of the unleavened
bread that is before HWHY.
24 “And you shall put all these in the hands of Aharon
and in the hands of his sons, and you shall wave them
- a wave offering before HWHY.
25 “Then you shall take them from their hands and
burn them on the altar as a burnt offering, as a sweet
fragrance before HWHY. It is an offering made by fire
to HWHY.
26 “And you shall take the breast of the ram of
Aharon’s ordination and wave it - a wave offering
before HWHY, and it shall be your portion.
27 “And from the ram of ordination you shall qadosh
the breast of the wave offering which is waved, and
the thigh of the contribution which is raised, of that
which is for Aharon and of that which is for his sons.
28 “And it shall be from the children of Yisra’ĕl for
Aharon and his sons by a Law forever, for it is a
contribution. And it is a contribution from the children
of Yisra’ĕl from their peace offerings - their
contribution to HWHY.
29 “And the qodesh garments of Aharon are for his
sons after him, to be anointed in them and to be
ordained in them.
30 “The kohĕn from his sons in his place, puts them
on for seven days, when he enters the Tent of
Appointment to attend in the qodesh place.
31 “And take the ram of ordination and cook its flesh
in a qodesh place.
22

218

SHEMOTH

“And Aharon and his sons shall eat the flesh of the
ram, and the bread that is in the basket, by the door
of the Tent of Appointment,
33 and they shall eat those with which the atonement
was made, to ordain them, to qadosh them. But let a
stranger not eat them, because they are qodesh.
34 “And if any of the flesh of the ordination offerings,
or of the bread, be left over until the morning, then
you shall burn up what is left over. It is not eaten,
because it is qodesh.
35 “And so you shall do to Aharon and his sons,
according to all I have commanded you. Seven days
you shall ordain them,
36 and prepare a bull each day as a sin offering for
atonement. And you shall cleanse the altar when you
make atonement for it, and you shall anoint it to
qadosh it.
37 “For seven days you shall make atonement for the
altar, and qadosh it. And the altar shall be most
qodesh - whatever touches the altar is to be qodesh.
38 “And this is what you prepare on the altar: two
lambs, a year old, daily, continually.
39 “Prepare the one lamb in the morning, and the
other lamb you prepare between the evenings,
40 and one-tenth of an ĕphah of flour mixed with onefourth of a hin of pressed oil, and one-fourth of a hin
of wine as a drink offering, with the one lamb.
41 “And prepare the other lamb between the
evenings. And with it prepare the grain offering and
the drink offering, as in the morning, for a sweet
fragrance, an offering made by fire to HWHY 42 a continual burnt offering for your generations at
the door of the Tent of Appointment before HWHY,
where I shall meet with you to speak with you.
32

219

EXODUS

“And there I shall meet with the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and it shall be made qadosh by My esteem.
44 “And I shall qadosh the Tent of Appointment and
the altar. And Aharon and his sons I qadosh to serve
as kohenim to Me.
45 “And I shall dwell in the midst of the children of
Yisra’ĕl and shall be their Elohim.
46 “And they shall know that I am HWHY their Elohim,
who brought them up out of the land of Mitsrayim, to
dwell in their midst. I am HWHY their Elohim.
43

30 “And you shall make an altar to burn incense on,
make it of acacia wood,
2 an ammah long and an ammah wide - it is a
square - and two ammah high, its horns of the same.
3 “And you shall overlay its top, and its sides all
around, and its horns with clean gold. And you shall
make for it a moulding of gold all around.
4 “And make two gold rings for it, under the
moulding on both its sides. Make them on its two
sides, and they shall be holders for the poles to lift it
with.
5 “And you shall make the poles of acacia wood, and
overlay them with gold.
6 “And you shall put it before the veil that is before
the ark of the Witness, before the lid of atonement
that is over the Witness, where I am to meet with you.
7 “And Aharon shall burn on it sweet incense,
morning by morning. As he tends the lamps, he shall
burn incense on it.
8 “And when Aharon lights the lamps between the
evenings, he shall burn incense on it - a continual
incense before HWHY throughout your generations.

220

SHEMOTH

“Do not offer strange incense on it, or a burnt
offering, or a grain offering, and do not pour a drink
offering on it.
10 “And Aharon shall make atonement upon its horns
once a year with the blood of the sin offering of
atonement - once a year he makes atonement upon
it throughout your generations. It is most qodesh to
HWHY.”
11 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
12 “When you take the census of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, to register them, then each one shall give an
atonement for his life to HWHY, when you register
them, so that there is no plague among them when
you register them.
13 “Everyone among those who are registered is to
give this: half a sheqel according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, twenty gĕrahs being a sheqel. The
half-sheqel is the contribution to HWHY.
14 “Everyone passing over to be registered, from
twenty years old and above, gives a contribution to
HWHY.
15 “The rich does not give more and the poor does
not give less than half a sheqel, when you give a
contribution to HWHY, to make atonement for
yourselves.
16 “And you shall take the silver for the atonement
from the children of Yisra’ĕl, and give it for the service
of the Tent of Appointment. And it shall be to the
children of Yisra’ĕl for a remembrance before HWHY,
to make atonement for yourselves.”
17 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
18 “And you shall make a basin of bronze, with its
stand also of bronze, for washing. And you shall put
it between the Tent of Appointment and the altar, and
shall put water in it.
9

221

EXODUS

“And Aharon and his sons shall wash from it their
hands and their feet.
20 “When they go into the Tent of Appointment, or
when they come near the altar to attend, to burn an
offering made by fire to HWHY, they wash with water,
lest they die.
21 “And they shall wash their hands and their feet,
lest they die. And it shall be a Law forever to them, to
him and his seed throughout their generations.”
22 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
23 “And take for yourself choice spices, five hundred
of liquid myrrh, and half as much - two hundred and
fifty - of sweet-smelling cinnamon, and two hundred
and fifty of sweet-smelling cane,
24 and five hundred of cassia, according to the
sheqel of the qodesh place, and a hin of olive oil.
25 “And you shall make from these a qodesh
anointing oil, a compound, blended, the work of a
perfumer. It is a qodesh anointing oil.
26 “And with it you shall anoint the Tent of
Appointment and the ark of the Witness,
27 and the table and all its utensils, and the
lampstand and its utensils, and the altar of incense,
28 and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils,
and the basin and its stand.
29 “And you shall qadosh them, and they shall be
most qodesh. Whatever touches them is to be
qodesh.
30 “And you shall anoint Aharon and his sons, and
qadosh them, to serve as kohenim to Me.
31 “And speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘This
is a qodesh anointing oil to Me throughout your
generations.
19

222

SHEMOTH

‘It shall not be poured on the flesh of a man, and
make no other like it, according to its composition. It
is qodesh, it is qodesh to you.
33 ‘Whoever compounds like it, or whoever puts any
of it on a stranger, shall be cut off from his people.’ ”
34 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Take sweet spices,
fragrant gum and cinnamon and galbanam, and clear
frankincense with these sweet spices, all in equal
amounts.
35 “Then you shall make of these an incense, a
compound, work of a perfumer, salted, clean, qodesh.
36 “And you shall beat some of it very fine, and put
some of it before the Witness in the Tent of
Appointment where I meet with you, it is most qodesh
to you.
37 “And the incense which you make, do not make
any for yourselves, according to its composition, it is
qodesh to you for HWHY.
38 “Whoever makes like it, to smell it, he shall be cut
off from his people.”
32

31 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“See, I have called by name Betsal’ĕl son of Uri,
son of Ḥur, of the tribe of Yahuḏah,
3 and I have filled him with the Ruaḥ of Elohim in
wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and
in all work,
4 to make designs for work in gold, and in silver, and
in bronze,
5 and in cutting stones for mounting, and in carving
wood, and to work in all work.
6 “And I, look I have appointed with him Oholiaḇ son
of Aḥisamaḵ, of the tribe of Dan. And I have put
wisdom in the hearts of everyone who is wise2

223

EXODUS

hearted, and they shall make all that I have
commanded you:
7 the Tent of Appointment, and the ark of the
Witness and the lid of atonement that is on it, and all
the utensils of the Tent,
8 and the table and its utensils, and the clean gold
lampstand with all its utensils, and the altar of
incense,
9 and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils,
and the basin and its stand,
10 and the woven garments, and the qodesh
garments for Aharon the kohĕn and the garments of
his sons, for serving as kohenim,
11 and the anointing oil and sweet incense for the
qodesh place. According to all that I have
commanded you, they are to do.”
12 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
13 “And you, speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘My Shabbathoth you are to guard, by all means, for
this is a sign between Me and you throughout your
generations, to know that I, HWHY, qadosh you.
14 ‘And you shall guard the Shabbath, for it is qodesh
to you. Everyone who profanes it shall certainly be put
to death, for anyone who does work on it, that being
shall be cut off from among his people.
15 ‘Six days work is done, and on the seventh is a
Shabbath of rest, qodesh to HWHY. Everyone doing
work on the Shabbath day shall certainly be put to
death.
16 ‘And the children of Yisra’ĕl shall guard the
Shabbath, to perform the Shabbath throughout their
generations as an everlasting Covenant.
17 ‘Between Me and the children of Yisra’ĕl it is a sign
forever. For in six days HWHY made the shamayim
224

SHEMOTH

and the earth, and on the seventh day He rested and
was refreshed.’ ”
18 And when He had ended speaking with him on
Mount Sinai, He gave Mosheh two tablets of the
Witness, tablets of stone, written with the finger of
Elohim.

32 And when the people saw that Mosheh was so
long in coming down from the mountain, the people
gathered together to Aharon, and said to him, “Arise,
make us mighty ones who go before us. For this
Mosheh, the man who brought us up out of the land of
Mitsrayim, we do not know what has become of him.”
2 And Aharon said to them, “Take off the golden
earrings which are in the ears of your wives, your
sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.”
3 And all the people took off the golden earrings
which were in their ears, and brought them to Aharon.
4 And he took from their hand, and he formed it with
an engraving tool, and made a moulded calf. And they
said, “This is your mighty one, O Yisra’ĕl, that brought
you out of the land of Mitsrayim!”
5 And Aharon saw and built an altar before it. And
Aharon called out and said, “Tomorrow is a festival to
HWHY.”
6 And they rose early on the next day, and offered
burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings. And the
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
7 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Go, get down! For
your people whom you brought out of the land of
Mitsrayim have corrupted themselves.
8 “They have turned aside quickly out of the Way
which I commanded them. They have made
themselves a moulded calf, and have bowed
themselves to it and slaughtered to it, and said, ‘This
225

EXODUS

is your mighty one, O Yisra’ĕl, who brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim!’ ”
9 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “I have seen this
people, and see, it is a stiff-necked people!
10 “And now, let Me alone, that My wrath might burn
against them and I consume them and I make of you
a great nation.”
11 But Mosheh pleaded with HWHY his Elohim, and
said, “HWHY, why does Your wrath burn against Your
people whom You have brought out of the land of
Mitsrayim with great power and with a strong hand?
12 “Why should the Mitsrites speak, and say, ‘For evil
He brought them out to kill them in the mountains, and
to consume them from the face of the earth’? Turn
from the heat of Your wrath, and relent from this evil
to Your people.
13 “Remember Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Yisra’ĕl, Your
servants, to whom You swore by Yourself, and said
to them, ‘I increase your seed like the stars of the
shamayim. And all this land that I have spoken of I
give to your seed, and they shall inherit it forever.’ ”
14 And HWHY relented from the evil which He said He
would do to His people.
15 And Mosheh turned and went down from the
mountain, and in his hand were the two tablets of the
Witness, tablets written on both their sides, written on
the one and on the other.
16 And the tablets were the work of Elohim, and the
writing was the writing of Elohim engraved on the
tablets.
17 And Yahoshua heard the noise of the people as
they shouted and he said to Mosheh, “A noise of
battle in the camp!”

226

SHEMOTH

But he said, “It is not the sound of those who shout
of might, nor is it the sound of those who cry out in
weakness, but the sound of singing that I hear.”
19 And it came to be, as soon as he came near the
camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing. And
Mosheh’s displeasure burned, and he threw the
tablets out of his hands and broke them at the foot of
the mountain.
20 And he took the calf which they had made, and
burned it in the fire, and ground it into powder, and
scattered it on the face of the water and made the
children of Yisra’ĕl drink it.
21 And Mosheh said to Aharon, “What did this people
do to you that you have brought so great a sin upon
them?”
22 And Aharon said, “Do not let the displeasure of my
master burn. You know the people, for evil is in them.
23 “And they said to me, ‘Make us mighty ones who
go before us. For this Mosheh, the man who brought
us out of the land of Mitsrayim, we do not know what
has become of him.’
24 “And I said to them, ‘Whoever has gold, let them
take it off.’ And they gave it to me, and I threw it into
the fire, and this calf came out.”
25 And Mosheh saw that the people were let loose,
for Aharon had let them loose, to their shame among
their enemies.
26 And Mosheh stood in the entrance of the camp,
and said, “Who is for HWHY? To me!” And all the sons
of Lĕwi gathered themselves to him.
27 And he said to them, “Thus said HWHY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl: ‘Each one put his sword on his side, pass
over to and fro from gate to gate in the camp, and
each one slay his brother, and each one his friend,
and each one his relative.’ ”
18

227

EXODUS

And the sons of Lĕwi did according to the word of
Mosheh. And about three thousand men of the people
fell that day.
29 And Mosheh said, “You are ordained for HWHY
today - since each one has been against his son and
his brother - so as to bring upon you a beraḵah today.”
30 And it came to be on the next day that Mosheh
said to the people, “You, you have sinned a great sin.
And now I am going up to HWHY - if I might atone for
your sin.”
31 And Mosheh returned to HWHY and said, “Oh,
these people have sinned a great sin, and have made
for themselves a mighty one of gold!
32 “And now, if You would lift their sin, but if not,
please blot me out of Your Book which You have
written.”
33 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Whoever has sinned
against Me, I blot him out of My Book.
34 “And now, go, lead the people to the place of
which I have spoken to you. See, My Messenger goes
before you. And in the day of My visitation I shall visit
their sin upon them.”
35 And HWHY plagued the people because they made
the calf, which Aharon made.
28

33 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Come, go up from
here, you and the people whom you have brought out
of the land of Mitsrayim, to the land of which I swore to
Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ, saying, ‘To your
seed I give it.’
2 “And I shall send My Messenger before you, and I
shall drive out the Kena’anite and the Amorite and the
Ḥittite and the Perizzite and the Ḥiwwite and the
Yeḇusite,
228

SHEMOTH

to a land flowing with milk and honey. For I do not
go up in your midst because you are a stiff-necked
people, lest I consume you on the way.”
4 And when the people heard this evil word, they
mourned, and no one put on his ornaments.
5 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Say to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘You are a stiff-necked people. Should I go
up in your midst for one moment I shall consume you.
And now, take off your ornaments, and I shall know
what to do to you.’ ”
6 So the children of Yisra’ĕl took off their ornaments
at Mount Ḥorĕḇ.
7 And Mosheh took his tent and pitched it outside
the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of
Appointment. And it came to be that everyone who
sought HWHY went out to the Tent of Appointment
which was outside the camp.
8 And it came to be, whenever Mosheh went out to
the Tent, that all the people rose, and each man stood
at his tent door and watched Mosheh until he entered
the Tent.
9 And it came to be, when Mosheh entered the Tent,
that the column of cloud descended and stood at the
door of the Tent, and He spoke with Mosheh.
10 And all the people saw the column of cloud
standing at the Tent door, and all the people rose and
bowed themselves, each one at the door of his tent.
11 Thus HWHY spoke to Mosheh face to face, as a
man speaks to his friend. And he would return to the
camp, but his servant Yahoshua son of Nun, a young
man, did not leave the Tent.
12 And Mosheh said to HWHY, “See, You are saying
to me, ‘Bring up this people.’ But You have not made
known to me whom You would send with me, though
3

229

EXODUS

You have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have
also found favour in My eyes.’
13 “And now, please, if I have found favour in Your
eyes, please show me Your way, and let me know
You, so that I find favour in Your eyes. And consider
that this nation is Your people.”
14 And He said, “My Presence goes, and I shall give
you rest.”
15 And he said to Him, “If Your Presence is not going,
do not lead us up from here.
16 “For how then shall it be known that I have found
favour in Your eyes, I and Your people, except You
go with us? Then we shall be distinguished, I and
Your people, from all the people who are upon the
face of the earth.”
17 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Even this word you
have spoken I shall do, for you have found favour in
My eyes, and I know you by name.”
18 Then he said, “Please, show me Your esteem.”
19 And He said, “I shall cause all My goodness to
pass before you, and I shall proclaim the Name of
HWHY before you. And I shall favour him whom I
favour, and shall have compassion on him whom I
have compassion.”
20 But He said, “You are unable to see My face, for
no man sees Me and lives.”
21 And HWHY said, “See, there is a place with Me! And
you shall stand on the rock.
22 “And it shall be, while My esteem passes by, that
I shall put you in the cleft of the rock and cover you
with My hand while I pass by.
23 “Then I shall take away My hand and you shall see
My back, but My face shall not be seen.”

230

SHEMOTH

34 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Cut two tablets of
stone like the first ones, and I shall write on these
tablets the Words that were on the first tablets which
you broke.
2 “And be ready in the morning. Then you shall
come up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present
yourself to Me there on the top of the mountain.
3 “And let no man come up with you, and let no man
be seen in all the mountain, and let not even the flock
or the herd feed in front of that mountain.”
4 And he cut two tablets of stone like the first ones.
Then Mosheh rose early in the morning and went up
Mount Sinai, as HWHY had commanded him, and he
took two tablets of stone in his hand.
5 And HWHY came down in the cloud and stood with
him there, and proclaimed the Name, HWHY.
6 And HWHY passed before him and proclaimed,
“HWHY, HWHY, an Ĕl compassionate and showing
favour, patient, and great in kindness and truth,
7 watching over kindness for thousands, forgiving
wickedness and transgression and sin, but by no
means leaving unpunished, visiting the wickedness of
the fathers upon the children and the children’s
children to the third and the fourth generation.”
8 And Mosheh hurried and bowed himself toward
the earth, and did obeisance,
9 and said, “If, now, I have found favour in Your
eyes, O HWHY, I pray, let HWHY go on in our midst,
even though we are a stiff-necked people. And forgive
our wickedness and our sin, and take us as Your
inheritance.”
10 And He said, “See, I am making a Covenant.
Before all your people I am going to do wonders such
as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any
231

EXODUS

nation. And all the people among whom you are shall
see the work of HWHY. For what I am doing with you
is awesome.
11 “Guard what I command you today. See, I am
driving out from before you the Amorite and the
Kena’anite and the Ḥittite and the Perizzite and the
Ḥiwwite and the Yeḇusite.
12 “Guard yourself, lest you make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land where you are going, lest it be
a snare in your midst.
13 “But break down their altars, and destroy their
pillars, and cut down their Ashĕrim 14 for you do not bow yourselves to another mighty
one, for HWHY, whose Name is jealous, is a jealous Ĕl
15 lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of
the land, and they whore after their mighty ones, and
slaughter to their mighty ones, and one of them
invites you and you eat of his slaughterings,
16 and you take of his daughters for your sons, and
his daughters whore after their mighty ones, and
make your sons whore after their mighty ones.
17 “Do not make a moulded mighty one for
yourselves.
18 “Guard the Festival of Matstsoth. For seven days
you eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, in
the Appointed Time of the month of Aḇiḇ, because in
the month of Aḇiḇ you came out from Mitsrayim.
19 “Everyone opening the womb is Mine, and every
male first-born among your livestock, whether bull or
sheep.
20 “But the first-born of a donkey you ransom with a
lamb. And if you do not ransom, then you shall break
his neck. Every first-born of your sons you shall
232

SHEMOTH

ransom. And they shall not appear before Me emptyhanded.
21 “Six days you work, but on the seventh day you
rest - in ploughing time and in harvest you rest.
22 “And perform the Festival of Shaḇuoth for yourself,
of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the Festival of
Ingathering at the turn of the year.
23 “Three times in the year all your men are to appear
before the Aḏon, HWHY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
24 for I dispossess nations before you, and shall
enlarge your borders, and let no one covet your land
when you go up to appear before HWHY your Elohim
three times in the year.
25 “Do not offer the blood of My slaughtering with
leaven, and do not let the slaughtering of the Festival
of the Pesaḥ remain until morning.
26 “Bring the first of the first-fruits of your land to the
House of HWHY your Elohim. Do not cook a young
goat in its mother’s milk.”
27 And HWHY said to Mosheh, “Write these Words, for
according to the mouth of these Words I have made
a Covenant with you and with Yisra’ĕl.”
28 And he was there with HWHY forty days and forty
nights. He did not eat bread and he did not drink
water. And He wrote on the tablets the Words of the
Covenant, the Ten Words.
29 And it came to be, when Mosheh came down from
Mount Sinai, while the two tablets of the Witness were
in Mosheh’s hand when he came down from the
mountain, that Mosheh did not know that the skin of
his face shone since he had spoken with Him.
30 And Aharon and all the children of Yisra’ĕl looked
at Mosheh and saw the skin of his face shone, and
they were afraid to come near him.
233

EXODUS

But Mosheh called out to them, and Aharon and
all the rulers of the congregation returned to him, and
Mosheh spoke to them.
32 And afterward all the children of Yisra’ĕl came
near, and he commanded them all that HWHY had
spoken with him on Mount Sinai.
33 And when Mosheh ended speaking with them, he
put a veil on his face.
34 But whenever Mosheh went in before HWHY to
speak with Him, he would remove the veil until he
came out. And when he came out he spoke to the
children of Yisra’ĕl what he had been commanded,
35 and the children of Yisra’ĕl would see the face of
Mosheh, that the skin of Mosheh’s face shone, and
Mosheh would put the veil on his face again, until he
went in to speak with Him.
31

35 And Mosheh assembled all the congregation of
the children of Yisra’ĕl, and said to them, “These are
the Words which HWHY has commanded you to do:
2 “Work is done for six days, but on the seventh day
it shall be qodesh to you, a Shabbath of rest to HWHY.
Anyone doing work on it is put to death.
3 “Do not kindle a fire in any of your dwellings on the
Shabbath day.”
4 And Mosheh spoke to all the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “This is the word which
HWHY commanded, saying,
5 ‘Take from among you a contribution to HWHY.
Everyone whose heart so moves him, let him bring it
as a contribution to HWHY: gold, and silver, and
bronze,
6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen,
and goats’ hair,
234

SHEMOTH

and ram skins dyed red, and fine leather, and
acacia wood,
8 and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil
and for the sweet incense,
9 and shoham stones, and stones to be put in the
shoulder garment and in the breastplate.
10 ‘And let all the wise-hearted among you come and
make all that HWHY has commanded:
11 the Mishkan, its Tent and its covering, its hooks
and its boards, its bars, its columns, and its sockets,
12 the ark and its poles, the lid of atonement and the
veil of the covering,
13 the table and its poles, and all its utensils, and the
showbread,
14 and the lampstand for the light, and its utensils,
and its lamps, and the oil for the light,
15 and the incense altar, and its poles, and the
anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the covering
for the door at the entrance of the Mishkan,
16 the altar of burnt offering with its bronze grating,
its poles, and all its utensils, the basin and its stand,
17 the screens of the courtyard, its columns, and their
sockets, and the covering for the gate of the
courtyard,
18 the pegs of the Mishkan, and the pegs of the
courtyard, and their cords,
19 the woven garments to do service in the qodesh
place, the qodesh garments for Aharon the kohĕn and
the garments of his sons to serve as kohenim.’ ”
20 And all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
withdrew from the presence of Mosheh.
21 And everyone whose heart lifted him up and
everyone whose spirit moved him came, and they
brought the contribution to HWHY for the work of the
7

235

EXODUS

Tent of Appointment, and for all its service, and for
the qodesh garments.
22 And they came, both men and women, all whose
hearts moved them, and brought earrings and nose
rings, and rings and necklaces, all golden goods,
even every one who made a wave offering of gold to
HWHY.
23 And every man, with whom was found blue and
purple and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and
rams’ skins dyed red, and fine leather, brought them.
24 Everyone who would make a contribution to HWHY
of silver or bronze, brought it. And everyone with
whom was found acacia wood for any work of the
service, brought it.
25 And all the wise-hearted women spun yarn with
their hands, and brought what they had spun, the blue
and the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen.
26 And all the women whose hearts lifted them up in
wisdom spun the goats’ hair.
27 And the rulers brought shoham stones, and the
stones to be put in the shoulder garment and in the
breastplate,
28 and the spices and the oil for the light, and for the
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
29 The children of Yisra’ĕl brought a voluntary
offering to HWHY, all the men and women whose
hearts moved them to bring all kinds of work which
HWHY, by the hand of Mosheh, had commanded to be
done.
30 And Mosheh said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “See,
HWHY has called by name Betsal’ĕl son of Uri, son of
Ḥur, of the tribe of Yahuḏah,
31 and He has filled him with the Ruaḥ of Elohim, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in
all work,
236

SHEMOTH

to make designs, to work in gold and in silver and
in bronze,
33 and in cutting of stones for mounting, and in
carving wood, and to work in all workmanship of
design.
34 “And He has put in his heart the ability to teach, in
him and Oholiaḇ son of Aḥisamaḵ, of the tribe of Dan.
35 “He has filled them with skill to do all work of the
engraver and the designer and embroiderer, in blue
and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and a
weaver, doing any work, and makers of designs.
32

36 “And Betsal’ĕl and Oholiaḇ, and every wisehearted man in whom HWHY has given wisdom and
understanding, to know how to do all work for the
service of the qodesh place, shall do according to all
that HWHY has commanded.”
2 And Mosheh called Betsal’ĕl and Oholiaḇ, and
every wise-hearted man in whose heart HWHY had
given wisdom, everyone whose heart lifted him up, to
come and do the work.
3 And
they received from Mosheh all the
contribution which the children of Yisra’ĕl had brought
for the work of the service of making the qodesh
place. But they still brought to him voluntary offerings
every morning,
4 so all the craftsmen who were doing all the work
of the qodesh place came, each from the work he was
doing,
5 and they spoke to Mosheh, saying, “The people
bring much more than enough for the service of the
work which HWHY commanded us to do.”
6 Then Mosheh commanded and they sent this
word throughout the camp, saying, “Let neither man
nor woman do any more work for the contribution of
237

EXODUS

the qodesh place.” And the people were withheld from
bringing,
7 for what they had was enough for all the work to
be done, more than enough.
8 Then all the wise-hearted ones among them who
worked on the Mishkan made ten curtains woven of
fine linen and blue and purple and scarlet. They made
them with keruḇim, the work of a skilled workman.
9 The length of each curtain was twenty-eight
ammah, and the width of each curtain four ammah,
all the curtains having one measure.
10 And he joined five curtains, one to another; and
the other five curtains he joined, one to another.
11 And he made loops of blue on the edge of the end
of one curtain on the seam, the same he did on the
edge of the end curtain of the second on the seam.
12 Fifty loops he made on one curtain, and fifty loops
he made on the edge of the curtain on the seam of
the second; the loops held one curtain to another.
13 And he made fifty hooks of gold, and joined the
curtains to each other with the hooks, and the
Mishkan became one.
14 And he made curtains of goats’ hair for the Tent
over the Mishkan, he made eleven curtains.
15 The length of each curtain was thirty ammah, and
the width of each curtain four ammah, the eleven
curtains having one measure.
16 And he joined five curtains by themselves and six
curtains by themselves.
17 And he made fifty loops on the edge of the end
curtain in one, and fifty loops he made on the edge of
the curtain joining the second.
18 And he made fifty bronze hooks to join the Tent, to
be one.
238

SHEMOTH

And he made a covering for the Tent of rams’
skins, dyed red, and a covering of fine leather above
that.
20 And for the Mishkan he made boards of acacia
wood, standing up.
21 The length of each board was ten ammah, and the
width of each board an ammah and a half.
22 Each board had two tenons for binding one to
another. So he did to all the boards of the Mishkan.
23 And he made boards for the Mishkan, twenty
boards for the south side.
24 And he made forty sockets of silver to go under
the twenty boards, and two sockets under each of the
boards for its two tenons.
25 And for the other side of the Mishkan, for the north
side, he made twenty boards,
26 and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under
the one board, and two sockets under the other
board.
27 And he made six boards for the west side of the
Mishkan.
28 And he made two boards for the two back corners
of the Mishkan.
29 And they were double beneath, and similarly they
were complete to the top by one ring. So he did to
both of them for the two corners.
30 And there were eight boards, and their silver
sockets, sixteen sockets, two sockets under each of
the boards.
31 And he made bars of acacia wood, five for the
boards on one side of the Mishkan,
32 and five bars for the boards on the other side of
the Mishkan, and five bars for the boards of the
Mishkan at the rear, westward.
19

239

EXODUS

And he made the middle bar to pass through the
boards from one end to the other.
34 And he overlaid the boards with gold, and their
rings he made of gold to be holders for the bars, and
overlaid the bars with gold.
35 And he made a veil of blue and purple and scarlet,
and fine worked linen. It was made with keruḇim, the
work of a skilled workman.
36 And he made four columns of acacia wood for it,
and overlaid them with gold, with their hooks of gold.
And he cast four sockets of silver for them.
37 And he made a covering for the Tent door of blue
and purple and scarlet and fine woven linen, made by
a weaver,
38 and its five columns with their hooks. And he
overlaid their tops and their rings with gold, but their
five sockets were of bronze.
33

37 And Betsal’ĕl made the ark of acacia wood, two
and a half ammah long, and an ammah and a half
wide, and an ammah and a half high.
2 And he overlaid it with clean gold inside and
outside, and made a moulding of gold all around it.
3 And he cast four rings of gold for it, for its four feet,
two rings on its one side, and two rings on its other
side.
4 And he made poles of acacia wood, and overlaid
them with gold.
5 And he put the poles into the rings at the sides of
the ark, to lift the ark.
6 And he made a lid of atonement of clean gold, two
and a half ammah long and an ammah and a half
wide.
7 And he made two keruḇim of beaten gold. He
made them from the two ends of the lid of atonement,
240

SHEMOTH

one keruḇ at one end on this side, and the other
keruḇ at the other end on that side. He made the
keruḇim from the lid of atonement, from the two ends.
9 And the keruḇim spread out their wings above,
and covered the lid of atonement with their wings,
with their faces toward each other, the faces of the
keruḇim were toward the lid of atonement.
10 And he made the table of acacia wood, two
ammah long, and an ammah wide, and an ammah
and a half high.
11 And he overlaid it with clean gold, and made a
moulding of gold all around it.
12 And he made a rim, a tophaḥ all around, and made
a moulding of gold for the rim all around it.
13 And he cast four rings of gold for it, and put the
rings on the four corners that were at its four legs.
14 The rings were next to the rim, as holders for the
poles to lift the table.
15 And he made the poles of acacia wood to lift the
table, and overlaid them with gold.
16 And he made the utensils which were on the table,
its dishes, and its cups, and its bowls, and its jars for
pouring, of clean gold.
17 And he made the lampstand of clean gold. He
made the lampstand of beaten work, its base, and its
shaft, its cups, its ornamental knobs, and its blossoms
were from it.
18 And six branches came out of its sides: three
branches of the lampstand out of one side, and three
branches of the lampstand out of the other side.
19 There were three cups like almond flowers on one
branch, with ornamental knob and blossom, and three
cups like almond flowers on the other branch, a knob
and a blossom - so for the six branches coming out of
the lampstand.
8

241

EXODUS

And on the lampstand were four cups like almond
flowers, its knobs and blossoms,
21 and a knob under the first two branches of the
same, and a knob under the second two branches of
the same, and a knob under the third two branches of
the same, for the six branches coming out of it.
22 Their knobs and their branches were of it, all of it
was one beaten work of clean gold.
23 And he made its seven lamps, and its snuffers,
and its trays, of clean gold.
24 He made it of a kiḵar of clean gold, and all its
utensils.
25 And he made the incense altar of acacia wood, an
ammah long and an ammah wide, square, and two
ammah high. Its horns were of it.
26 And he overlaid it with clean gold, its top and its
sides all around, and its horns. And he made a
moulding for it of gold all around it.
27 And he made two rings of gold for it under its
moulding, at its two corners on both sides, as holders
for the poles with which to lift it.
28 And he made the poles of acacia wood, and
overlaid them with gold.
29 And he made the qodesh anointing oil and the
clean incense of sweet spices, according to the work
of the perfumer.
20

38 And he made the altar of burnt offering of acacia
wood, five ammah long and five ammah wide, square,
and three ammah high.
2 And he made its horns on its four corners, the
horns were of it. And he overlaid it with bronze.
3 And he made all the utensils for the altar: the pots,
and the shovels, and the basins, and the forks, and
the fire holders. He made all its utensils of bronze.
242

SHEMOTH

And he made a grating for the altar, a bronze
network, under its rim, midway from the bottom.
5 And he cast four rings for the four corners of the
bronze grating, as holders for the poles.
6 And he made the poles of acacia wood, and
overlaid them with bronze.
7 And he put the poles into the rings on the sides of
the altar, with which to lift it. He made the altar hollow
with boards.
8 And he made the basin of bronze and its stand of
bronze, from the bronze mirrors of the serving women
who did service at the door of the Tent of
Appointment.
9 And he made the courtyard: for the south side the
screens of the courtyard were of fine woven linen, one
hundred ammah long,
10 their twenty columns and their twenty sockets, of
bronze. The hooks of the columns and their bands
were of silver.
11 And for the north side the screens were one
hundred ammah long, their twenty columns and their
twenty sockets, of bronze. The hooks of the columns
and their bands were of silver.
12 And for the west side there were screens of fifty
ammah, their ten columns and their ten sockets. The
hooks of the columns and their bands were of silver.
13 And for the east side eastward, fifty ammah:
14 fifteen ammah of screens on the one side, with
their three columns and their three sockets,
15 and fifteen ammah of screens the other side of the
courtyard gate, on this side and that side, with their
three columns and their three sockets.
16 All the screens of the courtyard all around were of
fine woven linen.
4

243

EXODUS

And the sockets for the columns were of bronze,
the hooks of the columns and their bands were of
silver, and the overlay of their tops was of silver. And
all the columns of the courtyard had bands of silver.
18 And the covering for the gate of the courtyard was
the work of an embroiderer, of blue and purple and
scarlet, and of fine woven linen, and twenty ammah
long, and the height along its width was five ammah,
corresponding to the screens of the courtyard.
19 And the columns were four, and their sockets of
bronze four, their hooks were of silver, and the
overlay of their tops and their bands was of silver.
20 And all the pegs of the Mishkan, and of the
courtyard all around, were of bronze.
21 These were the appointments of the Mishkan, the
Mishkan of the Witness, which was appointed by the
command of Mosheh, for the service of the Lĕwites,
by the hand of Ithamar, son of Aharon the kohĕn.
22 And Betsal’ĕl son of Uri, son of Ḥur, of the tribe of
Yahuḏah, made all that HWHY had commanded
Mosheh.
23 And with him: Oholiaḇ son of Aḥisamaḵ, of the
tribe of Dan, an engraver and designer, an
embroiderer in blue and purple and scarlet, and in fine
linen.
24 All the gold prepared for the work, in all the work
of the qodesh place - and it was the gold of the wave
offering - came to be twenty-nine kiḵars and seven
hundred and thirty sheqels, according to the sheqel
of the qodesh place.
25 And the silver from the ones counted of the
congregation was one hundred kiḵars and one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-five sheqels,
according to the sheqel of the qodesh place:
17

244

SHEMOTH

a beqa, half a sheqel for a head, according to the
sheqel of the qodesh place, for everyone passing
over to those counted, from twenty years old and
above, for six hundred and three thousand, five
hundred and fifty.
27 And the hundred kiḵars of silver were for casting
the sockets of the qodesh place and the bases of the
veil: one hundred sockets from the hundred kiḵars, a
kiḵar for each socket.
28 And of the one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five he made hooks for the columns, and
overlaid their tops, and made bands for them.
29 And the bronze of the wave offering was seventy
kiḵars and two thousand four hundred sheqels.
30 And with it he made the sockets for the door of the
Tent of Appointment, and the bronze altar, and the
bronze grating for it, and all the utensils for the altar,
31 and the sockets for the courtyard all around, and
the bases for the courtyard gate, and all the pegs for
the Mishkan, and all the pegs for the courtyard all
around.
26

39 And of the blue and purple and scarlet they made
woven garments, to do service in the qodesh place.
And they made the qodesh garments which were for
Aharon, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
2 And he made the shoulder garment of gold, of blue
and purple and scarlet, and of fine woven linen.
3 And they beat out sheets of gold and cut it into
threads, to work it in with the blue and purple and
scarlet, and the fine linen, the work of a skilled
workman.
4 They made shoulder pieces for it to join it, it was
joined at its two edges.
245

EXODUS

And the embroidered band of his shoulder
garment that was on it was of the same work of gold,
and blue and purple and scarlet, and of fine woven
linen, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
6 And they made the shoham stones, placed in
plated work of gold, engraved as signets are
engraved, according to the names of the sons of
Yisra’ĕl.
7 And he put them on the shoulders of the shoulder
garment, stones of remembrance for the sons of
Yisra’ĕl, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
8 And he made the breastplate, a work of a skilled
workman, like the work of the shoulder garment, of
gold, of blue and purple and scarlet, and of fine woven
linen.
9 It was square, they made the breastplate double,
its length a zereth, its width a zereth, doubled.
10 And they filled it with four rows of stones: a row of
ruby, a topaz, and an emerald was the first row;
11 and the second row a turquoise, a sapphire, and a
diamond;
12 and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an
amethyst;
13 and the fourth row a beryl, a shoham, and a jasper
- placed in plated work of gold in their mountings.
14 And the stones were according to the names of
the sons of Yisra’ĕl, twelve according to their names,
engraved like a signet, each one with its own name
according to the twelve tribes.
15 And they made braided chains of corded work for
the breastplate at the ends, of clean gold.
16 And they made two mountings of gold and two
gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of
the breastplate.
5

246

SHEMOTH

And they put the two cords of gold in the two rings
on the ends of the breastplate.
18 And the two ends of the two cords they fastened
in the two mountings, and put them on the shoulder
pieces of the shoulder garment in the front.
19 And they made two rings of gold and put them on
the two ends of the breastplate, on the edge of it,
which was on the inward side of the shoulder
garment.
20 And they made two gold rings and put them on the
two shoulder pieces, underneath the shoulder
garment, on the front of it, close to its seam above the
embroidered band of the shoulder garment.
21 And they bound the breastplate by means of its
rings to the rings of the shoulder garment with a blue
cord, so that it would be above the embroidered band
of the shoulder garment, and that the breastplate
would not come loose from the shoulder garment, as
HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
22 And he made the robe of the shoulder garment of
woven work, all of blue.
23 And the opening of the robe was in the middle, like
the opening in scaled armour, with a woven binding
all around the opening, so that it would not tear.
24 And they made on the hem of the robe
pomegranates of blue and purple and scarlet, twined.
25 And they made bells of clean gold, and put the
bells between the pomegranates on the hem of the
robe all around between the pomegranates:
26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, all around the hem of the robe, for the
service, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
27 And they made the long shirt of fine linen, the work
of a weaver, for Aharon and his sons,
17

247

EXODUS

and a turban of fine linen, and the turban
ornaments of fine linen, and short trousers of fine
woven linen,
29 and a girdle of fine woven linen with blue and
purple and scarlet, the work of an embroiderer, as
HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
30 And they made the plate of the qodesh sign of
dedication of clean gold, and wrote on it an inscription
like the engraving of a signet: QODESHAH TO HWHY.
31 And they put on it a blue cord, to fasten it above
on the turban, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
32 And all the work of the Mishkan of the Tent of
Appointment was completed. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl did according to all that HWHY had
commanded Mosheh, so they did.
33 And they brought the Mishkan to Mosheh, the Tent
and all its furnishings, its hooks, its boards, its bars,
and its columns, and its sockets,
34 and the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the
covering of fine leather, and the veil of the covering,
35 the ark of the Witness with its poles, and the lid of
atonement,
36 the table, and all its utensils, and the showbread,
37 the clean lampstand with its lamps, the lamps to
be put in order, and all its utensils, and the oil for light,
38 and the altar of gold, and the anointing oil, and the
sweet incense, and the covering for the Tent door,
39 the bronze altar and its bronze grating, its poles,
and all its utensils, the basin with its stand,
40 the screens of the courtyard, its columns and its
sockets, the covering for the courtyard gate, its cords,
and its pegs, and all the utensils for the service of the
Mishkan, for the Tent of Appointment,
28

248

SHEMOTH

the woven garments, to do service in the qodesh
place: the qodesh garments for Aharon the kohĕn,
and his sons’ garments, to serve as kohenim.
42 According to all that HWHY had commanded
Mosheh, so the children of Yisra’ĕl did all the work.
43 And Mosheh looked over all the work and saw they
did it as HWHY had commanded, so they had done.
And Mosheh baraḵ them.
41

40 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“On the first day of the first month, you are to raise
up the Mishkan of the Tent of Appointment,
3 and shall put in it the ark of the Witness, and
screen the ark with the veil.
4 “And you shall bring in the table and arrange what
belongs on it, and bring in the lampstand and light its
lamps.
5 “And you shall put the altar of gold for the incense
before the ark of the Witness, and put up the covering
of the door to the Mishkan.
6 “And you shall put the altar of the burnt offering
before the door of the Mishkan of the Tent of
Appointment,
7 and shall put the basin between the Tent of
Appointment and the altar, and shall put water
therein.
8 “And you shall put up the courtyard all around, and
shall place the covering of the courtyard gate,
9 and shall take the anointing oil, and anoint the
Mishkan and all that is in it, and shall qadosh it and
all its utensils, and it shall be qodesh.
10 “And you shall anoint the altar of the burnt offering
and all its utensils, and qadosh the altar, and the altar
shall be most qodesh.
2

249

EXODUS

“And you shall anoint the basin and its stand, and
qadosh it.
12 “And you shall bring Aharon and his sons to the
door of the Tent of Appointment and wash them with
water.
13 “And you shall put the qodesh garments on
Aharon, and anoint him and qadosh him to serve as
kohĕn to Me.
14 “And you shall bring his sons and put long shirts
on them,
15 and shall anoint them, as you anointed their father,
and they shall serve as kohenim to Me. And their
anointing shall be for them an everlasting kehunnah
throughout their generations.”
16 And Mosheh did according to all that HWHY had
commanded him, so he did.
17 And it came to be in the first month of the second
year, on the first day of the month, that the Mishkan
was raised up.
18 And Mosheh raised up the Mishkan and placed its
sockets, and put up its boards, and put in its bars, and
raised up its columns,
19 and spread the Tent over the Mishkan and put the
covering of the Tent on top of it, as HWHY had
commanded Mosheh.
20 And he took the Witness and put it into the ark,
and he put the poles through the rings of the ark, and
put the lid of atonement on top of the ark,
21 and brought the ark into the Mishkan, and placed
the veil of the covering to screen off the ark of the
Witness, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
22 And he put the table in the Tent of Appointment,
on the north side of the Mishkan, outside the veil,
23 and put the bread in order upon it before HWHY, as
HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
11

250

SHEMOTH

And he put the lampstand in the Tent of
Appointment, opposite the table, on the south side of
the Mishkan,
25 and lit the lamps before HWHY, as HWHY had
commanded Mosheh.
26 And he put the gold altar in the Tent of
Appointment in front of the veil,
27 and burned sweet incense on it, as HWHY had
commanded Mosheh.
28 And he put up the covering to the door of the
Mishkan.
29 And he put the altar of burnt offering before the
door of the Mishkan of the Tent of Appointment, and
offered upon it the burnt offering and the grain
offering, as HWHY had commanded Mosheh.
30 And he put the basin between the Tent of
Appointment and the altar, and put water therein for
washing.
31 And Mosheh, and Aharon, and his sons washed
their hands and their feet with water from it.
32 As they went into the Tent of Appointment, and as
they came near the altar, they would wash, as HWHY
had commanded Mosheh.
33 And he raised up the courtyard all around the
Mishkan and the altar, and placed the covering of the
courtyard gate. And Mosheh completed the work.
34 And the cloud covered the Tent of Appointment,
and the esteem of HWHY filled the Mishkan.
35 And Mosheh was not able to come into the Tent of
Appointment, because the cloud dwelt on it, and the
esteem of HWHY filled the Mishkan.
36 And when the cloud was taken up from above the
Mishkan, the children of Yisra’ĕl went onward in all
their journeys.
24

251

EXODUS

But if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not
depart till the day that it was taken up.
38 For the cloud of HWHY was on the Mishkan by day,
and fire was on it by night, before the eyes of all the
house of Yisra’ĕl, in all their journeys.
37

252

LEVITICUS

WAYYIQRA
‫ ויקרא‬ARqYW

1 And hWhY called to Mosheh, and spoke to him from
the Tent of Appointment, saying,
2 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When anyone of you brings an offering to hWhY, you
bring your offering of the livestock, of the herd or of
the flock.
3 ‘If his offering is a burnt offering of the herd, let him
bring a male, a perfect one. Let him bring it at the door
of the Tent of Appointment, for his acceptance before
hWhY.
4 ‘And he shall lay his hand on the head of the burnt
offering, and it shall be accepted on his behalf to
make atonement for him.
5 ‘And he shall slaughter the bull before hWhY. And
the sons of Aharon, the kohenim, shall bring the blood
and sprinkle the blood all around on the altar which is
at the door of the Tent of Appointment.
6 ‘And he shall skin the burnt offering and cut it into
its pieces.
7 ‘And the sons of Aharon the kohĕn shall put fire on
the altar, and lay the wood in order on the fire.
8 ‘And the sons of Aharon, the kohenim, shall
arrange the pieces, with the head and the fat on the
wood which is on the fire on the altar.
9 ‘But its entrails and its legs he washes with water.
And the kohĕn shall burn all of it on the altar as a burnt
offering, an offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance
to hWhY.
10 ‘And if his offering is from the flock, from the sheep
or from the goats as a burnt offering, let him bring a
male, a perfect one.
253

WAYYIQRA

‘And he shall slaughter it on the north side of the
altar before hWhY. And the sons of Aharon, the
kohenim, shall sprinkle its blood on the altar all
around.
12 ‘And he shall cut it into its pieces, with its head and
its fat, and the kohĕn shall arrange them on the wood
which is on the fire on the altar.
13 ‘But the entrails and the legs he washes with
water. And the kohĕn shall bring it all and burn it on
the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by
fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
14 ‘And if the burnt offering of his offering to hWhY is
of birds, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves
or young pigeons.
15 ‘And the kohĕn shall bring it to the altar, and shall
wring off its head, and burn it on the altar, and its
blood shall be drained out at the side of the altar.
16 ‘And he shall remove its crop with its feathers and
throw it beside the altar on the east side, into the
place for ashes.
17 ‘And he shall split it at its wings, but not sever it.
And the kohĕn shall burn it on the altar, on the wood
that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering
made by fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
11

2 ‘And when anyone brings a grain offering to hWhY,
his offering is to be of fine flour. And he shall pour oil
on it, and put frankincense on it,
2 and he shall bring it to the sons of Aharon, the
kohenim, and he shall take from it his hand filled with
fine flour and oil with all the frankincense. And the
kohĕn shall burn it as a remembrance portion on the
altar, an offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to
hWhY.
254

LEVITICUS

‘And the rest of the grain offering is for Aharon and
his sons, most qodesh of the offerings to hWhY by fire.
4 ‘And so you bring as an offering a grain offering
baked in the oven, unleavened cakes of fine flour
mixed with oil, or unleavened thin cakes anointed with
oil.
5 ‘But if your offering is a grain offering on the
griddle, it is of fine flour, unleavened, mixed with oil.
6 ‘Divide it into bits and pour oil on it, it is a grain
offering.
7 ‘And if your offering is a grain offering, in a
stewing-pot, it is made of fine flour with oil.
8 ‘And you shall bring to hWhY the grain offering that
is made of these, and shall present it to the kohĕn,
and he shall bring it to the altar.
9 ‘And the kohĕn shall take from the grain offering a
remembrance portion, and burn it on the altar, an
offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
10 ‘And the rest of the grain offering is for Aharon and
his sons, most qodesh of the offerings to hWhY made
by fire.
11 ‘No grain offering which you bring to hWhY is made
with leaven, for you do not burn any leaven or any
honey in an offering to hWhY made by fire.
12 ‘Bring them to hWhY as an offering of the firstfruits, but they are not burned on the altar for a sweet
fragrance.
13 ‘And season with salt every offering of your grain
offering, and do not allow the salt of the Covenant of
your Elohim to be lacking from your grain offering.
With all your offerings you bring salt.
14 ‘And if you bring a grain offering of your first-fruits
to hWhY, bring for the grain offering of your first-fruits
green heads of grain roasted on the fire, crushed
heads of new grain.
3

255

WAYYIQRA

‘And you shall put oil on it, and lay frankincense
on it. It is a grain offering.
16 ‘And the kohĕn shall burn the remembrance
portion, from its crushed grain and from its oil, with all
the frankincense, an offering made by fire to hWhY.
15

3 ‘And if that which he presents is a peace offering, if
he is bringing it of the herd, whether male or female,
he brings a perfect one before hWhY.
2 ‘And he shall lay his hand on the head of his
offering, and slaughter it at the door of the Tent of
Appointment. And the sons of Aharon, the kohenim,
shall sprinkle the blood on the altar all around.
3 ‘And from the peace offering he shall bring an
offering made by fire to hWhY, the fat that covers the
entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails,
4 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them by
the loins, and the appendage on the liver which he
removes with the kidneys.
5 ‘And the sons of Aharon shall burn it on the altar
upon the burnt offering, which is on the wood, which
is on the fire, as an offering made by fire, a sweet
fragrance to hWhY.
6 ‘And if that which he presents is from the flock, for
a peace offering to hWhY, male or female, he brings a
perfect one.
7 ‘If he is bringing a lamb as his offering, then he
shall bring it before hWhY,
8 and shall lay his hand on the head of his offering,
and slaughter it in front of the Tent of Appointment,
and the sons of Aharon shall sprinkle its blood on the
altar round about.
9 ‘And from the peace offering he shall bring near as an offering made by fire to hWhY - its fat, all the fat
tail which he removes close to the backbone, and the
256

LEVITICUS

fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the
entrails,
10 and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them by
the loins, and the appendage on the liver, which he
removes with the kidneys.
11 ‘And the kohĕn shall burn them on the altar as
food, an offering made by fire to hWhY.
12 ‘And if his offering is a goat, then he shall bring it
before hWhY,
13 and shall lay his hand on its head and slaughter it
before the Tent of Appointment. And the sons of
Aharon shall sprinkle its blood on the altar all around.
14 ‘And from it he shall bring his offering, as an
offering made by fire to hWhY, the fat that covers the
entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails,
15 and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them by
the loins, and the appendage on the liver, which he
removes with the kidneys.
16 ‘And the kohĕn shall burn them on the altar as
food, an offering made by fire for a sweet fragrance.
All the fat belongs to hWhY.
17 ‘An everlasting Law throughout your generations
in all your dwellings: you do not eat any fat or any
blood.’ ”

4 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘When a
being sins by mistake against any of the Commands
of hWhY, which are not to be done, and shall do any
of them:
3 ‘If the anointed kohĕn sins, bringing guilt on the
people, then he shall bring to hWhY for his sin which
he has sinned a young bull, a perfect one, as a sin
offering,
2

257

WAYYIQRA

and he shall bring the bull to the door of the Tent
of Appointment before hWhY, and shall lay his hand
on the bull’s head, and slaughter the bull before
hWhY.
5 ‘And the anointed kohĕn shall take some of the
bull’s blood and bring it to the Tent of Appointment,
6 and the kohĕn shall dip his finger in the blood and
sprinkle some of the blood seven times before hWhY,
in front of the veil of the qodesh place.
7 ‘And the kohĕn shall put some of the blood on the
horns of the altar of sweet incense before hWhY,
which is in the Tent of Appointment, and pour all the
blood of the bull at the base of the altar of the burnt
offering, which is at the door of the Tent of
Appointment.
8 ‘Then he takes all the fat of the bull as the sin
offering, the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat
which is on the entrails,
9 and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them by
the loins, and the appendage on the liver, which he
removes with the kidneys,
10 as it was taken from the bull of the peace offering.
And the kohĕn shall burn them on the altar of the
burnt offering.
11 ‘But the skin of the bull, and all its flesh, with its
head and legs, its entrails and dung 12 all of the bull - he shall bring outside the camp to
a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and
burn it on wood with fire. Where the ashes are poured
out it is burned.
13 ‘And if the entire congregation of Yisra’ĕl strays by
mistake, and the matter has been hidden from the
eyes of the assembly, and they have done any of the
Commands of hWhY which are not to be done, and
shall be guilty,
4

258

LEVITICUS

when the sin which they have sinned becomes
known, then the assembly shall bring a young bull for
the sin, and bring it before the Tent of Appointment.
15 ‘And the elders of the congregation shall lay their
hands on the head of the bull before hWhY, and the
bull shall be slaughtered before hWhY.
16 ‘And the anointed kohĕn shall bring some of the
bull’s blood to the Tent of Appointment,
17 and the kohĕn shall dip his finger in the blood and
sprinkle it seven times before hWhY, in front of the
veil,
18 and put some of the blood on the horns of the altar
which is before hWhY, which is in the Tent of
Appointment, and pour all the blood at the base of the
altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the Tent
of Appointment.
19 ‘Then he takes all the fat from it and shall burn it
on the altar.
20 ‘And he shall do with the bull as he did with the bull
as a sin offering - so shall he do it. And the kohĕn
shall make atonement for them, and it shall be
forgiven them.
21 ‘And he shall bring the bull outside the camp, and
burn it as he burned the first bull. It is a sin offering for
the assembly.
22 ‘When a ruler sins, and by mistake has done any
of the Commands of hWhY his Elohim which are not
to be done, and shall be guilty,
23 or if his sin which he has sinned is made known to
him, then he shall bring as his offering a buck of the
goats, a male, a perfect one.
24 ‘And he shall lay his hand on the head of the goat,
and slaughter it at the place where they slaughter the
burnt offering before hWhY. It is a sin offering.
14

259

WAYYIQRA

‘And the kohĕn shall take some of the blood of the
sin offering with his finger, and shall put it on the horns
of the altar of burnt offering, and pour its blood at the
base of the altar of burnt offering,
26 and burn all its fat on the altar, like the fat of the
slaughtering of the peace offering. And the kohĕn
shall make atonement for him for his sin, and it shall
be forgiven him.
27 ‘And if any being of the people of the land sins by
mistake by doing any of the Commands of hWhY
which are not to be done, and shall be guilty,
28 or if his sin which he has sinned shall be made
known to him, then he shall bring as his offering a
female goat, a perfect one, for his sin which he has
sinned.
29 ‘And he shall lay his hand on the head of the sin
offering, and slaughter the sin offering at the place of
the burnt offering.
30 ‘And the kohĕn shall take some of its blood with
his finger, and shall put it on the horns of the altar of
burnt offering, and pour all the blood at the base of
the altar,
31 then remove all its fat, as fat is removed from the
slaughtering of the peace offering. And the kohĕn
shall burn it on the altar for a sweet fragrance to
hWhY. And the kohĕn shall make atonement for him,
and it shall be forgiven him.
32 ‘And if he brings a lamb as his sin offering, he
brings a female, a perfect one.
33 ‘And he shall lay his hand on the head of the sin
offering, and slaughter it as a sin offering at the place
where they slaughter the burnt offering.
34 ‘And the kohĕn shall take some of the blood of the
sin offering with his finger, and shall put it on the horns
25

260

LEVITICUS

of the altar of burnt offering, and pour all the blood at
the base of the altar.
35 ‘Then he removes all its fat, as the fat of the lamb
is removed from the slaughtering of the peace
offering. And the kohĕn shall burn it on the altar,
according to the offerings made by fire to hWhY. So
the kohĕn shall make atonement for his sin that he
has sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.

5 ‘And when a being sins in that he has heard the
voice of swearing, and is a witness, or has seen, or
has known, but does not reveal it, he shall bear his
wickedness.
2 ‘Or when a being touches any unclean matter, or
the carcass of an unclean beast, or the carcass of
unclean livestock, or the carcass of unclean creeping
creatures, and it has been hidden from him, he is
unclean and guilty.
3 ‘Or when he touches uncleanness of man, any of
his uncleanness by which he is unclean, and it has
been hidden from him, when he shall know it, then he
shall be guilty.
4 ‘Or when a being swears, speaking rashly with his
lips to do evil or to do good, whatever it is that a man
swears rashly with an oath, and it has been hidden
from him, when he shall know it, then he shall be
guilty of one of these.
5 ‘And it shall be, when he is guilty of one of these,
that he shall confess that in which he has sinned,
6 and shall bring his guilt offering to hWhY for his sin
which he has sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb
or a female goat as a sin offering. And the kohĕn shall
make atonement for him, for his sin.
7 ‘And if he is unable to bring a lamb, then he shall
bring to hWhY, he who has sinned, two turtledoves or
261

WAYYIQRA

two young pigeons, one for a sin offering and the
other for a burnt offering.
8 ‘And he shall bring them to the kohĕn, who shall
bring near that which is for the sin offering first, and
wring off its head from its neck, but not sever it.
9 ‘And he shall sprinkle some of the blood of the sin
offering on the side of the altar, and the rest of the
blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar. It
is a sin offering.
10 ‘And he shall prepare the second as a burnt
offering according to the Right-Ruling, and the kohĕn
shall make atonement for him, for his sin which he
has sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.
11 ‘But if he is unable to bring two turtledoves or two
young pigeons, then he who sinned shall bring for his
offering one-tenth of an ĕphah of fine flour as a sin
offering. He puts no oil on it, nor does he put any
frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
12 ‘And he shall bring it to the kohĕn, and the kohĕn
shall take his hand filled with it as a remembrance
portion, and burn it on the altar according to the
offerings made by fire to hWhY. It is a sin offering.
13 ‘And the kohĕn shall make atonement for him, for
his sin that he has sinned in any of these, and it shall
be forgiven him. And it shall be the kohĕn’s, like a
grain offering.’ ”
14 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
15 “When a being commits a trespass, and has
sinned by mistake against the qodesh matters of
hWhY, then he shall bring to hWhY as his guilt offering
a ram, a perfect one, from the flock, with your
valuation in sheqels of silver according to the sheqel
of the qodesh place, as a guilt offering.
16 “And he shall make good for the sin that he has
done against that which is qodesh, and shall add one262

LEVITICUS

fifth to it and give it to the kohĕn. And the kohĕn shall
make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt
offering, and it shall be forgiven him.
17 “And when any being sins, and has done what is
not to be done, any of the Commands of hWhY,
though he knew it not, yet he shall be guilty and shall
bear his wickedness.
18 “Then he shall bring to the kohĕn a ram, a perfect
one, from the flock, with your valuation, as a guilt
offering. And the kohĕn shall make atonement for his
mistake he committed unintentionally, though he did
not know it, and it shall be forgiven him 19 it is a guilt offering, he was truly guilty before
hWhY.”

6 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“When any being sins, and committed a trespass
against HWHY, and has lied to his neighbour about a
deposit, or about a pledge, or about a robbery, or
shall extort from his neighbour,
3 or has found what was lost and has lied
concerning it, or sworn falsely, so that he sins in
regard to any one of all these that a man does,
4 then it shall be, when he sins, and shall be guilty,
that he shall return what he took by robbery, or what
he has extorted, or the deposit which was deposited
with him, or the lost item which he found,
5 or all that about which he swore falsely. He shall
repay its total value, add one-fifth more to it, and give
it to whom it belongs, on the day of his guilt offering.
6 “Then he brings his guilt offering to hWhY, a ram,
a perfect one, from the flock, with your valuation, as
a guilt offering, to the kohĕn.
2

263

WAYYIQRA

“And the kohĕn shall make atonement for him
before hWhY, and he shall be forgiven for whatever
he did that made him guilty.”
8 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
9 “Command Aharon and his sons, saying, ‘This is
the Torah of the burnt offering: This is the burnt
offering, because it is burned on the altar all night until
morning, and the fire of the altar is kept burning on it.
10 ‘And the kohĕn shall put on his linen garment, and
put his linen trousers on his body, and shall take up
the ashes of the burnt offering which the fire has
consumed on the altar, and shall put them beside the
altar.
11 ‘And he shall take off his garments, and put on
other garments, and shall bring the ashes outside the
camp to a clean place.
12 ‘And the fire on the altar is kept burning on it, it is
not put out. And the kohĕn shall burn wood on it every
morning, and arrange the burnt offering on it, and
shall burn on it the fat of the peace offerings 13 fire is continually kept burning on the altar, it is not
put out.
14 ‘And this is the Torah of the grain offering: The
sons of Aharon shall bring it near before hWhY, in front
of the altar,
15 and shall take from it with his hand from the fine
flour of the grain offering, and from its oil, and all the
frankincense which is on the grain offering, and shall
burn it on the altar for a sweet fragrance, as its
remembrance portion to hWhY.
16 ‘Then Aharon and his sons eat the rest of it. It is
eaten with unleavened bread, in the qodesh place.
They eat it in the courtyard of the Tent of
Appointment.
7

264

LEVITICUS

‘It is not baked with leaven. I have given it to them
as their portion of My offerings made by fire, it is most
qodesh, like the sin offering and the guilt offering.
18 ‘All the males among the children of Aharon eat it
- a Law forever in your generations concerning the
offerings made by fire to hWhY. All that touches them
is to be qodesh.’ ”
19 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
20 “This is the offering of Aharon and his sons, which
they bring near to hWhY, beginning on the day when
he is anointed: one-tenth of an ĕphah of fine flour as
a daily grain offering, half of it in the morning and half
of it at night.
21 “It is made on a griddle with oil. Bring it in mixed,
bring the baked portions of the grain offering near, a
sweet fragrance to hWhY.
22 “And the anointed kohĕn from among his sons,
who is in his place, prepares it - a Law forever to
hWhY. All of it has to be burned,
23 and every grain offering for the kohĕn is
completely burned, it is not eaten.”
24 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
25 “Speak to Aharon and to his sons, saying, ‘This is
the Torah of the sin offering: In the place where the
burnt offering is slaughtered, the sin offering is
slaughtered before hWhY, it is most qodesh.
26 ‘The kohĕn who is making atonement eats it, in the
qodesh place it is eaten, in the courtyard of the Tent
of Appointment.
27 ‘All that touches its flesh is to be qodesh. And
when its blood is sprinkled on any garment, you wash
that on which it was sprinkled, in a qodesh place.
28 ‘But the earthen vessel in which it is cooked is to
be broken. And if it is cooked in a bronze pot, then it
is scoured and rinsed in water.
17

265

WAYYIQRA

‘Every male among the kohenim eats it, it is most
qodesh.
30 ‘And no sin offering from which any of the blood is
brought into the Tent of Appointment, to make
atonement in the qodesh place, is eaten, it is burned
with fire.
29

7 ‘And this is the Torah of the guilt offering - it is most
qodesh.
2 ‘The guilt offering is slaughtered in the place
where they slaughter the burnt offering, and its blood
is sprinkled on the altar all around.
3 ‘Then he brings from it all its fat: the fat tail and the
fat that covers the entrails,
4 and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them by
the loins, and the appendage on the liver, which he
removes with the kidneys.
5 ‘And the kohĕn shall burn them on the altar as an
offering made by fire to hWhY. It is a guilt offering.
6 ‘Every male among the kohenim eats it. It is eaten
in the qodesh place, it is most qodesh.
7 ‘The guilt offering is like the sin offering, there is
one Torah for them both: the kohĕn who makes
atonement with it, it is his.
8 ‘And the kohĕn who brings anyone’s burnt
offering, the skin of the burnt offering which he has
brought is the kohĕn’s, it is his.
9 ‘And every grain offering that is baked in the oven
and all that is prepared in the stewing-pot, or on a
griddle, is the kohĕn’s who brings it, it is his.
10 ‘And every grain offering mixed with oil, or dry, is
for all the sons of Aharon, for all alike.
11 ‘And this is the Torah of the slaughtering of peace
offerings which is brought to hWhY:
266

LEVITICUS

‘If he brings it for a thanksgiving, then he shall
bring with the slaughtering of thanksgiving
unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened
thin cakes anointed with oil, or cakes of finely blended
flour mixed with oil.
13 ‘Besides the cakes, he brings as his offering
leavened bread together with the slaughtering of
thanksgiving of his peace offering.
14 ‘And from it he shall bring one cake from each
offering as a contribution to hWhY: to the kohĕn who
sprinkles the blood of the peace offering, it is his.
15 ‘As for the flesh of the slaughtering of his peace
offering for thanksgiving, it is eaten the same day it is
offered, he does not leave any of it until morning.
16 ‘And if the offering he brings is a vow or a voluntary
offering, it is eaten the same day that he brings his
slaughtering, and what is left of it is eaten the next
day,
17 but whatever is left of the flesh of the slaughtering
on the third day is burned with fire.
18 ‘However, if any of the flesh of his peace offering
is eaten at all on the third day, it is not accepted. It is
not reckoned to him who brings it, it is unclean to him,
and the being who eats of it bears his wickedness.
19 ‘And the flesh that touches that which is unclean
is not eaten, it is burned with fire. And as for the clean
flesh, all who are clean eat of it.
20 ‘But the being who eats the flesh of the peace
offering that belongs to hWhY, while he is unclean,
that being shall be cut off from his people.
21 ‘And when a being who touches that which is
unclean, of the uncleanness of man, or of the
uncleanness of beast, or of any unclean swarming
creature, and shall eat the flesh of the peace offering
12

267

WAYYIQRA

that belongs to hWhY, that being shall be cut off from
his people.’ ”
22 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
23 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘Do not
eat any fat, of bull or sheep or goat.
24 ‘And the fat of a dead body, and the fat of what is
torn, is used for any purpose, but you do not eat it at
all.
25 ‘For whoever eats the fat of the beast of which
men bring as an offering made by fire to hWhY, even
the being who eats it shall be cut off from his people.
26 ‘And do not eat any blood in any of your dwellings,
of bird or of beast.
27 ‘Any being who eats any blood, even that being
shall be cut off from his people.’ ”
28 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
29 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘He who
brings his peace offering to hWhY brings his offering
to hWhY from the slaughtering of his peace offering.
30 ‘With his own hands he brings the offerings made
by fire to hWhY. He brings the fat with the breast, to
be waved as a wave offering before hWhY.
31 ‘And the kohĕn shall burn the fat on the altar, but
the breast shall be Aharon’s and his sons.’
32 ‘And the right thigh you give to the kohĕn as a
contribution from your peace offerings.
33 ‘He among the sons of Aharon, who brings the
blood of the peace offering, and the fat, the right thigh
is his for a portion.
34 ‘For the breast of the wave offering and the thigh
of the contribution I have taken from the children of
Yisra’ĕl, from their peace offerings, and I give them to
Aharon the kohĕn and to his sons, as a Law forever,
from the children of Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
268

LEVITICUS

This is the anointed portion for Aharon and the
anointed portion for his sons, from the offerings made
by fire to hWhY, on the day when Mosheh presented
them to serve as kohenim to hWhY,
36 which hWhY commanded to be given to them by
the children of Yisra’ĕl, on the day that He anointed
them, a Law forever throughout their generations.
37 This is the Torah of the burnt offering, of the grain
offering, and of the sin offering, and of the guilt
offering, and of the ordinations, and of the peace
offering,
38 which hWhY commanded Mosheh on Mount Sinai,
on the day when He commanded the children of
Yisra’ĕl to bring their offerings to hWhY, in the
Wilderness of Sinai.
35

8 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Take Aharon and his sons with him, and the
garments, and the anointing oil, and the bull of the sin
offering, and the two rams, and the basket of
unleavened bread,
3 and assemble all the congregation at the door of
the Tent of Appointment.”
4 And Mosheh did as hWhY commanded him, and
the congregation was assembled at the door of the
Tent of Appointment.
5 And Mosheh said to the congregation, “This is the
Word hWhY commanded to be done.”
6 So Mosheh brought Aharon and his sons and
washed them with water,
7 and put the long shirt on him, and girded him with
the girdle, and dressed him in the robe, and put the
shoulder garment on him, and girded him with the
embroidered band of the shoulder garment, and with
it tied the shoulder garment on him,
2

269

WAYYIQRA

and put the breastplate on him, and put the Urim
and the Tummim in the breastplate,
9 and put the turban on his head. And on the turban,
on its front, he put the golden plate, the qodesh sign
of dedication, as hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
10 And Mosheh took the anointing oil and anointed
the Mishkan and all that was in it, and qadosh them.
11 And he sprinkled some of it on the altar seven
times, and anointed the altar and all its utensils, and
the basin and its base, to qadosh them.
12 And he poured some of the anointing oil on
Aharon’s head and anointed him, to qadosh him.
13 And Mosheh brought the sons of Aharon and put
long shirts on them, and girded them with girdles, and
put turbans on them, as hWhY had commanded
Mosheh.
14 And he brought the bull for the sin offering, and
Aharon and his sons laid their hands on the head of
the bull for the sin offering,
15 and it was slaughtered. And Mosheh took the
blood, and put some on the horns of the altar all
around with his finger, and cleansed the altar. And he
poured the blood at the base of the altar, and qadosh
it, to make atonement for it.
16 And he took all the fat that was on the entrails, and
the appendage on the liver, and the two kidneys with
their fat, and Mosheh burned them on the altar.
17 And the bull, and its skin, and its flesh, and its
dung, he burned with fire outside the camp, as hWhY
had commanded Mosheh.
18 And he brought the ram of the burnt offering, and
Aharon and his sons laid their hands on the head of
the ram,
19 and it was slaughtered. And Mosheh sprinkled the
blood on the altar all around,
8

270

LEVITICUS

and he cut the ram into pieces. And Mosheh
burned the head, and the pieces, and the fat,
21 and he washed the entrails and the legs in water.
And Mosheh burned the entire ram on the altar. It was
a burnt offering for a sweet fragrance, and an offering
made by fire to hWhY, as HWHY had commanded
Mosheh.
22 And he brought the second ram, the ram of
ordination, and Aharon and his sons laid their hands
on the head of the ram,
23 and it was slaughtered. And Mosheh took some of
its blood and put it on the tip of Aharon’s right ear, and
on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of
his right foot.
24 And he brought near the sons of Aharon, and
Mosheh put some of the blood on the tips of their right
ears, and on the thumbs of their right hands, and on
the big toes of their right feet. And Mosheh sprinkled
the blood on the altar all around,
25 and took the fat and the fat tail, and all the fat that
was on the entrails, and the appendage on the liver,
and the two kidneys and their fat, and the right thigh,
26 and from the basket of unleavened bread that was
before hWhY he took one unleavened cake, and a
cake of bread anointed with oil, and one thin cake,
and put them on the fat and on the right thigh,
27 and placed all these in the hands of Aharon and in
the hands of his sons, and waved them as a wave
offering before hWhY.
28 Mosheh then took them from their hands and
burned them on the altar, on the burnt offering. They
were ordinations for a sweet fragrance. It was an
offering by fire to hWhY.
20

271

WAYYIQRA

And Mosheh took the breast and waved it, a wave
offering before hWhY. It was Mosheh’s portion of the
ram of ordination, as hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
30 And Mosheh took some of the anointing oil and
some of the blood which was on the altar, and
sprinkled it on Aharon, on his garments, and on his
sons, and on the garments of his sons with him. And
he qadosh Aharon, his garments, and his sons, and
the garments of his sons with him.
31 And Mosheh said to Aharon and his sons, “Cook
the flesh at the door of the Tent of Appointment, and
eat it there with the bread that is in the basket of the
ordinations, as I have commanded, saying, ‘Aharon
and his sons are to eat it.’
32 “Then burn the rest of the flesh and the bread with
fire.
33 “And do not go outside the door of the Tent of
Appointment for seven days, until the days of your
ordination are completed - for He fills your hands for
seven days.
34 “hWhY has commanded to do, as He has done this
day, to make atonement for you.
35 “And stay at the door of the Tent of Appointment
day and night for seven days. And you shall guard the
duty of hWhY, and not die, for so I have been
commanded.”
36 And Aharon and his sons did all the words that
hWhY had commanded by the hand of Mosheh.
29

9 And on the eighth day it came to be that Mosheh
called Aharon and his sons and the elders of Yisra’ĕl.
2 And he said to Aharon, “Take for yourself a young
bull as a sin offering and a ram as a burnt offering, a
perfect one, and bring them before hWhY.
272

LEVITICUS

“And speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘Take a male goat as a sin offering, and a calf and a
lamb, both a year old, perfect ones, as a burnt
offering,
4 and a bull and a ram as peace offerings, to
slaughter before hWhY, and a grain offering mixed
with oil. For today hWhY shall appear to you.’ ”
5 And they took what Mosheh commanded before
the Tent of Appointment, and all the congregation
drew near and stood before hWhY.
6 And Mosheh said, “This is the Word which hWhY
commanded you to do, so that the esteem of hWhY
appears to you.”
7 And Mosheh said to Aharon, “Go to the altar, and
prepare your sin offering and your burnt offering, and
make atonement for yourself and for the people. And
make the offering of the people, and make atonement
for them, as hWhY has commanded.”
8 So Aharon came near to the altar and slaughtered
the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself.
9 And the sons of Aharon brought the blood to him,
and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it on the
horns of the altar, and poured the blood at the base
of the altar.
10 And the fat, and the kidneys, and the appendage
on the liver of the sin offering he burned on the altar,
as hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
11 And the flesh and the skin he burned with fire
outside the camp.
12 And he slaughtered the burnt offering, and the
sons of Aharon presented to him the blood, which he
sprinkled on the altar all around.
13 And they presented the burnt offering to him, with
its pieces and head, and he burned them on the altar.
3

273

WAYYIQRA

And he washed the entrails and the legs, and burnt
them with the burned offering on the altar.
15 And he brought the people’s offering, and took the
goat, which was the sin offering for the people, and
slaughtered it and made it a sin offering, like the first
one.
16 And he brought the burnt offering and made it,
according to the Right-Ruling.
17 He also brought the grain offering, and filled his
hand with it, and burned it on the altar, besides the
burnt offering of the morning.
18 And he slaughtered the bull and the ram as peace
offerings, which were for the people. And Aharon’s
sons presented to him the blood, which he sprinkled
on the altar all around,
19 and the fat from the bull and the ram, the fat tail,
and the covering, and the kidneys, and the
appendage on the liver,
20 and they placed the fat on the breasts, and he
burned the fat on the altar.
21 But the breasts and the right thigh Aharon waved
as a wave offering before hWhY, as Mosheh had
commanded.
22 Aharon then lifted up his hand toward the people
and baraḵ them, and came down from making the sin
offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace
offerings.
23 And Mosheh and Aharon went into the Tent of
Appointment, and came out and baraḵ the people.
And the esteem of hWhY appeared to all the people,
24 and fire came out from before hWhY and
consumed the burnt offering and the fat on the altar.
And all the people saw and cried aloud and fell on
their faces.
14

274

LEVITICUS

10 And Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu, the sons of Aharon, each
took his fire holder and put fire in it, and put incense on
it, and brought strange fire before hWhY, which He had
not commanded them.
2 And fire came out from hWhY and consumed them,
and they died before hWhY.
3 Then Mosheh said to Aharon, “This is what hWhY
spoke, saying, ‘By those who come near Me let Me
be qodesh! And before all the people let Me be
esteemed!’ ” And Aharon was silent.
4 And Mosheh called to Misha’ĕl and to Eltsaphan,
the sons of Uzzi’ĕl the uncle of Aharon, and said to
them, “Come near, take your brothers from before the
qodesh place out of the camp.”
5 So they came near and took them by their long
shirts out of the camp, as Mosheh had said.
6 And Mosheh said to Aharon, and to El’azar and to
Ithamar, his sons, “Do not unbind your heads nor tear
your garments, lest you die, and wrath come upon all
the people. But let your brothers, all the house of
Yisra’ĕl, bewail the burning which hWhY has kindled.
7 “And do not go out from the door of the Tent of
Appointment, lest you die, for the anointing oil of
hWhY is upon you.” And they did according to the
word of Mosheh.
8 And hWhY spoke to Aharon, saying,
9 “Do not drink wine or strong drink, you, nor your
sons with you, when you go into the Tent of
Appointment, lest you die - a Law forever throughout
your generations,
10 so as to make a distinction between the qodesh
and the profane, and between the unclean and the
clean,
275

WAYYIQRA

and to teach the children of Yisra’ĕl all the Laws
which hWhY has spoken to them by the hand of
Mosheh.”
12 And Mosheh spoke to Aharon, and to El’azar and
Ithamar, his sons who were left, “Take the grain
offering that is left over from the offerings made by fire
to hWhY, and eat it without leaven beside the altar, for
it is most qodesh.
13 “And you shall eat it in a qodesh place, because it
is yours by law and your sons’ by law, of the offerings
made by fire to hWhY, for so I have been commanded.
14 “And the breast of the wave offering and the thigh
of the contribution you eat in a clean place, you, and
your sons, and your daughters with you. For they are
yours by law and your sons’ by law, which are given
from the slaughterings of peace offerings of the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
15 “The thigh of the contribution and the breast of the
wave offering they bring with the offerings of fat made
by fire, to bring as a wave offering before hWhY. And
it shall be yours and your sons’ with you, as a Law
forever, as hWhY has commanded.”
16 And Mosheh diligently looked for the goat of the
sin offering and saw it was burned up. And he was
wroth with El’azar and Ithamar, the sons of Aharon
who were left, saying,
17 “Why have you not eaten the sin offering in a
qodesh place, since it is most qodesh, and Elohim
has given it to you to bear the wickedness of the
congregation, to make atonement for them before
hWhY?
18 “See, its blood was not brought inside the qodesh
place. You should have eaten it without fail in a
qodesh place, as I have commanded.”
11

276

LEVITICUS

And Aharon said to Mosheh, “See, today they
have brought their sin offering and their burnt offering
before hWhY, and these have come upon me! If I had
eaten the sin offering today, would it have been right
in the eyes of hWhY?”
20 And when Mosheh heard that, it was good in his
eyes.
19

11And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying to them,
2 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘These
are the living creatures which you do eat among all
the beasts that are on the earth:
3 ‘Whatever has a split hoof completely divided,
chewing the cud, among the beasts, that you do eat.
4 ‘Only, these you do not eat among those that chew
the cud or those that have a split hoof: the camel,
because it chews the cud but does not have a split
hoof, it is unclean to you;
5 and the rabbit, because it chews the cud but does
not have a split hoof, it is unclean to you;
6 and the hare, because it chews the cud but does
not have a split hoof, it is unclean to you;
7 and the pig, though it has a split hoof, completely
divided, yet does not chew the cud, it is unclean to
you.
8 ‘Their flesh you do not eat, and their carcasses
you do not touch. They are unclean to you.
9 ‘These you do eat of all that are in the waters: any
one that has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas
or in the rivers, that you do eat.
10 ‘But all that have not fins and scales in the seas
and in the rivers, all that move in the waters or any
living creature which is in the waters, they are an
abomination to you.
277

WAYYIQRA

‘They are an abomination to you - of their flesh you
do not eat, and their carcasses you abominate.
12 ‘All that have not fins or scales in the waters is an
abomination to you.
13 ‘And these you do abominate among the birds,
they are not eaten, they are an abomination: the
eagle, and the vulture, and the black vulture,
14 and the hawk, and the falcon after its kind,
15 every raven after its kind,
16 and the ostrich, and the nighthawk, and the
seagull, and the hawk after its kind,
17 and the little owl, and the fisher owl, and the great
owl,
18 and the white owl, and the pelican, and the carrion
vulture,
19 and the stork, the heron after its kind, and the
hoopoe, and the bat.
20 ‘All flying insects that creep on all fours is an
abomination to you.
21 ‘Only, these you do eat of every flying insect that
creeps on all fours: those which have jointed legs
above their feet with which to leap on the earth.
22 ‘These of them you do eat: the locust after its kind,
and the destroying locust after its kind, and the cricket
after its kind, and the grasshopper after its kind.
23 ‘But all other flying insects which have four feet is
an abomination to you.
24 ‘And by these you are made unclean, anyone
touching the carcass of any of them is unclean until
evening,
25 and anyone picking up part of the carcass of any
of them has to wash his garments, and shall be
unclean until evening.
11

278

LEVITICUS

‘Every beast that has a split hoof not completely
divided, or does not chew the cud, is unclean to you.
Anyone who touches their carcass is unclean.
27 ‘And whatever goes on its paws, among all the
creatures that go on all fours, those are unclean to
you. Anyone who touches their carcass is unclean
until evening,
28 and he who picks up their carcass has to wash his
garments, and shall be unclean until evening. They
are unclean to you.
29 ‘And these are unclean to you among the creeping
creatures that creep on the earth: the mole, and the
mouse, and the tortoise after its kind,
30 and the gecko, and the land crocodile, and the
sand reptile, and the sand lizard, and the chameleon.
31 ‘These are unclean to you among all that creep.
Anyone who touches them when they are dead
becomes unclean until evening.
32 ‘And whatever any of them in its dead state falls
upon, becomes unclean, whether it is any wooden
object or garment or skin or sack, any object in which
work is done, it is put in water. And it shall be unclean
until evening, then it shall be clean.
33 ‘Any earthen vessel into which any of them falls,
whatever is in it becomes unclean, and you break it.
34 ‘Any of the food which might be eaten, on which
water comes, becomes unclean, and any drink which
might be drunk from it becomes unclean.
35 ‘And on whatever their carcass falls becomes
unclean - an oven or cooking range - it is broken
down. They are unclean, and are unclean to you.
36 ‘But a fountain or a well, a collection of water, is
clean, but whatever touches their carcass is unclean.
37 ‘And when their carcass falls on any planting seed
which is to be sown, it is clean.
26

279

WAYYIQRA

‘But when any water is put on the seed and any
part of any such carcass falls on it, it is unclean to
you.
39 ‘And when any of the beasts which are yours for
food dies, he who touches its carcass becomes
unclean until evening.
40 ‘And he who eats of its carcass has to wash his
garments, and shall be unclean until evening. And he
who picks up its carcass has to wash his garments,
and shall be unclean until evening.
41 ‘And every creeping creature that creeps on the
earth is an abomination, it is not eaten.
42 ‘Whatever crawls on its stomach, and whatever
goes on all fours, and whatever has many feet among
all creeping creatures that creep on the earth, these
you do not eat, for they are an abomination.
43 ‘Do not make yourselves abominable with any
creeping creature that creeps, and do not make
yourselves unclean with them, lest you be defiled by
them.
44 ‘For I am hWhY your Elohim, and you shall qadosh
yourselves. And you shall be qodesh, for I am
qodesh. And do not defile yourselves with any
creeping creature that creeps on the earth.
45 ‘For I am hWhY who is bringing you up out of the
land of Mitsrayim, to be your Elohim. And you shall be
qodesh, for I am qodesh.
46 ‘This is the Torah of the beasts and the birds and
every living creature that moves in the waters, and of
every creature that creeps on the earth,
47 to make a distinction between the unclean and the
clean, and between the living creature that is eaten
and the living creature that is not eaten.’ ”
38

12 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
280

LEVITICUS

“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘When a
woman has conceived, and has given birth to a male
child, then she shall be unclean seven days, as in the
days of her monthly separation she is unclean.
3 ‘And on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin is
circumcised.
4 ‘And she remains in the blood of her cleansing
thirty-three days. She does not touch whatever is
qodesh, and she does not come into the Miqdash until
the days of her cleansing are completed.
5 ‘But if she gives birth to a female child, then she
shall be unclean for two weeks, as in her monthly
separation, and she remains in the blood of her
cleansing for sixty-six days.
6 ‘And when the days of her cleansing are
completed, for a son or for a daughter, she brings to
the kohĕn a lamb a year old, as a burnt offering, and
a young pigeon or a turtledove as a sin offering, to the
door of the Tent of Appointment.
7 ‘And he shall bring it before hWhY, and make
atonement for her, and she shall be cleansed from the
flow of her blood. This is the Torah for her who has
given birth to a male or a female.
8 ‘And if she is not able to bring a lamb, then she
shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one
as a burnt offering and the other as a sin offering. And
the kohĕn shall make atonement for her, and she
shall be clean.’ ”
2

13 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying,
2 “When a man has on the skin of his body a
swelling, a scab, or a bright spot, and it shall become
on the skin of his body like a leprous infection, then
281

WAYYIQRA

he shall be brought to Aharon the kohĕn or to one of
his sons the kohenim.
3 “And the kohĕn shall look at the infection on the
skin of the body. And if the hair on the infection has
turned white, and the infection appears to be deeper
than the skin of his body, it is a leprous infection. And
the kohĕn shall look at him, and pronounce him
unclean.
4 “But if the bright spot is white on the skin of his
body, and does not appear to be deeper than the skin,
and its hair has not turned white, then the kohĕn shall
shut up the infected one seven days.
5 “And the kohĕn shall look at him on the seventh
day and see, if the infection appears to be as it was,
and the infection has not spread on the skin, then the
kohĕn shall shut him up another seven days.
6 “And the kohĕn shall look at him again on the
seventh day and see, if the infection has darkened,
and the infection has not spread on the skin, then the
kohĕn shall pronounce him clean. It is a scab, and he
shall wash his garments and be clean.
7 “But if the scab spreads further over the skin, after
he has been seen by the kohĕn for his cleansing, he
shall be seen by the kohĕn again.
8 “And the kohĕn shall look and see, if the scab has
spread on the skin, then the kohĕn shall pronounce
him unclean, it is leprosy.
9 “When the infection of leprosy is on a man, then
he shall be brought to the kohĕn.
10 “And the kohĕn shall look and see, if the swelling
on the skin is white, and it has turned the hair white,
and there is a spot of raw flesh in the swelling,
11 it is an old leprosy on the skin of his body, and the
kohĕn shall pronounce him unclean. He does not shut
him up, for he is unclean.
282

LEVITICUS

“And if leprosy breaks out all over the skin, and the
leprosy shall cover all the skin of the infected one,
from his head to his foot, wherever the kohĕn looks,
13 then the kohĕn shall look and see, if the leprosy
has covered all his body, he shall pronounce the
infected one clean. It has all turned white, he is clean.
14 “But the day raw flesh appears on him, he is
unclean.
15 “And the kohĕn shall look at the raw flesh and
pronounce him to be unclean - the raw flesh is
unclean, it is leprosy.
16 “Or when the raw flesh changes and turns white
again, he shall come to the kohĕn.
17 “And the kohĕn shall look at him and see, if the
infection has turned white, then the kohĕn shall
pronounce the infected one clean, he is clean.
18 “And when the body has a boil in the skin, and it is
healed,
19 and in the place of the boil there comes a white
swelling or a bright spot, reddish-white, then it shall
be seen by the kohĕn.
20 “And the kohĕn shall look and see, if it appears
deeper than the skin, and its hair has turned white,
the kohĕn shall pronounce him unclean, it is a leprous
infection which has broken out of the boil.
21 “But if the kohĕn looks at it and sees no white hairs
in it, and it is not deeper than the skin, but has faded,
then the kohĕn shall shut him up seven days;
22 and if it has spread further over the skin, then the
kohĕn shall pronounce him unclean, it is a leprous
infection.
23 “But if the bright spot stays in its place, it has not
spread, it is the scar of the boil, and the kohĕn shall
pronounce him clean.
12

283

WAYYIQRA

“Or when the body receives a burn on its skin by
fire, and the raw flesh of the burn shall become a
bright spot, reddish-white or white,
25 then the kohĕn shall look at it and see, if the hair
of the bright spot has turned white, and it appears
deeper than the skin, it is leprosy broken out in the
burn. And the kohĕn shall pronounce him unclean, it
is a leprous infection.
26 “But if the kohĕn looks at it and sees there are no
white hairs in the bright spot, and it is not deeper than
the skin, but has faded, then the kohĕn shall shut him
up seven days.
27 “And the kohĕn shall look at him on the seventh
day. If it spreads further over the skin, then the kohĕn
shall pronounce him unclean, it is a leprous infection.
28 “But if the bright spot stays in its place, and has
not spread on the skin, but has faded, it is a swelling
from the burn. And the kohĕn shall pronounce him
clean, for it is the scar from the burn.
29 “And when a man, or a woman, has an infection
on the head or in the beard,
30 then the kohĕn shall look at the infection and see,
if it appears deeper than the skin, and there is thin
yellow hair in it, then the kohĕn shall pronounce him
unclean, it is an eruption, a leprosy of the head or
beard.
31 “But when the kohĕn looks at the infection of the
eruption and sees that it does not appear deeper than
the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then the kohĕn
shall shut up the infection of the eruption seven days.
32 “And on the seventh day the kohĕn shall look at
the infection and see, if the eruption has not spread,
and there is no yellow hair in it, and the eruption does
not appear deeper than the skin,
24

284

LEVITICUS

then he shall shave himself, but the eruption he
does not shave. And the kohĕn shall shut up the
eruption another seven days.
34 “And on the seventh day the kohĕn shall look at
the eruption and see, if the eruption has not spread
over the skin, and does not appear deeper than the
skin, then the kohĕn shall pronounce him clean. And
he shall wash his garments, and he shall be clean.
35 “But if the eruption spreads further over the skin
after his cleansing,
36 then the kohĕn shall look at him and see, if the
eruption has spread over the skin, the kohĕn need not
seek for yellow hair, he is unclean.
37 “But if the eruption appears to have stayed, and
there is black hair grown up in it, the eruption has
healed. He is clean, and the kohĕn shall pronounce
him clean.
38 “And when a man or a woman has bright spots on
the skin of the body, white bright spots,
39 then the kohĕn shall look and see, if the bright
spots on the skin of the body are dull white, it is a
white spot that grows on the skin, he is clean.
40 “And when a man loses the hair of his head, he is
bald, he is clean.
41 “And if the hair has fallen from his forehead, he is
bald on the forehead, he is clean.
42 “And when there is on the bald head or bald
forehead a reddish-white infection, it is leprosy
breaking out on his bald head or his bald forehead.
43 “And the kohĕn shall look at it and see, if the
swelling of the infection is reddish-white on his bald
head or on his bald forehead, as the appearance of
leprosy on the skin of the body,
33

285

WAYYIQRA

he is a leprous man, he is unclean. The kohĕn
shall pronounce him unclean, without fail, his infection
is on his head.
45 “As for the leper who has the infection, his
garments are torn, and his head is uncovered, and he
has to cover his upper lip and cry, ‘Unclean! Unclean!’
46 “He is unclean - all the days he has the infection
he is unclean. He is unclean, and he dwells alone, his
dwelling place is outside the camp.
47 “And when a garment has an infection of leprosy
in it, in a woollen garment or in a linen garment,
48 or in the warp or in the weft of linen or wool, or in
leather or in any leather-work,
49 and the infection shall be greenish or reddish in
the garment or in the leather, or in the warp or in the
weft, or in any leather object, it is an infection of
leprosy and shall be shown to the kohĕn.
50 “And the kohĕn shall look at the infection and shut
up the infection seven days.
51 “And he shall look at the infection on the seventh
day. And when the infection has spread in the
garment, or in the warp or in the weft, or in the leather
or any leather-work, the infection is an active leprosy,
it is unclean.
52 “And he shall burn that garment, or the warp or the
weft, in wool or in linen, or any leather object in which
the infection is, for it is an active leprosy. It is burned
with fire.
53 “But if the kohĕn looks and sees that the infection
has not spread in the garment, or in the warp or in the
weft, or in any leather object,
54 then the kohĕn shall give command, and they shall
wash that in which the infection is. And he shall shut
it up another seven days.
44

286

LEVITICUS

“And the kohĕn shall look at the infection after it
has been washed and see, if the infection has not
changed its appearance, though the infection has not
spread, it is unclean, and burn it in the fire - it is eaten
away, in its inside or outside.
56 “And if the kohĕn shall look and see that the
infection has faded after washing it, then he shall tear
it out of the garment, or out of the warp, or out of the
weft, or out of the leather.
57 “And if it is still seen in the garment, or in the warp
or in the weft, or in any leather object, it is a spreading
infection. Burn it with fire, that in which the infection
is.
58 “And if you wash the garment, or the warp or the
weft, or any leather object, if the infection has
disappeared from it, then it shall be washed a second
time, and shall be clean.
59 “This is the Torah of the infection of leprosy in a
garment of wool or linen, or in the warp or in the weft,
or in any leather object, to pronounce it clean or to
pronounce it unclean.”
55

14 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“This shall be the Torah of the leper for the day of
his cleansing: He shall be brought to the kohĕn,
3 and the kohĕn shall go out of the camp, and the
kohĕn shall look and see, if the leprosy is healed in
the leper,
4 then the kohĕn shall command, and he shall take
for him who is to be cleansed two live and clean birds,
and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
5 “And the kohĕn shall command, and he shall kill
one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running
water.
2

287

WAYYIQRA

“Let him take the live bird and the cedar wood and
the scarlet and the hyssop, and dip them and the live
bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the
running water.
7 “And he shall sprinkle it seven times on him who
is to be cleansed from the leprosy, and shall
pronounce him clean, and shall let the live bird loose
in the open field.
8 “And he who is to be cleansed shall wash his
garments, and shall shave off all his hair and wash
himself in water, and shall be clean. Then after that
he comes into the camp, but shall stay outside his tent
seven days.
9 “And on the seventh day it shall be that he shaves
all the hair off his head and his beard and his
eyebrows, even all his hair he shaves off. And he
shall wash his garments and wash his body in water,
and shall be clean.
10 “And on the eighth day he takes two male lambs,
perfect ones, and one ewe lamb a year old, a perfect
one, and three-tenth parts of fine flour mixed with oil
as a grain offering, and one log of oil.
11 “And the kohĕn who is cleansing shall present the
man who is to be cleansed, with these, before hWhY,
at the door of the Tent of Appointment.
12 “And the kohĕn shall take one male lamb and bring
it as a guilt offering, and the log of oil, and wave them
as a wave offering before hWhY.
13 “And he shall slaughter the lamb in the place
where he slaughters the sin offering and the burnt
offering, in a qodesh place. For the guilt offering, like
the sin offering, belongs to the kohĕn. It is most
qodesh.
14 “And the kohĕn shall take some of the blood of the
guilt offering, and the kohĕn shall put it on the tip of
6

288

LEVITICUS

the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the
thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right
foot.
15 “And the kohĕn shall take some of the log of oil,
and pour it into the palm of his own left hand.
16 “And the kohĕn shall dip his right finger in the oil
that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle some of the
oil with his finger seven times before hWhY.
17 “And of the rest of the oil in his hand, the kohĕn
puts some on the tip of the right ear of him who is to
be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and
on the big toe of his right foot, on the blood of the guilt
offering.
18 “And the rest of the oil that is in the kohĕn’s hand
he puts on the head of him who is to be cleansed. And
the kohĕn shall make atonement for him before hWhY.
19 “And the kohĕn shall make the sin offering, and
make atonement for him who is to be cleansed from
his uncleanness. Then afterwards he slaughters the
burnt offering.
20 “And the kohĕn shall offer the burnt offering and
the grain offering on the altar. And the kohĕn shall
make atonement for him, and he shall be clean.
21 “But if he is poor and is unable to afford it, then he
shall take one male lamb as a guilt offering to be
waved, to make atonement for him, and one-tenth
part of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and
a log of oil,
22 and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, such
as he is able to afford, and one shall be a sin offering
and the other a burnt offering.
23 “And he shall bring them to the kohĕn on the
eighth day for his cleansing, to the door of the Tent of
Appointment, before hWhY.
289

WAYYIQRA

“And the kohĕn shall take the lamb of the guilt
offering and the log of oil, and the kohĕn shall wave
them as a wave offering before hWhY.
25 “And he shall slaughter the lamb of the guilt
offering, and the kohĕn shall take some of the blood
of the guilt offering and put it on the tip of the right ear
of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his
right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
26 “Then the kohĕn pours some of the oil into the
palm of his own left hand.
27 “And the kohĕn shall sprinkle with his right finger
some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times
before hWhY.
28 “And the kohĕn shall put some of the oil that is in
his hand on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be
cleansed, and on the thumb of the right hand, and on
the big toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood
of the guilt offering.
29 “And the rest of the oil that is in the kohĕn’s hand
he puts on the head of him who is to be cleansed, to
make atonement for him before hWhY.
30 “And he shall prepare one of the turtledoves or
young pigeons, such as he is able to afford,
31 that which he is able to afford, the one as a sin
offering and the other as a burnt offering, with the
grain offering. And the kohĕn shall make atonement
for him who is to be cleansed before hWhY.
32 “This is the Torah for one who had an infection of
leprosy, who is unable to afford for his cleansing.”
33 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying,
34 “When you come into the land of Kena’an, which I
am giving you as a possession, and I put a plague of
leprosy in a house in the land of your possession,
24

290

LEVITICUS

then shall the one who owns the house come and
inform the kohĕn, saying, ‘It seems to me that there
is some plague in the house.’
36 “And the kohĕn shall command, and they shall
empty the house, before the kohĕn goes in to look at
the plague, so that all that is in the house is not made
unclean. And after that the kohĕn goes in to look at
the house.
37 “And he shall look at the plague and see, if the
plague is on the walls of the house with sunken
places, greenish or reddish, which appear to be deep
in the wall,
38 then the kohĕn shall go out of the house, to the
door of the house, and shut up the house seven days.
39 “And the kohĕn shall come again on the seventh
day and look and see, if the plague has spread on the
walls of the house,
40 then the kohĕn shall command, and they shall
remove the stones with the plague in them, and they
shall throw them outside the city, into an unclean
place,
41 while he lets the house be scraped inside, all
around, and the dust that they scrape off they shall
pour out in an unclean place outside the city.
42 “And they shall take other stones and put them in
the place of those stones, and take other mortar and
plaster the house.
43 “And if the plague comes back and breaks out in
the house, after he has removed the stones, after he
has scraped the house, and after it is plastered,
44 then the kohĕn shall come and look and see, if the
plague has spread in the house, it is an active leprosy
in the house, it is unclean.
35

291

WAYYIQRA

“And he shall break down the house, its stones,
and its timber, and all the plaster of the house, and he
shall bring them outside the city to an unclean place.
46 “And he who goes into the house, all the days
while it is shut up, becomes unclean until evening.
47 “And he who lies down in the house has to wash
his garments, and he who eats in the house has to
wash his garments.
48 “However, if the kohĕn indeed comes in and looks
at it and sees that the plague has not spread in the
house after the house was plastered, then the kohĕn
shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague
is healed.
49 “And to cleanse the house, he shall take two birds,
and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
50 “And he shall kill one of the birds in an earthen
vessel over running water,
51 and he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop,
and the scarlet, and the live bird, and dip them in the
blood of the slain bird and in the running water, and
shall sprinkle the house seven times.
52 “He shall thus cleanse the house with the blood of
the bird and the running water and the live bird, and
with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with
the scarlet,
53 and he shall let the live bird loose outside the city
in the open field, and shall make atonement for the
house, and it shall be clean.
54 “This is the Torah for any infection of leprosy, and
eruption,
55 and for leprosy of a garment, and of a house,
56 and for a swelling, and for a scab, and for a bright
spot,
57 to teach when it is unclean and when it is clean.
This is the Torah of leprosy.”
45

292

LEVITICUS

15 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying,
2 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When any man has a discharge from his flesh, his
discharge is unclean.
3 ‘And this is his uncleanness in regard to his
discharge; whether his flesh runs with his discharge,
or his flesh is stopped up by his discharge, it is his
uncleanness.
4 ‘Any bed becomes unclean on which he who has
the discharge lies, and any object on which he sits
becomes unclean.
5 ‘And anyone who touches his bed has to wash his
garments, and shall bathe in water, and be unclean
until evening.
6 ‘And he who sits on any object on which he who
has the discharge sat, has to wash his garments, and
shall bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
7 ‘And he who touches the flesh of him who has the
discharge has to wash his garments, and shall bathe
in water, and shall be unclean until evening.
8 ‘And when he who has the discharge spits on him
who is clean, then he shall wash his garments, and
shall bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
9 ‘Any saddle on which he who has the discharge
rides becomes unclean.
10 ‘And whoever touches any of that which was under
him is unclean until evening. And he who is carrying
them up has to wash his garments, and shall bathe in
water, and be unclean until evening.
11 ‘And anyone whom he who has the discharge
touches without rinsing his hands in water, shall wash
his garments and bathe in water, and be unclean until
evening.
293

WAYYIQRA

‘And the earthen vessel which he who has the
discharge touches has to be broken, and every
wooden vessel has to be rinsed in water.
13 ‘And when he who has a discharge is cleansed of
his discharge, then he shall count for himself seven
days for his cleansing, and shall wash his garments,
and shall bathe his flesh in running water, and be
clean.
14 ‘And on the eighth day he takes for himself two
turtledoves or two young pigeons, and shall come
before hWhY, to the door of the Tent of Appointment,
and shall give them to the kohĕn.
15 ‘And the kohĕn shall prepare them, the one as a
sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. And the
kohĕn shall make atonement for him before hWhY
because of his discharge.
16 ‘And when a man has an emission of semen, then
he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean
until evening.
17 ‘And any garment and any leather on which there
is semen, shall also be washed with water, and be
unclean until evening.
18 ‘And when a woman lies with a man, and there is
an emission of semen, they both shall bathe in water,
and be unclean until evening.
19 ‘And when a woman has a discharge, and the
discharge from her flesh is blood, she has to be in her
separation for seven days. And whoever touches her
is unclean until evening.
20 ‘And whatever she lies on during her separation is
unclean. And whatever she sits on is unclean.
21 ‘And anyone who touches her bed has to wash his
garments, and shall bathe in water, and be unclean
until evening.
12

294

LEVITICUS

‘And whoever touches any object that she sat on
has to wash his garments, and shall bathe in water,
and be unclean until evening.
23 ‘And if it is on the bed or on any object on which
she sits, when he touches it, he is unclean until
evening.
24 ‘And if any man lies with her at all, and her monthly
flow is on him, he shall be unclean seven days. And
any bed he lies on is unclean.
25 ‘And when a woman has a discharge of blood for
many days, other than at the time of her monthly
separation, or when she discharges beyond her usual
time of monthly separation, all the days of her unclean
discharge shall be as the days of her monthly
separation. She is unclean.
26 ‘Any bed on which she lies all the days of her
discharge is to her as the bed of her monthly
separation. And whatever she sits on is unclean, as
the uncleanness of her monthly separation.
27 ‘And anyone who touches them is unclean, and
shall wash his garments, and shall bathe in water,
and be unclean until evening.
28 ‘But if she is cleansed of her discharge, then she
shall count for herself seven days, and after that she
is clean.
29 ‘And on the eighth day she takes for herself two
turtledoves or two young pigeons, and shall bring
them to the kohĕn, to the door of the Tent of
Appointment.
30 ‘And the kohĕn shall prepare the one as a sin
offering and the other as a burnt offering, and the
kohĕn shall make atonement for her before hWhY for
the discharge of her uncleanness.
31 ‘Thus you shall separate the children of Yisra’ĕl
from their uncleanness, lest they die in their
22

295

WAYYIQRA

uncleanness when they defile My Mishkan which is in
their midst.
32 ‘This is the Torah for one who has a discharge,
and for him who emits semen and is unclean thereby,
33 and for her who is sick in her monthly separation,
and for one who has a discharge, either man or
woman, and for him who lies with an unclean
woman.’ ”

16 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh after the death of the
two sons of Aharon, when they drew near before
hWhY, and died.
2 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Speak to Aharon your
brother not to come in at all times to the qodesh place
inside the veil, before the lid of atonement which is on
the ark, lest he die, because I appear in the cloud
above the lid of atonement.
3 “With this Aharon should come into the qodesh
place: with the blood of a young bull as a sin offering,
and of a ram as a burnt offering.
4 “He should put on the qodesh linen long shirt, with
linen trousers on his flesh, and gird himself with a
linen girdle, and be dressed with the linen turban they are qodesh garments. And he shall bathe his
body in water, and shall put them on.
5 “And from the congregation of the children of
Yisra’ĕl he takes two male goats as a sin offering, and
one ram as a burnt offering.
6 “And Aharon shall bring the bull as a sin offering,
which is for himself, and make atonement for himself
and for his house.
7 “And he shall take the two goats and let them
stand before hWhY at the door of the Tent of
Appointment.
296

LEVITICUS

“And Aharon shall cast lots for the two goats, one
lot for hWhY and the other lot for Azazĕl.
9 “And Aharon shall bring the goat on which the lot
for hWhY fell, and shall prepare it as a sin offering.
10 “But the goat on which the lot for Azazĕl fell is
caused to stand alive before hWhY, to make
atonement upon it, to send it into the wilderness to
Azazĕl.
11 “And Aharon shall bring the bull of the sin offering,
which is for himself, and make atonement for himself
and for his house, and shall slaughter the bull as the
sin offering which is for himself,
12 and shall take a fire holder filled with burning coals
of fire from the altar before hWhY, with his hands filled
with sweet incense beaten fine, and shall bring it
inside the veil.
13 “And he shall put the incense on the fire before
hWhY, and the cloud of incense shall cover the lid of
atonement which is on the Witness, lest he die.
14 “And he shall take some of the blood of the bull
and sprinkle it with his finger on the lid of atonement
on the east side, also in front of the lid of atonement
he sprinkles some of the blood with his finger seven
times.
15 “And he shall slaughter the goat of the sin offering,
which is for the people, and shall bring its blood inside
the veil, and shall do with that blood as he did with the
blood of the bull, and sprinkle it on the lid of
atonement and in front of the lid of atonement.
16 “And he shall make atonement for the qodesh
place, because of the uncleanness of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and because of their transgressions in all
their sins. And so he does for the Tent of Appointment
which is dwelling with them in the midst of their
uncleanness.
8

297

WAYYIQRA

“And no man should be in the Tent of Appointment
when he goes in to make atonement in the qodesh
place, until he comes out. And he shall make
atonement for himself, and for his household, and for
all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl.
18 “And he shall go out to the altar that is before
hWhY, and make atonement for it. And he shall take
some of the blood of the bull and some of the blood
of the goat, and put it on the horns of the altar all
around.
19 “And he shall sprinkle some of the blood on it with
his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and qadosh it
from the uncleanness of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
20 “And when he has finished atoning for the qodesh
place, and the Tent of Appointment, and the altar, he
shall bring the live goat.
21 “Then Aharon shall lay both his hands on the head
of the live goat, and shall confess over it all the
wickednesses of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, and shall put them on
the head of the goat, and shall send it away into the
wilderness by the hand of a fit man.
22 “And the goat shall bear on itself all their
wickednesses, to a land cut off. Thus he shall send
the goat away into the wilderness.
23 “Aharon shall then come into the Tent of
Appointment, and shall take off the linen garments
which he put on when he went into the qodesh place,
and shall leave them there.
24 “And he shall bathe his body in water in the
qodesh place, and shall put on his garments, and
shall come out and prepare his burnt offering and the
burnt offering of the people, and make atonement for
himself and for the people,
25 and burn the fat of the sin offering on the altar.
17

298

LEVITICUS

“And he who sent away the goat to Azazĕl washes
his garments, and shall bathe his body in water, and
afterward he comes into the camp.
27 “And the bull for the sin offering and the goat for
the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make
atonement in the qodesh place, is brought outside the
camp. And they shall burn their skins, and their flesh,
and their dung with fire.
28 “And he who burns them washes his garments,
and shall bathe his body in water, and afterward he
comes into the camp.
29 “And this shall be for you a Law forever: In the
seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, you
afflict your beings, and do no work, the native or the
stranger who sojourns among you.
30 “For on that day he makes atonement for you, to
cleanse you, to be clean from all your sins before
hWhY.
31 “It is a Shabbath of rest for you, and you shall
afflict your beings - a Law forever.
32 “And the kohĕn, who is anointed and ordained to
serve as kohĕn in his father’s place, shall make
atonement, and shall put on the linen garments, the
qodesh garments,
33 and he shall make atonement for the Qodesh
Miqdash, and make atonement for the Tent of
Appointment and for the altar, and make atonement
for the kohenim and for all the people of the
assembly.
34 “And this shall be for you a Law forever, to make
atonement for the children of Yisra’ĕl, for all their sins,
once a year.” And he did as hWhY commanded
Mosheh.
26

17 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
299

WAYYIQRA

“Speak to Aharon, to his sons, and to all the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them, ‘This is the word
which hWhY has commanded, saying,
3 “Any man from the house of Yisra’ĕl who
slaughters a bull or a lamb or a goat in the camp, or
who slaughters it outside the camp,
4 and does not bring it to the door of the Tent of
Appointment, to bring an offering to HWHY before the
Mishkan of hWhY, blood-guilt is reckoned to that man.
He has shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from
among his people,
5 in order that the children of Yisra’ĕl bring their
slaughterings which they slaughter in the open field.
And they shall bring them to hWhY at the door of the
Tent of Appointment, to the kohĕn, and slaughter
them as peace offerings to hWhY.
6 “And the kohĕn shall sprinkle the blood on the altar
of hWhY at the door of the Tent of Appointment, and
shall burn the fat for a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
7 “And
let them no longer slaughter their
slaughterings to demons, after whom they whored.
This is a Law forever for them throughout their
generations.” ’
8 “And say to them, ‘Any man of the house of
Yisra’ĕl, or of the strangers who sojourn among you,
who offers a burnt offering or slaughtering,
9 and does not bring it to the door of the Tent of
Appointment, to do it to hWhY, that man shall be cut
off from among his people.
10 ‘And any man of the house of Yisra’ĕl, or of the
strangers who sojourn among you, who eats any
blood, I shall turn My face against that being who eats
blood, and shall cut him off from among his people.
11 ‘For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have
given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for
2

300

LEVITICUS

your lives, for it is the blood that makes atonement for
the life.’
12 “Therefore I said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘No
being among you eats blood, nor does any stranger
who sojourns among you eat blood.’
13 “And any man from the children of Yisra’ĕl, or from
the strangers who sojourn among you, who hunts and
catches any beast or bird, which is eaten, shall pour
out its blood and cover it with dust,
14 for it is the life of all flesh. Its blood is for its life.
And I said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Do not eat the
blood of any flesh, for the life of all flesh is its blood.
Anyone eating it is cut off.’
15 “And any being who eats a carcass or what was
torn by a beast, be he a native or a stranger, he shall
wash his garments and bathe in water, and shall be
unclean until evening. Then he shall be clean.
16 “And if he does not wash or bathe his body, then
he shall bear his wickedness.”

18 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘I am hWhY your Elohim.
3 ‘Do not do as they do in the land of Mitsrayim,
where you dwelt. And do not do as they do in the land
of Kena’an, where I am bringing you, and do not walk
in their laws.
4 ‘Do My Right-Rulings and guard My Laws, to walk
in them. I am hWhY your Elohim.
5 ‘And you shall guard My Laws and My RightRulings, which a man does and lives by them. I am
hWhY.
6 ‘No one is to approach anyone of his own flesh to
uncover his nakedness. I am hWhY.
2

301

WAYYIQRA

‘The nakedness of your father or the nakedness of
your mother you do not uncover. She is your mother,
you do not uncover her nakedness.
8 ‘The nakedness of your father’s wife you do not
uncover, it is your father’s nakedness.
9 ‘The nakedness of your sister, the daughter of
your father, or the daughter of your mother, whether
born at home or elsewhere, their nakedness you do
not uncover.
10 ‘The nakedness of your son’s daughter or your
daughter’s daughter, their nakedness you do not
uncover, for theirs is your own nakedness.
11 ‘The nakedness of your father’s wife’s daughter,
brought forth by your father, she is your sister, you do
not uncover her nakedness.
12 ‘The nakedness of your father’s sister you do not
uncover, she is your father’s flesh.
13 ‘The nakedness of your mother’s sister you do not
uncover, for she is your mother’s flesh.
14 ‘The nakedness of your father’s brother you do not
uncover, you do not approach his wife, she is your
aunt.
15 ‘The nakedness of your daughter-in-law you do
not uncover, she is your son’s wife, you do not
uncover her nakedness.
16 ‘The nakedness of your brother’s wife you do not
uncover, it is your brother’s nakedness.
17 ‘The nakedness of a woman and her daughter you
do not uncover, nor do you take her son’s daughter
or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her
nakedness. They are her relatives - it is wickedness.
18 ‘And do not take a woman as a rival to her sister,
to uncover her nakedness while the other is alive.
19 ‘And do not approach a woman to uncover her
nakedness in her monthly separation of uncleanness.
7

302

LEVITICUS

‘And do not have intercourse with the wife of your
neighbour, to defile yourself with her.
21 ‘And do not give any of your offspring to pass
through to Moleḵ. And do not profane the Name of
your Elohim. I am hWhY.
22 ‘And do not lie with a male as with a woman, it is
an abomination.
23 ‘And do not have intercourse with any beast, to
defile yourself with it. And a woman does not stand
before a beast to mate with it, it is a perversion.
24 ‘Do not defile yourselves with all these, for by all
these the nations are defiled, which I am driving out
before you.
25 ‘Thus the land became defiled, therefore I
punished it for its wickedness, and the land vomited
out its inhabitants.
26 ‘But you, you shall guard My Laws and My RightRulings, and not do any of these abominations, the
native nor stranger who sojourns among you,
27 because the men of the land who were before you
have done all these abominations, and thus the land
became defiled.
28 ‘So let not the land vomit you out for defiling it, as
it vomited out the nations that were before you.
29 ‘For whoever does any of these abominations,
those beings who do them shall be cut off from among
their people.
30 ‘And you shall guard My Charge, so as not to do
any of these abominable practices which were done
before you, so as not to defile yourselves by them. I
am hWhY your Elohim.’ ”
20

19 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
303

WAYYIQRA

“Speak to all the congregation of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and say to them, ‘Be qodesh, for I hWhY your
Elohim am qodesh.
3 ‘Each one of you should revere his mother and his
father, and guard My Shabbathoth. I am hWhY your
Elohim.
4 ‘Do not turn to idols, and do not make for
yourselves moulded mighty ones. I am hWhY your
Elohim.
5 ‘And when you bring a peace offering to hWhY,
bring it for your acceptance.
6 ‘It is eaten the same day you slaughter it, and on
the next day. And that which is left on the third day is
burned with fire.
7 ‘So if it is eaten at all on the third day, it is
abominable, it is not accepted,
8 and he who eats it bears his wickedness, because
he has profaned the qodesh offering of hWhY, and
that being shall be cut off from his people.
9 ‘And when you reap the harvest of your land, do
not completely reap the corners of your field or gather
the gleanings of your harvest.
10 ‘And do not glean your vineyard or gather every
grape of your vineyard, leave them for the poor and
the stranger. I am hWhY your Elohim.
11 ‘Do not steal, do not lie, do not deceive one
another.
12 ‘And do not swear falsely by My Name and so
profane the Name of your Elohim. I am hWhY.
13 ‘Do not oppress your neighbour and do not rob the
wages of him who is hired. It is not to remain with you
all night until morning.
14 ‘Do not curse the deaf or put a stumbling-block
before the blind, but revere your Elohim. I am hWhY.
2

304

LEVITICUS

‘Do no unrighteousness in right-ruling. Do not be
partial to the poor or favour the face of the great, but
rightly rule your neighbour in righteousness.
16 ‘Do not go slandering among your people. Do not
stand against the blood of your neighbour. I am hWhY.
17 ‘Do not hate your brother in your heart. Reprove
your neighbour, for certain, and bear no sin because
of him.
18 ‘Do not take vengeance or bear a grudge against
the children of your people. And you shall love your
neighbour as yourself. I am hWhY.
19 ‘Guard My Laws. Do not let your livestock mate
with another kind. Do not sow your field with mixed
seed. And do not put a garment woven of two sorts of
thread upon you.
20 ‘And when a man has intercourse with a woman
who is a female servant, engaged to a man, and who
has not at all been ransomed nor redeemed, nor
freedom given there should be an inquiry. But they
are not put to death, because she was not free.
21 ‘And he shall bring his guilt offering to hWhY, to the
door of the Tent of Appointment, a ram as a guilt
offering.
22 ‘And the kohĕn shall make atonement for him with
the ram of the guilt offering before hWhY for his sin
which he has done. And the sin which he has sinned
shall be forgiven him.
23 ‘And when you come into the land, and have
planted all kinds of trees for food, then you shall
reckon their fruit as uncircumcised. For three years it
is as uncircumcised to you, it is not eaten.
24 ‘And in the fourth year all its fruit is qodesh praises to hWhY.
25 ‘And in the fifth year you eat its fruit, so that it
increases its yield to you. I am hWhY your Elohim.
15

305

WAYYIQRA

‘Do not eat with the blood. Do not practise
divination or magic.
27 ‘Do not round the corner of your head, nor destroy
the corner of your beard.
28 ‘And do not make any cuttings in your flesh for the
dead, nor put tattoo marks on you. I am hWhY.
29 ‘Do not profane your daughter by making her a
whore, so that the land does not whore, and the land
becomes filled with wickedness.
30 ‘Guard My Shabbathoth and reverence My
Miqdash. I am hWhY.
31 ‘Do not turn to mediums, and do not seek after
spiritists to be defiled by them. I am hWhY your
Elohim.
32 ‘Rise up before the grey-headed. And you shall
favour the face of an old man, and shall revere your
Elohim. I am hWhY.
33 ‘And when a stranger sojourns with you in your
land, do not oppress him.
34 ‘Let the stranger who dwells among you be to you
as the native among you, and you shall love him as
yourself. For you were strangers in the land of
Mitsrayim. I am hWhY your Elohim.
35 ‘Do
no unrighteousness in right-ruling, in
measurement of length, in weight, or in measuring
liquids.
36 ‘Have right scales, right weights, a right ĕphah,
and a right hin. I am hWhY your Elohim, who brought
you out of the land of Mitsrayim.
37 ‘And you shall guard all My Laws and all My RightRulings, and do them. I am hWhY.’ ”
26

20 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Say to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Any man of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, or of the strangers who sojourn in
2

306

LEVITICUS

Yisra’ĕl, who gives any of his offspring to Moleḵ, shall
certainly be put to death. The people of the land shall
stone him with stones.
3 ‘And I, I shall turn My face against that man, and
shall cut him off from the midst of his people, because
he has given of his offspring to Moleḵ, so as to defile
My Miqdash and to profane My qodesh Name.
4 ‘And if the people of the land at all hide their eyes
from the man, as he gives any of his offspring to
Moleḵ, and they do not kill him,
5 then I shall turn My face against that man and
against his clan, and shall cut him off - and all who go
whoring after him, even go whoring after Moleḵ - from
the midst of their people.
6 ‘And the being who turns to mediums, and to
spiritists, to go whoring after them, I shall turn My face
against that being and cut him off from the midst of
his people.
7 ‘And you shall qadosh yourselves, and shall be
qodesh, for I am hWhY your Elohim,
8 and you shall guard My Laws and do them. I am
hWhY, who qadosh you.
9 ‘For everyone who curses his father or his mother
shall certainly be put to death - he has cursed his
father or his mother, his blood is on him.
10 ‘And a man who commits adultery with the wife of
another man, who commits adultery with the wife of
his neighbour: the adulterer and the adulteress shall
certainly be put to death.
11 ‘And a man who lies with the wife of his father has
uncovered the nakedness of his father, both of them
shall certainly be put to death, their blood is upon
them.

307

WAYYIQRA

‘And a man who lies with his daughter-in-law: both
of them shall certainly be put to death, they have
made confusion, their blood is upon them.
13 ‘And a man who lies with a male as he lies with a
woman: both of them have done an abomination, they
shall certainly be put to death, their blood is upon
them.
14 ‘And a man who marries a woman and her mother:
it is wickedness, they are burned with fire, both he
and they, that there be no wickedness in your midst.
15 ‘And a man who has intercourse with a beast: he
shall certainly be put to death, and the beast you kill.
16 ‘And a woman who approaches any beast and
mates with it: you shall kill the woman and the beast,
they shall certainly be put to death, their blood is upon
them.
17 ‘And a man who takes his sister, his father’s
daughter or his mother’s daughter, and sees her
nakedness and she sees his nakedness: it is a
reproach, and they shall be cut off before the eyes of
their people. He has uncovered his sister’s
nakedness, he bears his wickedness.
18 ‘And a man who lies with a woman during her
sickness and uncovers her nakedness: he has laid
bare her flow, and she has uncovered the flow of her
blood, both of them shall be cut off from the midst of
their people.
19 ‘And do not uncover the nakedness of your
mother’s sister nor of your father’s sister, for that is
laying bare one’s own flesh, they bear their
wickedness.
20 ‘And a man who lies with his uncle’s wife: he has
uncovered his uncle’s nakedness, they bear their sin,
they die childless.
12

308

LEVITICUS

‘And a man who takes his brother’s wife: it is
uncleanness, he has uncovered his brother’s
nakedness, they are childless.
22 ‘And you shall guard all My Laws and all My RightRulings, and do them, so that the land where I am
bringing you to dwell does not vomit you out.
23 ‘And do not walk in the laws of the nation which I
am driving out before you, for they do all these, and
therefore I loathed them.
24 ‘But I say to you, “You are going to possess their
land, and I Myself give it to you to possess it, a land
flowing with milk and honey.” I am hWhY your Elohim,
who has separated you from the peoples.
25 ‘And you shall make a distinction between clean
beasts and unclean, and between unclean birds and
clean. And do not make yourselves abominable by
beast or by bird, or whatever creeps on the ground,
which I have separated from you as unclean.
26 ‘And you shall be qodesh to Me, for I hWhY am
qodesh, and have separated you from the peoples to
be Mine.
27 ‘And a man or a woman in whom there is a
medium, or who are spiritists, shall certainly be put to
death, they are to stone them with stones. Their blood
is upon them.’ ”
21

21 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Speak to the
kohenim, the sons of Aharon, and say to them, ‘No one
is to be defiled for the dead among his people,
2 except for his relatives who are nearest to him: for
his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for
his daughter, and for his brother;
3 and for his maiden sister who is near to him, who
has had no husband - for her he is defiled.
309

WAYYIQRA

‘A leader does not defile himself among his
people, to profane himself;
5 they do not make any bald place on their heads,
and they do not shave the corner of their beard, and
they do not make a cutting in their flesh.
6 ‘They are qodesh to their Elohim and do not
profane the Name of their Elohim, for they bring the
offerings of hWhY made by fire, and the bread of their
Elohim, and shall be qodesh.
7 ‘They do not take a woman who is a whore or a
defiled woman, and they do not take a woman put
away from her husband, for he is qodesh to his
Elohim.
8 ‘And you shall qadosh him, for he brings the bread
of your Elohim, he is qodesh to you. For I, hWhY, who
qadosh you, am qodesh.
9 ‘And when the daughter of any kohĕn profanes
herself by whoring, she profanes her father. She is
burned with fire.
10 ‘And the kohĕn ha’gadol among his brothers, on
whose head the anointing oil was poured and who is
ordained to wear the garments, does not unbind his
head nor tear his garments,
11 nor come near any dead body, nor defile himself
for his father or his mother,
12 nor go out of the Miqdash, nor profane the
Miqdash of his Elohim, for the sign of dedication of
the anointing oil of his Elohim is upon him. I am hWhY.
13 ‘And let him take a wife in her maidenhood.
14 ‘A widow or one put away or a defiled woman or a
whore - these he does not take. But a maiden of his
own people he takes as a wife.
15 ‘And he does not profane his offspring among his
people, for I am hWhY, who qadosh him.’ ”
16 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
4

310

LEVITICUS

“Speak to Aharon, saying, ‘No man of your
offspring throughout their generations, who has any
defect, is to draw near to bring the bread of his
Elohim.
18 ‘For any man who has a defect is not to draw near:
a man blind or one lame or disfigured or deformed,
19 a man who has a broken foot or broken hand,
20 or is a hunchback or a dwarf, or a man who has a
defect in his eye, or eczema or scab, or is a eunuch.
21 ‘No man among the offspring of Aharon the kohĕn,
who has a defect, is to come near to bring the
offerings made by fire to hWhY - he has a defect, he
does not come near to bring the bread of his Elohim.
22 ‘He eats the bread of his Elohim, both the most
qodesh and the qodesh,
23 only, he does not go near the veil or approach the
altar, because he has a defect, lest he profanes My
Miqdashim. For I am hWhY, who qadosh them.’ ”
24 Thus Mosheh spoke to Aharon and his sons, and
to all the children of Yisra’ĕl.
17

22 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to Aharon and his sons, that they separate
themselves from the qodesh offerings of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and that they do not profane My qodesh
Name in what they qadosh to Me. I am hWhY.
3 “Say to them, ‘Any man of all your offspring
throughout your generations who draws near the
qodesh offerings which the children of Yisra’ĕl
qadosh to hWhY, while he has uncleanness upon him,
that being shall be cut off from before Me. I am hWhY.
4 ‘Any man of the offspring of Aharon, who is a leper
or has a discharge, does not eat the qodesh offerings
until he is clean. And whoever touches what is
2

311

WAYYIQRA

rendered unclean by a corpse, or a man who has had
an emission of semen,
5 or a man who touches any creeping creature by
which he would be made unclean, or any being by
whom he would become unclean, even any of his
uncleanness;
6 the being who has touched it shall be unclean until
evening, and does not eat the qodesh offerings, but
shall bathe his body in water.
7 ‘And when the sun goes down he shall be clean,
and afterward eat the qodesh offerings, because it is
his food.
8 ‘He does not eat that which dies or is torn by
beasts, becoming unclean by it. I am HWHY.
9 ‘And they shall guard My Charge, lest they bear
sin for it and die thereby, when they profane it. I HWHY
qadosh them.
10 ‘And no stranger eats the qodesh offering. A
sojourner with the kohĕn, or a hired servant, does not
eat the qodesh offering.
11 ‘But when the kohĕn buys a being with his silver,
he eats of it. And one who is born in his house eats
his food.
12 ‘And when a kohĕn’s daughter is married to a
stranger, she does not eat of the qodesh offerings.
13 ‘But when a kohĕn’s daughter is a widow or put
away, and has no child, and has returned to her
father’s house as in her youth, she eats her father’s
food, but no stranger eats of it.
14 ‘And when a man eats the qodesh offering by
mistake, then he shall give a qodesh offering to the
kohĕn, and add one-fifth to it.
15 ‘And do not profane the qodesh offerings of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, which they lift up to HWHY,
312

LEVITICUS

or allow them to bear the wickedness of trespass
when they eat their qodesh offerings. For I am HWHY,
who qadosh them.’ ”
17 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
18 “Speak to Aharon and his sons, and to all the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them, ‘Any man of the
house of Yisra’ĕl, or of the strangers in Yisra’ĕl, who
brings his offering for any of his vows or for any of his
voluntary offerings, which they bring to HWHY as a
burnt offering,
19 for your acceptance, is a male, a perfect one from
the cattle, from the sheep, or from the goats.
20 ‘Whatever has a defect, you do not bring, for it is
not acceptable for you.
21 ‘And when a man brings a peace offering to HWHY,
to complete a vow, or a voluntary offering from the
cattle or the sheep, it is to be perfect to be accepted,
let there be no defect in it.
22 ‘Those blind or broken or having a cut, or have an
ulcer or eczema or scabs, you do not bring to HWHY,
nor make an offering by fire of them on the altar to
HWHY.
23 ‘As for a bull or a lamb that has any limb deformed
or dwarfed you do prepare as a voluntary offering, but
for a vow it is not accepted.
24 ‘Do not bring to HWHY what is bruised or crushed,
or torn or cut, nor do it in your land.
25 ‘And from a son of a stranger’s hand you do not
bring any of these as the bread of your Elohim, for
their corruption is in them, and defects are in them,
they are not acceptable for you.’ ”
26 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
27 “When a bull or a sheep or a goat is born, it shall
be seven days with its mother. And from the eighth
16

313

WAYYIQRA

day and thereafter it is acceptable as an offering
made by fire to hWhY.
28 “But do not slaughter a cow or a sheep and its
young on the same day.
29 “And
when you bring a slaughtering of
thanksgiving to hWhY, bring it for your acceptance.
30 “It is eaten that same day, leave none of it till
morning. I am hWhY.
31 “And you shall guard My Commands and do them.
I am hWhY.
32 “And do not profane My qodesh Name, and I shall
be qodesh among the children of Yisra’ĕl. I am hWhY,
who qadosh you,
33 who brought you out of the land of Mitsrayim, to
be your Elohim. I am hWhY.”

23 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘The Appointed Times of hWhY, which you are to
proclaim as qodesh gatherings, My Appointed Times,
are these:
3 ‘Six days work is done, but the seventh day is a
Shabbath of rest, a qodesh gathering. You do no
work, it is a Shabbath to hWhY in all your dwellings.
4 ‘These are the Appointed Times of hWhY, qodesh
gatherings which you are to proclaim at their
Appointed Times.
5 ‘In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the
month, between the evenings, is the Pesaḥ to hWhY.
6 ‘And on the fifteenth day of this month is the
Festival of Matstsoth to hWhY - seven days you eat
unleavened bread.
7 ‘On the first day you have a qodesh gathering, you
do no servile work.
2

314

LEVITICUS

‘And you shall bring an offering made by fire to
hWhY for seven days. On the seventh day is a qodesh
gathering, you do no servile work.’ ”
9 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
10 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and you shall
say to them, ‘When you come into the land which I
give you, and shall reap its harvest, then you shall
bring a sheaf of the first-fruits of your harvest to the
kohĕn.
11 ‘And he shall wave the sheaf before hWhY, for your
acceptance. On the morrow after the Shabbath the
kohĕn waves it.
12 ‘And on that day when you wave the sheaf, you
shall prepare a male lamb a year old, a perfect one,
as a burnt offering to hWhY,
13 and its grain offering: two-tenths of an ĕphah of
fine flour mixed with oil, an offering made by fire to
hWhY, a sweet fragrance, and its drink offering: onefourth of a hin of wine.
14 ‘And you do not eat bread or roasted grain or fresh
grain until the same day that you have brought an
offering to your Elohim - a Law forever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings.
15 ‘And from the morrow after the Shabbath, from the
day that you brought the sheaf of the wave offering,
you shall count for yourselves: seven completed
Shabbathoth.
16 ‘Until the morrow after the seventh Shabbath you
count fifty days, then you shall bring a new grain
offering to hWhY.
17 ‘Bring from your dwellings for a wave offering two
of bread, of two-tenth parts of fine flour they are,
baked with leaven, first-fruits to hWhY.
18 ‘And besides the bread, you shall bring seven
lambs a year old, perfect ones, and one young bull
8

315

WAYYIQRA

and two rams. They are a burnt offering to hWhY, with
their grain offering and their drink offerings, an
offering made by fire for a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
19 ‘And you shall offer one male goat as a sin
offering, and two male lambs a year old, as a peace
offering.
20 ‘And the kohĕn shall wave them, besides the
bread of the first-fruits, as a wave offering before
HWHY, besides the two lambs. They are qodesh to
hWhY for the kohĕn.
21 ‘And on this same day you shall proclaim a qodesh
gathering for yourselves, you do no servile work on it
- a Law forever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.
22 ‘And when you reap the harvest of your land do
not completely reap the corners of your field when
you reap, and do not gather any gleaning from your
harvest. Leave them for the poor and for the stranger.
I am hWhY your Elohim.’ ”
23 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
24 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘In the
seventh month, on the first day of the month, you
have a rest, a remembrance of blowing of trumpets,
a qodesh gathering.
25 ‘You do no servile work, and you shall bring an
offering made by fire to hWhY.’ ”
26 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
27 “On the tenth day of this seventh month is Yom
ha’Kippurim. It shall be a qodesh gathering for you.
And you shall afflict your beings, and shall bring an
offering made by fire to HWHY.
28 “And you do no work on that same day, for it is a
Yom Kippurim, to make atonement for you before
HWHY your Elohim.
29 “For any being who is not afflicted on that same
day, he shall be cut off from his people.
316

LEVITICUS

“And any being who does any work on that same
day, that being I shall destroy from the midst of his
people.
31 “You do no work - a Law forever throughout your
generations in all your dwellings.
32 “It is a Shabbath of rest to you, and you shall afflict
your beings. On the ninth day of the month at
evening, from evening to evening, you observe your
Shabbath.”
33 And HWHY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
34 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘On the
fifteenth day of this seventh month is the Festival of
Sukkoth for seven days to HWHY.
35 ‘On the first day is a qodesh gathering, you do no
servile work.
36 ‘For seven days you bring an offering made by fire
to HWHY. On the eighth day there shall be a qodesh
gathering for you, and you shall bring an offering
made by fire to HWHY. It is a closing Festival, you do
no servile work.
37 ‘These are the Appointed Times of HWHY which
you proclaim as qodesh gatherings, to bring an
offering made by fire to HWHY, a burnt offering and a
grain offering, a slaughtering and drink offerings, as
commanded for every day 38 besides the Shabbathoth of HWHY, and besides
your gifts, and besides all your vows, and besides all
your voluntary offerings which you give to HWHY.
39 ‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when
you gather in the fruit of the land, celebrate the
Festival of HWHY for seven days. On the first day is a
rest, and on the eighth day a rest.
40 ‘And you shall take for yourselves on the first day
the fruit of good trees, branches of palm trees, twigs
of leafy trees, and willows of the stream, and shall
rejoice before HWHY your Elohim for seven days.
30

317

WAYYIQRA

‘And you shall celebrate it as a Festival to HWHY
for seven days in the year - a Law forever in your
generations. Celebrate it in the seventh month.
42 ‘Dwell in booths for seven days; all who are native
Yisra’ĕlites dwell in booths,
43 so that your generations know that I made the
children of Yisra’ĕl dwell in booths when I brought
them out of the land of Mitsrayim. I am HWHY your
Elohim.’ ”
44 Thus did Mosheh speak of the Appointed Times of
HWHY to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
41

24 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Command the children of Yisra’ĕl that they bring
to you clear oil of pressed olives for the light, to make
the lamps burn continually.
3 “Outside the veil of the Witness, in the Tent of
Appointment, Aharon is to arrange it from evening
until morning before hWhY continually - a Law forever
throughout your generations.
4 “He is to arrange the lamps on the clean gold
lampstand before hWhY continually.
5 “And you shall take fine flour and bake twelve
cakes with it, two-tenth parts in each cake.
6 “And you shall put them in two rows, six in a row,
on the clean table before hWhY.
7 “And you shall put clear frankincense on each row,
and it shall be on the bread as a remembrance
portion, an offering made by fire to hWhY.
8 “On every Shabbath he is to arrange it before
hWhY continually, from the children of Yisra’ĕl - an
everlasting Covenant.
9 “And it shall be for Aharon and his sons, and they
shall eat it in the qodesh place, because it is most
qodesh to him from the offerings of hWhY made by fire
- an everlasting Law.”
2

318

LEVITICUS

And the son of an Yisra’ĕlite woman, whose father
was a Mitsrite, went out among the children of
Yisra’ĕl. And the Yisra’ĕlite woman’s son and a man
of Yisra’ĕl strove in the camp.
11 And the Yisra’ĕlite woman’s son blasphemed the
Name, and cursed. So they brought him to Mosheh.
Now his mother’s name was Shelomith the daughter
of Diḇri, of the tribe of Dan.
12 And they put him in under guard, that it might be
declared to them at the word of hWhY.
13 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
14 “Bring the one who has cursed outside the camp,
and all those who heard him shall lay their hands on
his head, and all the congregation shall stone him.
15 “And speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘Anyone who curses his Elohim shall bear his sin.
16 ‘And he who blasphemes the Name of hWhY shall
certainly be put to death, and all the congregation
certainly stone him, the stranger as well as the native.
When he blasphemes the Name, he is put to death.
17 ‘And he who smites the life from any man shall
certainly be put to death.
18 ‘And he who smites a beast repays it, body for
body.
19 ‘And when a man inflicts a blemish upon his
neighbour, as he has done so it is done to him:
20 ‘Fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth;
as he inflicts a blemish upon him, so it is done to him.
21 ‘And he who smites a beast repays it, and he who
kills a man is put to death.
22 ‘You are to have one Right-Ruling, for the stranger
and for the native, for I am hWhY your Elohim.’ ”
23 And Mosheh spoke to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
they brought the one who cursed outside the camp,
10

319

WAYYIQRA

and stoned him with stones. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl did as HWHY commanded Mosheh.

25 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh on Mount Sinai,
saying,
2 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When you come into the land which I give you, then
the land shall observe a Shabbath to hWhY.
3 ‘Six years you sow your field, and six years you
prune your vineyard, and gather in its fruit,
4 but in the seventh year the land is to have a
Shabbath of rest, a Shabbath to hWhY. Do not sow
your field and do not prune your vineyard.
5 ‘Do not reap what grows of its own of your harvest,
and do not gather the grapes of your unpruned vine,
for it is a year of rest for the land.
6 ‘And the Shabbath of the land shall be to you for
food, for you and your servant, and for your female
servant and your hired servant, and for the stranger
who sojourns with you,
7 and for your livestock and the beasts that are in
your land. All its crops are for food.
8 ‘And you shall count seven Shabbathoth of years
for yourself, seven times seven years. And the time
of the seven Shabbathoth of years shall be to you
forty-nine years.
9 ‘You shall then sound a ram’s horn to pass through
on the tenth day of the seventh month, on Yom
ha’Kippurim cause a ram’s horn to pass through all
your land.
10 ‘And you shall qadosh the fiftieth year, and
proclaim release throughout all the land to all its
inhabitants, it is a Yoḇĕl for you. And each of you shall
return to his possession, and each of you return to his
clan.
320

LEVITICUS

‘The fiftieth year is a Yoḇĕl to you. Do not sow, nor
reap what grows of its own, nor gather from its
unpruned vine.
12 ‘It is a Yoḇĕl, it is qodesh to you. Eat from the field
its crops.
13 ‘In the Year of this Yoḇĕl let each one of you return
to his possession.
14 ‘And when you sell whatever to your neighbour or
buy from the hand of your neighbour, do not exploit
one another.
15 ‘According to the number of years after the Yoḇĕl
you buy from your neighbour, and according to the
number of years of crops he sells to you.
16 ‘According to the greater number of years you
increase its price, and according to the fewer number
of years you diminish its price, because he sells to
you according to the number of the years of the crops.
17 ‘And do not oppress one another, but you shall
revere your Elohim. For I am hWhY your Elohim.
18 ‘And you shall do My Laws and guard My RightRulings, and shall do them. And you shall dwell in the
land in safety,
19 and the land shall yield its fruit, and you shall eat
to satisfaction, and shall dwell there in safety.
20 ‘And since you might say, “What do we eat in the
seventh year, since we do not sow nor gather in our
crops?”
21 ‘Therefore I have commanded My beraḵah on you
in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth the crop for
three years.
22 ‘And you shall sow in the eighth year, and eat of
the old crop until the ninth year. Eat of the old until its
crop comes in.
11

321

WAYYIQRA

‘And the land is not to be sold beyond reclaim, for
the land is Mine, for you are sojourners and settlers
with Me.
24 ‘And provide for a redemption for the land, in all
the land of your possession.
25 ‘When your brother becomes poor, and has sold
some of his possession, and his redeemer, a close
relative comes to redeem it, then he shall redeem
what his brother sold.
26 ‘And when the man has no one to redeem it, but
he himself becomes able to redeem it,
27 then let him count the years since its sale, and
return the remainder to the man to whom he sold it,
that he shall return to his possession.
28 ‘And if his hand has not found enough to give back
to him, then what was sold shall remain in the hand
of him who bought it until the Year of Yoḇĕl. And it
shall be released in the Yoḇĕl, and he shall return to
his possession.
29 ‘And when a man sells a house in a walled city,
then his right of redemption shall be at the end of the
year after it is sold. His right of redemption lasts a
year.
30 ‘But if it is not redeemed within a complete year,
then the house in the walled city shall be established
beyond reclaim to the buyer of it, throughout his
generations. It is not released in the Yoḇĕl.
31 ‘The houses of villages, however, which have no
wall around them are reckoned as the field of the
country. A right of redemption belongs to it, and they
are released in the Yoḇĕl.
32 ‘As for the cities of the Lĕwites, and the houses in
the cities of their possession, the Lĕwites have a right
of redemption forever.
23

322

LEVITICUS

‘And that which is redeemed from the Lĕwites,
both the sale of a house and the city of his possession
shall be released in the Year of Yoḇĕl, because the
houses in the cities of the Lĕwites are their
possession in the midst of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
34 ‘But the field of the open land of their cities is not
sold, for it is their everlasting possession.
35 ‘And when your brother becomes poor, and his
hand has failed with you, then you shall sustain him,
and he shall live with you, like a stranger or a
sojourner.
36 ‘Take no interest from him, or profit, but you shall
revere your Elohim, and your brother shall live with
you.
37 ‘Do not lend him your silver on interest, and do not
lend him your food for profit.
38 ‘I am hWhY your Elohim, who brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim, to give you the land of Kena’an,
to be your Elohim.
39 ‘And when your brother who dwells by you
becomes poor, and sells himself to you, do not make
him serve as a slave.
40 ‘But as a hired servant, as a settler he is with you,
and serves you until the Year of Yoḇĕl.
41 ‘And then he shall leave you, he and his children
with him, and shall return to his own clan, even return
to the possession of his fathers.
42 ‘For they are My servants, whom I brought out of
the land of Mitsrayim, they are not sold as slaves.
43 ‘Do not rule over him with harshness, but you shall
revere your Elohim.
44 ‘And your male and female slaves whom you have
from the nations that are around you, from them you
buy male and female slaves,
33

323

WAYYIQRA

and also from the sons of the strangers sojourning
among you, from them you buy, and from their clans
who are with you, which they shall bring forth in your
land, and they shall be your property.
46 ‘And you shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them as a possession,
they are your slaves for all time. But over your
brothers, the children of Yisra’ĕl, you do not rule with
harshness, one over another.
47 ‘Now when a sojourner or a settler with you
becomes rich, and your brother with him becomes
poor, and sells himself to the settler or sojourner with
you, or to a member of the sojourner’s clan,
48 after he has been sold, there is a right of
redemption to him - one of his brothers redeems him,
49 or his uncle or his uncle’s son redeems him, or
anyone who is a close relative to him in his clan
redeems him, or if he is able, then he shall redeem
himself.
50 ‘And he shall reckon with him who bought him: The
price of his release shall be according to the number
of years, from the year that he was sold to him until
the Year of Yoḇĕl; as the days of a hired servant it is
with him.
51 ‘If there are yet many years, according to them he
repays the price of his redemption, from the silver of
his purchase.
52 ‘And if few years are left until the Year of Yoḇĕl,
then he shall reckon with him, and according to his
years he repays him the price of his redemption.
53 ‘He is with him as a yearly hired servant, and he
does not rule with harshness over him before your
eyes.
45

324

LEVITICUS

‘And if he is not redeemed in these years, then he
shall be released in the Year of Yoḇĕl, he and his
children with him.
55 ‘Because the children of Yisra’ĕl are servants to
Me, they are My servants whom I brought out of the
land of Mitsrayim. I am hWhY your Elohim.
54

26 ‘Do not make idols for yourselves, and do not put
up a carved image or a pillar for yourselves, and do not
place a stone image in your land, to bow down to it.
For I am hWhY your Elohim.
2 ‘Guard My Shabbathoth and reverence My
Miqdash. I am hWhY.
3 ‘If you walk in My Laws and guard My Commands,
and shall do them,
4 then I shall give you rain in its season, and the land
shall yield its crops, and the trees of the field yield
their fruit.
5 ‘And your threshing shall last till the time of the
grape harvest, and the grape harvest shall last till the
time of sowing. And you shall eat your bread until you
have enough, and shall dwell in your land safely.
6 ‘And I shall give peace in the land, and you shall
lie down and no one make you afraid. And I shall clear
the land of evil beasts, and not let the sword go
through your land.
7 ‘And you shall pursue your enemies, and they
shall fall by the sword before you.
8 ‘And five of you shall pursue a hundred, and a
hundred of you pursue ten thousand. And your
enemies shall fall by the sword before you.
9 ‘And I shall turn to you and make you bear fruit,
and shall increase you, and shall establish My
Covenant with you.
325

WAYYIQRA

‘And you shall eat the old supply, and clear out the
old because of the new.
11 ‘And I shall put My Mishkan in your midst, and My
being shall not reject you.
12 ‘And I shall walk in your midst, and shall be your
Elohim, and you shall be My people.
13 ‘I am hWhY your Elohim, who brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim, from being their slaves. And I
have broken the bars of your yoke and made you walk
upright.
14 ‘But if you do not obey Me, and do not do all these
Commands,
15 and if you reject My Laws, or if your being loathes
My Right-Rulings, so that you do not do all My
Commands, but break My Covenant,
16 ‘I also do this to you: And I shall appoint sudden
alarm over you, wasting disease and inflammation,
destroying the eyes, and consuming the life. And you
shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat
it.
17 ‘And I shall turn My face against you, and you shall
be smitten before your enemies. And those who hate
you shall rule over you, and you shall flee when no
one pursues you.
18 ‘And after all these, if you do not obey Me, then I
shall punish you seven times more for your sins.
19 ‘And I shall break the pride of your power, and
shall make your shamayim like iron and your earth
like bronze.
20 ‘And your strength shall be spent in vain and your
land not yield its crops, nor the trees of the land yield
their fruit.
21 ‘And if you walk contrary to Me, and refuse to obey
Me, I shall bring on you seven times more plagues,
according to your sins,
10

326

LEVITICUS

and send wild beasts among you, which shall
bereave you of your children. And I shall cut off your
livestock, and make you few in number, and your
highways shall be deserted.
23 ‘And if you are not instructed by Me by these, but
walk contrary to Me,
24 then I also shall walk contrary to you, and I Myself
shall smite you seven times for your sins.
25 ‘And I shall bring against you a sword executing
the vengeance of My Covenant, and you shall gather
together in your cities, and I shall send pestilence
among you, and you shall be given into the hand of
the enemy.
26 ‘When I have cut off your supply of bread, ten
women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they
shall bring back to you your bread by weight, and you
shall eat and not be satisfied.
27 ‘And if in spite of this, you do not obey Me, but walk
contrary to Me,
28 then I shall walk contrary to you in wrath. And I
Myself shall punish you seven times for your sins.
29 ‘And you shall eat the flesh of your sons, and eat
the flesh of your daughters.
30 ‘And I shall destroy your high places, and cut down
your sun-pillars, and put your carcasses on the
carcasses of your idols. And My being shall loathe
you.
31 ‘And I shall turn your cities into ruins and lay your
miqdashim waste, and not smell your sweet
fragrances.
32 ‘And I shall lay the land waste, and your enemies
who dwell in it shall be astonished at it.
33 ‘And I shall scatter you among the gentiles and
draw out a sword after you. And your land shall be
desert and your cities ruins,
22

327

WAYYIQRA

and the land enjoy its Shabbathoth as long as it
lies waste and you are in your enemies’ land. Then
the land would rest and enjoy its Shabbathoth.
35 ‘As long as it lies waste it rests, for the time it did
not rest on your Shabbathoth when you dwelt in it.
36 ‘And as for those of you who are left, I shall send
faintness into their hearts in the lands of their
enemies, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall cause
them to flee. And they shall flee as though retreating
from a sword, and they shall fall when no one
pursues.
37 ‘And they shall stumble over one another, as from
before a sword, when no one pursues. And you shall
be unable to stand before your enemies.
38 ‘And you shall perish among the gentiles, and the
land of your enemies shall eat you up,
39 and those of you who are left rot away in their
wickedness in your enemies’ lands, and also in their
fathers’ wickednesses rot away with them.
40 ‘But if they confess their wickedness and the
wickedness of their fathers, with their trespass in
which they trespassed against Me, and that they also
have walked contrary to Me,
41 and that I also have walked contrary to them and
have brought them into the land of their enemies - if
their uncircumcised heart is then humbled, and they
accept the punishment of their wickedness,
42 then I shall remember My Covenant with Ya’aqoḇ,
and also My Covenant with Yitsḥaq, and also
remember My Covenant with Aḇraham, and
remember the land.
43 ‘For the land was abandoned by them, and
enjoying its Shabbathoth while lying waste without
them, and they were paying for their wickedness,
34

328

LEVITICUS

because they rejected My Right-Rulings and because
their being loathed My Laws.
44 ‘And yet for all this, when they are in the land of
their enemies, I shall not reject them, nor shall I loathe
them so as to destroy them and break My Covenant
with them. For I am hWhY their Elohim.
45 ‘Then I shall remember for their sake the Covenant
of the ancestors whom I brought out of the land of
Mitsrayim before the eyes of the nations to be their
Elohim. I am hWhY.’ ”
46 These are the Laws and the Right-Rulings and the
Torot which hWhY made between Himself and the
children of Yisra’ĕl on Mount Sinai by the hand of
Mosheh.

27 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When a man separates a vow, by your evaluation of
lives unto hWhY,
3 when your evaluation is of a male from twenty
years old up to sixty years old, then your evaluation
shall be fifty sheqels of silver, according to the sheqel
of the qodesh place.
4 ‘And if it is a female, then your evaluation shall be
thirty sheqels;
5 and if from five years old up to twenty years old,
then your evaluation for a male shall be twenty
sheqels, and for a female ten sheqels;
6 and if from a month old up to five years old, then
your evaluation for a male shall be five sheqels of
silver, and for a female your evaluation shall be three
sheqels of silver;
7 and if from sixty years old and above, if it is a male,
then your evaluation shall be fifteen sheqels, and for
a female ten sheqels.
2

329

WAYYIQRA

‘But if he is too poor to pay your evaluation, then
he shall present himself before the kohĕn, and the
kohĕn shall lay a value for him. According to the
ability of him who vowed, the kohĕn shall value him.
9 ‘And if it is a beast of which they bring an offering
to hWhY, all such given to hWhY is qodesh.
10 ‘He is not to replace it or exchange it, good for
spoilt or spoilt for good. And if he at all exchanges
beast for beast, then both it and the one exchanged
for it is qodesh.
11 ‘And if it is any unclean beast of which they do not
bring an offering to HWHY, then he shall present the
beast before the kohĕn;
12 and the kohĕn shall value it, whether it is good or
spoilt. According to your evaluation, O kohĕn, so it
shall be.
13 ‘But if he indeed redeems it, then he shall add onefifth to your evaluation.
14 ‘And when a man qadosh his house, to be qodesh
to hWhY, then the kohĕn shall value it, whether it is
good or spoilt. As the kohĕn values it, so it stands.
15 ‘And if he who qadosh it redeems his house, then
he shall add one-fifth of the silver of your evaluation
to it, and it shall be his.
16 ‘And if a man qadosh to hWhY a field he owns, then
your evaluation shall be according to the seed for it a ḥomer of barley seed at fifty sheqels of silver.
17 ‘If he qadosh his field from the Year of Yoḇĕl,
according to your evaluation it stands.
18 ‘But if he qadosh his field after the Yoḇĕl, then the
kohĕn shall reckon to him the silver due according to
the years that remain till the Year of Yoḇĕl, and it shall
be deducted from your evaluation.
8

330

LEVITICUS

‘And if he who qadosh the field would redeem it,
then he shall add one-fifth of the silver of your
evaluation to it, and it shall be his.
20 ‘And if he does not redeem the field, or if he has
sold the field to another man, it is no longer
redeemed,
21 but the field, when it is released in the Yoḇĕl, is
qodesh to hWhY as a dedicated field, to be the
possession of the kohĕn.
22 ‘And if a man qadosh to hWhY a field which he has
bought, which is not the field of his possession,
23 then the kohĕn shall reckon to him the amount of
your evaluation, up to the Year of Yoḇĕl, and he shall
give your evaluation on that day, qodesh to hWhY.
24 ‘In the Year of Yoḇĕl the field returns to him from
whom he bought it, to him whose is the possession of
the land.
25 ‘And all your evaluations are to be according to the
sheqel of the qodesh place: twenty gĕrahs to the
sheqel.
26 ‘However, a first-born of the beasts, which is firstborn to hWhY, no man qadosh it - whether bull or
sheep, it belongs to hWhY.
27 ‘And if among the unclean beasts, then he shall
ransom it according to your evaluation, and shall add
one-fifth to it. And if it is not redeemed, then it shall be
sold according to your evaluation.
28 ‘However, whatever a man lays under ban for
HWHY of all that he has, man and beast, or the field of
his possession, is not sold or redeemed. Whatever is
laid under ban is most qodesh to hWhY.
29 ‘No one under the ban, under the ban among men,
is ransomed, but shall certainly be put to death.
19

331

WAYYIQRA

‘And all the tithe of the land - of the seed of the
land or of the fruit of the tree - belongs to hWhY. It is
qodesh to hWhY.
31 ‘If a man indeed redeems any of his tithes, he adds
one-fifth to it.
32 ‘And the entire tithe of the herd and of the flock, all
that passes under the rod, the tenth one is qodesh to
hWhY.
33 ‘He does not inquire whether it is good or spoilt,
nor does he exchange it. And if he exchanges it at all,
then both it and the one exchanged for it are qodesh,
it is not redeemed.’ ”
34 These
are the Commands which HWHY
commanded Mosheh for the children of Yisra’ĕl on
Mount Sinai.
30

332

NUMBERS

BEMIḎBAR
‫ במדבר‬RBdmB

1 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh in the Wilderness of
Sinai, in the Tent of Appointment, on the first day of the
second month, in the second year after they had come
out of the land of Mitsrayim, saying,
2 “Take a census of all the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, by their clans, by their fathers’
houses, according to the number of names, every
male, head by head,
3 from twenty years old and above, everyone going
out to the army in Yisra’ĕl. Number them by their
divisions, you and Aharon.
4 “And a man from every tribe should be with you,
each one the head of his father’s house.
5 “And these are the names of the men who stand
with you. From Re’uḇĕn: Elitsur, son of Sheḏĕy’ur.
6 “From Shim’on: Shelumi’ĕl, son of Tsurishaddai.
7 “From Yahuḏah: Naḥshon, son of Amminaḏaḇ.
8 “From Yissasḵar: Nethan’ĕl, son of Tsu’ar.
9 “From Zeḇulun: Eliyaḇ, son of Ḥĕlon.
10 “From the sons of Yosĕph: From Ephrayim:
Elishama, son of Ammihuḏ. From Menashsheh:
Gamli’ĕl, son of Peḏahtsur.
11 “From Binyamin: Aḇiḏan, son of Giḏ’oni.
12 “From Dan: Aḥi’ezer, son Ammishaddai.
13 “From Ashĕr: Paḡ’i’ĕl, son of Oḵran.
14 “From Gaḏ: Elyasaph, son of Deu’ĕl.
15 “From Naphtali: Aḥira, son of Ĕynan.”
16 These are the ones called from the congregation,
leaders of their fathers’ tribes, heads of the thousands
of Yisra’ĕl.
333

BEMIḎBAR

And Mosheh and Aharon took these men who
were called by name,
18 and they assembled all the congregation together
on the first day of the second month. And they
declared their ancestry by clans, by their fathers’
houses, according to the number of names, from
twenty years old and above, each one head by head.
19 As hWhY commanded Mosheh, so he registered
them in the Wilderness of Sinai.
20 And the children of Re’uḇĕn, Yisra’ĕl’s first-born,
their genealogies by their clans, by their fathers’
house, according to the number of names, every male
head by head, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
21 those who were registered of the tribe of Re’uḇĕn
were forty-six thousand five hundred.
22 From the children of Shim’on, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, of those who were
registered, according to the number of names, every
male head by head, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
23 those who were registered of the tribe of Shim’on
were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.
24 From the children of Gaḏ, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
25 those who were registered of the tribe of Gaḏ were
forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.
26 From the children of Yahuḏah, their genealogies
by their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
27 those who were registered of the tribe of Yahuḏah
were seventy-four thousand six hundred.
17

334

NUMBERS

From the children of Yissasḵar, their genealogies
by their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
29 those who were registered of the tribe of Yissasḵar
were fifty-four thousand four hundred.
30 From the children of Zeḇulun, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
31 those who were registered of the tribe of Zeḇulun
were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
32 From the sons of Yosĕph, the children of
Ephrayim, their genealogies by their clans, by their
fathers’ house, according to the number of names,
from twenty years old and above, everyone going out
to the army,
33 those who were registered of the tribe of Ephrayim
were forty thousand five hundred.
34 From
the children of Menashsheh, their
genealogies by their clans, by their fathers’ house,
according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and above, everyone going out to the army,
35 those who were registered of the tribe of
Menashsheh were thirty-two thousand two hundred.
36 From the children of Binyamin, their genealogies
by their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
37 those who were registered of the tribe of Binyamin
were thirty-five thousand four hundred.
38 From the children of Dan, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
28

335

BEMIḎBAR

those who were registered of the tribe of Dan were
sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
40 From the children of Ashĕr, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
41 those who were registered of the tribe of Ashĕr
were forty-one thousand five hundred.
42 From the children of Naphtali, their genealogies by
their clans, by their fathers’ house, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and above,
everyone going out to the army,
43 those who were registered of the tribe of Naphtali
were fifty-three thousand four hundred.
44 These were those registered, whom Mosheh and
Aharon registered, with the leaders of Yisra’ĕl, twelve
men, each one for his father’s house.
45 And all those that were registered of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, by their fathers’ houses, from twenty years
old and above, everyone going out to the army in
Yisra’ĕl,
46 all those that were registered were six hundred
and three thousand five hundred and fifty.
47 But the Lĕwites were not registered among them
by their fathers’ tribe,
48 because hWhY had spoken to Mosheh, saying,
49 “Only the tribe of Lĕwi you do not register, nor take
a census of them among the children of Yisra’ĕl.
50 “Instead, appoint the Lĕwites over the Mishkan of
the Witness, over all its furnishings, and over all that
belongs to it. They bear the Mishkan and all its
furnishings, and they attend to it, and camp around
the Mishkan.
51 “And when the Mishkan is to go forward, the
Lĕwites take it down. And when the Mishkan is to be
39

336

NUMBERS

put up, the Lĕwites put it up. And the stranger who
comes near is put to death.
52 “And the children of Yisra’ĕl shall pitch their tents,
everyone by his own camp, everyone by his own
banner, according to their divisions,
53 but let the Lĕwites camp around the Mishkan of
the Witness, so that there be no wrath on the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl. And the
Lĕwites shall guard the duty of the Mishkan of the
Witness.”
54 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did according to all that
hWhY commanded Mosheh, so they did.

2 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon, saying,
“The children of Yisra’ĕl are to camp, each one by
his own banner, beside the sign of his father’s house.
Let them camp around the Tent of Appointment at a
distance.”
3 And on the east side, towards sunrise: those of the
banner of the camp of Yahuḏah camp according to
their divisions. And the leader of the children of
Yahuḏah: Naḥshon, son of Amminaḏaḇ.
4 And his army with their registered ones: seventyfour thousand six hundred.
5 And those camping next to him is the tribe of
Yissasḵar, and the leader of the children of Yissasḵar:
Nethan’ĕl, son of Tsu’ar.
6 And his army with its registered ones: fifty-four
thousand four hundred.
7 Then the tribe of Zeḇulun, and the leader of the
children of Zeḇulun: Eliyaḇ, son of Ḥĕlon.
8 And his army with its registered ones: fifty-seven
thousand four hundred.
2

337

BEMIḎBAR

All the registered ones of the camp of Yahuḏah,
according to their divisions: one hundred and eightysix thousand four hundred. These depart first.
10 On the south side: the banner of the camp of
Re’uḇĕn according to their divisions, and the leader
of the children of Re’uḇĕn: Elitsur, son of Sheḏĕy’ur.
11 And his army with its registered ones: forty-six
thousand five hundred.
12 And those who camp next to him: the tribe of
Shim’on, and the leader of the children of Shim’on:
Shelumi’ĕl, son of Tsurishaddai.
13 And his army with their registered ones: fifty-nine
thousand three hundred.
14 Then the tribe of Gaḏ, and the leader of the
children of Gaḏ: Elyasaph, son of Re’uw’ĕl.
15 And his army with their registered ones: forty-five
thousand six hundred and fifty.
16 All the registered ones of the camp of Re’uḇĕn,
according to their divisions: one hundred and fifty-one
thousand four hundred and fifty. And they are the
second to depart.
17 And the Tent of Appointment, the camp of the
Lĕwites, shall move out in the middle of the camps.
As they camp, so they move out, everyone in his
place, by their banners.
18 On the west side: the banner of the camp of
Ephrayim according to their divisions, and the leader
of the children of Ephrayim: Elishama, son of
Ammihuḏ.
19 And his army with their registered ones: forty
thousand five hundred.
20 And next to him the tribe of Menashsheh, and the
leader of the children of Menashsheh: Gamli’ĕl, son
of Peḏahtsur.
9

338

NUMBERS

And his army with their registered ones: thirty-two
thousand two hundred.
22 Then the tribe of Binyamin, and the leader of the
children of Binyamin: Aḇiḏan, son of Giḏ’oni.
23 And his army with their registered ones: thirty-five
thousand four hundred.
24 All the registered ones of the camp of Ephrayim,
according to their divisions: one hundred and eight
thousand one hundred. And they are the third to
depart.
25 On the north side: the banner of the camp of Dan,
according to their divisions, and the leader of the
children of Dan: Aḥi’ezer, son of Ammishaddai.
26 And his army with their registered ones: sixty-two
thousand seven hundred.
27 And those who camp next to him: the tribe of
Ashĕr, and the leader of the children of Ashĕr:
Paḡ’i’ĕl, son of Oḵran.
28 And his army with their registered ones: forty-one
thousand five hundred.
29 Then the tribe of Naphtali, and the leader of the
children of Naphtali: Aḥira, son of Ĕynan.
30 And his army with their registered ones: fifty-three
thousand four hundred.
31 All the registered ones of the camp of Dan: one
hundred and fifty-seven thousand six hundred. They
depart last, with their banners.
32 These were registered ones of the children of
Yisra’ĕl by their fathers’ houses. All who were
registered according to their divisions of the camps:
six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.
33 But the Lĕwites were not registered among the
children of Yisra’ĕl, as HWHY commanded Mosheh.
34 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did according to all that
HWHY commanded Mosheh. So they camped by their
21

339

BEMIḎBAR

banners and so they departed, each one by his clan,
according to their fathers’ houses.

3 And these are the generations of Aharon and
Mosheh when hWhY spoke with Mosheh on Mount
Sinai.
2 And these are the names of the sons of Aharon:
Naḏaḇ, the first-born, and Aḇihu, El’azar, and
Ithamar.
3 These are the names of the sons of Aharon, the
anointed kohenim, whom he ordained to act as
kohenim.
4 And Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu had died before hWhY when
they brought strange fire before hWhY in the
Wilderness of Sinai. And they had no children. So
El’azar and Ithamar acted as kohenim in the presence
of Aharon their father.
5 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
6 “Bring the tribe of Lĕwi near, and put them before
Aharon the kohĕn, and they shall serve him,
7 and shall guard his duty and the duty of all the
congregation before the Tent of Appointment, to do
the service of the Mishkan.
8 “And they shall guard all the furnishings of the Tent
of Appointment, and the duty of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, to do the service of the Mishkan.
9 “And you shall give the Lĕwites to Aharon and his
sons. They are the given ones, given to him from
among the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 “And appoint Aharon and his sons, and they shall
guard their kehunnah. And the stranger who comes
near shall be put to death.”
11 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
12 “Now look, I Myself have taken the Lĕwites from
among the children of Yisra’ĕl instead of every first340

NUMBERS

born who opens the womb among the children of
Yisra’ĕl. And the Lĕwites shall be Mine,
13 because all the first-born are Mine. On the day that
I struck all the first-born in the land of Mitsrayim, I
qadosh to Myself all the first-born in Yisra’ĕl, both
man and beast. They are Mine, I am hWhY.”
14 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh in the Wilderness of
Sinai, saying,
15 “Register the children of Lĕwi by their fathers’
houses, by their clans. Register every male from a
month old and above.”
16 So Mosheh registered them according to the word
of HWHY, as he had been commanded.
17 And these were the sons of Lĕwi by their names:
Gĕreshon, and Qehath, and Merari.
18 And these are the names of the sons of Gĕreshon
by their clans: Liḇni and Shim’i.
19 And the sons of Qehath by their clans: Amram and
Yitshar, Ḥeḇron and Uzzi’ĕl.
20 And the sons of Merari by their clans: Maḥli and
Mushi. These are the clans of the Lĕwites by their
fathers’ houses.
21 From Gĕreshon came the clan of the Liḇnites and
the clan of the Shim’ites. These were the clans of the
Gĕreshonites.
22 Their registered ones, according to the number of
all the males from a month old and above, their
registered ones were seven thousand five hundred.
23 The clans of the Gĕreshonites were to camp
westward, behind the Mishkan,
24 and the leader of the fathers’ house of the
Gĕreshonites: Elyasaph, son of La’ĕl.
25 And the duty of the children of Gĕreshon in the
Tent of Appointment was the Mishkan, and the Tent
341

BEMIḎBAR

with its covering, and the covering of the door of the
Tent of Appointment,
26 and the screens of the courtyard and the covering
of the door of the courtyard, which is around the
Mishkan and the altar, and their cords, according to
all its service.
27 And from Qehath came the clan of the Amramites,
and the clan of the Yitsharites, and the clan of the
Ḥeḇronites, and the clan of the Uzzi’ĕlites. These
were the clans of the Qehathites.
28 In number, all the males, from a month old and
above, were eight thousand six hundred, guarding the
duty of the qodesh place.
29 The clans of the children of Qehath were to camp
on the south side of the Mishkan.
30 And the leader of the fathers’ house of the clans of
the Qehathites was Elitsaphan, son of Uzzi’ĕl.
31 And their duty was the ark, and the table, and the
lampstand, and the altars, and the utensils of the
qodesh place used in the service, and the covering,
and all its service.
32 And El’azar, son of Aharon the kohĕn, was to be
chief over the leaders of the Lĕwites, with oversight
of those who guard the duty of the qodesh place.
33 From Merari came the clan of the Maḥlites and the
clan of the Mushites. These were the clans of Merari.
34 And the number of their registered ones, all the
males from a month old and above, were six
thousand two hundred.
35 And the leader of the fathers’ house of the clans of
Merari was Tsuri’ĕl, son of Aḇiḥayil. These were to
camp on the north side of the Mishkan.
36 And the appointed duty of the children of Merari
was the boards of the Mishkan, and its bars, and its
342

NUMBERS

columns, and its sockets, and its utensils, and all its
service,
37 and the columns of the courtyard all around, with
their sockets, and their pegs, and their cords.
38 And those who were to camp before the Mishkan
on the east, before the Tent of Appointment, were
Mosheh and Aharon, and his sons, guarding the duty
of the Miqdash, and the duty of the children of
Yisra’ĕl. But the stranger who came near was to be
put to death.
39 All the registered ones of the Lĕwites, whom
Mosheh and Aharon registered at the command of
hWhY, by their clans, all the males from a month old
and above, were twenty-two thousand.
40 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Register all the firstborn males of the children of Yisra’ĕl from a month
old and above, and take the number of their names.
41 “And you shall take the Lĕwites for Me - I am hWhY
- instead of all the first-born among the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and the livestock of the Lĕwites instead of all
the first-born among the livestock of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.”
42 And Mosheh registered all the first-born among
the children of Yisra’ĕl as hWhY had commanded him.
43 And all the first-born males, by the number of
names, from one month old and above of their
registered ones, were twenty-two thousand two
hundred and seventy-three.
44 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
45 “Take the Lĕwites instead of all the first-born
among the children of Yisra’ĕl, and the livestock of the
Lĕwites instead of their livestock. And the Lĕwites
shall be Mine, I am hWhY.
46 “And for the ransom of the two hundred and
seventy-three of the first-born of the children of
343

BEMIḎBAR

Yisra’ĕl, who are more than the number of the
Lĕwites,
47 you shall take five sheqels for each one, head by
head - take it by the sheqel of the qodesh place, the
sheqel of twenty gĕrahs.
48 “And you shall give the silver, the ransom of those
who are in excess among them, to Aharon and his
sons.”
49 And Mosheh took the ransom silver from those
who were over and above those who were ransomed
by the Lĕwites.
50 From the first-born of the children of Yisra’ĕl he
took the silver, one thousand three hundred and sixtyfive pieces, according to the sheqel of the qodesh
place.
51 And Mosheh gave their ransom silver to Aharon,
and to his sons, according to the word of hWhY, as
HWHY had commanded Mosheh.

4 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, and to Aharon,
saying,
2 “Take a census of the sons of Qehath from among
the children of Lĕwi, by their clans, by their fathers’
house,
3 from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years
old, all who enter the service to do the work in the
Tent of Appointment.
4 “This is the service of the sons of Qehath in the
Tent of Appointment, the most qodesh matters:
5 “At the breaking of camp, Aharon and his sons
shall come, and they shall take down the covering veil
and cover the ark of the Witness with it,
6 and shall put on it a covering of fine leather, and
spread over that an all-blue wrapper, and shall insert
its poles.
344

NUMBERS

“And on the table of showbread they shall spread
a blue wrapper, and shall put on it the dishes, and the
ladles, and the bowls, and the jars for pouring, and
the showbread on it.
8 “And they shall spread over them a scarlet
wrapper, and cover the same with a covering of fine
leather, and shall insert its poles,
9 and shall take a blue wrapper and cover the
lampstand of the light, with its lamps, and its snuffers,
and its trays, and all its oil vessels, by which they
serve it.
10 “And they shall put it with all its utensils in a
covering of fine leather, and put it on a bar.
11 “And over the golden altar they shall spread a blue
wrapper, and cover it with a covering of fine leather,
and shall insert its poles,
12 and shall take all the utensils of service with which
they serve in the qodesh place, and shall put them in
a blue wrapper, cover them with a covering of fine
leather, and put them on a bar,
13 and shall remove the ashes from the altar, and
spread a purple wrapper over it,
14 and shall put on it all its utensils by which they
serve there: the fire holders, the forks, and the
shovels, and the basins, and all the utensils of the
altar, and shall spread on it a covering of fine leather,
and insert its poles.
15 “And when Aharon and his sons have finished
covering the qodesh objects and all the furnishings of
the qodesh place at the breaking of camp, then the
sons of Qehath shall come to lift them, but let them
not touch that which is qodesh, lest they die. These
are the burden of the sons of Qehath in the Tent of
Appointment.
7

345

BEMIḎBAR

“And the oversight of El’azar, son of Aharon the
kohĕn, is the oil for the light, and the sweet incense,
and the daily grain offering, and the anointing oil, and
the oversight of all the Mishkan and all that is in it,
with the qodesh place and its furnishings.”
17 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, and to Aharon,
saying,
18 “Do not cut off the tribe of the clans of the
Qehathites from among the Lĕwites,
19 but do this to them, and they shall live and not die
when they approach the most qodesh objects:
Aharon and his sons shall go in and appoint each of
them to his service and his burden.
20 “They are not, however, to go in to watch while the
qodesh objects are being covered, lest they die.”
21 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
22 “Take a census also of the sons of Gĕreshon, by
their fathers’ house, by their clans.
23 “Register them, from thirty years old and above,
even to fifty years old, all who enter to perform the
service, to do the service in the Tent of Appointment.
24 “This is the service of the clans of the
Gĕreshonites, in serving and in bearing burdens:
25 “And they shall bear the curtains of the Mishkan
and the Tent of Appointment with its covering, the
covering of fine leather that is on it, the covering for
the door of the Tent of Appointment,
26 and the screens of the courtyard and the covering
for the door of the gate of the courtyard, which is
around the Mishkan and altar, and their cords, all the
equipment for their service and all that is made for
them - so shall they serve.
27 “Aharon and his sons are to command all the
service of the sons of the Gĕreshonites, all their
16

346

NUMBERS

burden and all their service. And you shall appoint to
them all the duty of all their burden.
28 “This is the service of the clans of the sons of
Gĕreshon in the Tent of Appointment. And let their
duties be under the hand of Ithamar, son of Aharon
the kohĕn.
29 “As for the sons of Merari, register them by their
clans and by their fathers’ house.
30 “Register them, from thirty years old and above,
even to fifty years old, all who enter the service to do
the work of the Tent of Appointment.
31 “And this is the duty of their burden, according to
all their service for the Tent of Appointment: the
boards of the Mishkan, and its bars, and its columns,
and its sockets,
32 and the columns around the courtyard with their
sockets, and their pegs, and their cords, with all their
equipment and all their service. And assign by name
the equipment of the duty of their burden.
33 “This is the service of the clans of the sons of
Merari, as all their service for the Tent of
Appointment, under the hand of Ithamar, son of
Aharon the kohĕn.”
34 So Mosheh and Aharon and the leaders of the
congregation registered the sons of the Qehathites by
their clans and by their fathers’ house,
35 from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years
old, all who entered the service for work in the Tent of
Appointment.
36 And their registered ones, by their clans, were two
thousand seven hundred and fifty.
37 These were the registered ones of the clans of the
Qehathites, all those serving in the Tent of
Appointment, whom Mosheh and Aharon registered
347

BEMIḎBAR

according to the command of hWhY by the hand of
Mosheh.
38 And those registered ones of the sons of
Gĕreshon, by their clans and by their fathers’ house,
39 from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years
old, all who entered the service for work in the Tent of
Appointment,
40 the registered ones, by their clans, by their fathers’
house, were two thousand six hundred and thirty.
41 These were the registered ones of the clans of the
sons of Gĕreshon, of all who serve in the Tent of
Appointment, whom Mosheh and Aharon registered
according to the command of hWhY.
42 And those of the clans of the sons of Merari who
were registered, by their clans, by their fathers’
house,
43 from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years
old, all who entered the service for work in the Tent of
Appointment,
44 the registered ones, by their clans were three
thousand two hundred.
45 These were the registered ones of the clans of the
sons of Merari, whom Mosheh and Aharon registered
according to the command of hWhY by the hand of
Mosheh.
46 All the registered ones of the Lĕwites, whom
Mosheh and Aharon and the leaders of Yisra’ĕl
registered, by their clans and by their fathers’ houses,
47 from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years
old, all who came to do the work of service and the
work of bearing burdens in the Tent of Appointment,
48 their registered ones were eight thousand five
hundred and eighty.
49 According to the command of HWHY they were
registered by the hand of Mosheh, each according to
348

NUMBERS

his service and according to his burden, thus were
they registered by him, as hWhY commanded
Mosheh.

5 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Command the children of Yisra’ĕl to send out of
the camp every leper, and everyone who has a
discharge, and whoever becomes defiled for a being.
3 “Send out both male and female, send them
outside the camp, so that they do not defile their
camps in the midst of which I dwell.”
4 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did so, to send them
outside the camp. As hWhY had spoken to Mosheh,
so the children of Yisra’ĕl did.
5 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
6 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, ‘When a man or
woman commits any sin that men commit in trespass
against hWhY, and that being is guilty,
7 then they shall confess their sin which they have
done. And he shall restore his guilt in its principal,
plus one-fifth of it, and give it to whom he has been
guilty.
8 ‘But if the man has no relative to restore the guilt
to, the guilt which is restored goes to hWhY, for the
kohĕn, in addition to the ram of the atonement with
which atonement is made for him.
9 ‘And every contribution of all the qodesh gifts of
the children of Yisra’ĕl, which they bring to the kohĕn,
becomes his.
10 ‘And every man’s qodesh gifts becomes his,
whatever any man gives the kohĕn becomes his.’ ”
11 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
12 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When any man’s wife turns aside and has committed
a trespass against him,
2

349

BEMIḎBAR

and a man has intercourse with her, and it is
hidden from the eyes of her husband, and it is
concealed that she has defiled herself, and there was
no witness against her, nor was she caught,
14 and a spirit of jealousy comes upon him and he
becomes jealous of his wife who has defiled herself,
or a spirit of jealousy comes upon him and he
becomes jealous of his wife although she has not
defiled herself,
15 then the man shall bring his wife to the kohĕn. And
he shall bring the offering for her, one-tenth of an
ĕphah of barley flour. He is not to pour oil on it or put
frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering of
jealousy, an offering for remembering, for bringing
wickedness to remembrance.
16 ‘And the kohĕn shall bring her near, and shall
make her stand before hWhY.
17 ‘And the kohĕn shall take qodesh water in an
earthen vessel, and take some of the dust that is on
the floor of the Mishkan and put it into the water.
18 ‘And the kohĕn shall make the woman stand
before hWhY, and shall uncover the woman’s head,
and put the offering for remembering in her hands,
which is the grain offering of jealousy, while the kohĕn
holds in his hand the bitter water that brings a curse.
19 ‘And the kohĕn shall make her swear, and say to
the woman, “If no man has lain with you, and if you
have not turned aside to uncleanness under your
husband, be free from this bitter water that brings a
curse.
20 “But if you have turned aside under your husband,
and if you have defiled yourself and some man other
than your husband has lain with you”21 then the kohĕn shall make the woman swear with
the oath of the curse, and he shall say to the woman
13

350

NUMBERS

- “hWhY make you a curse and an oath among your
people, when hWhY makes your thigh waste away
and your abdomen swell,
22 and this water that causes the curse shall go into
your inward parts, and make your abdomen swell and
your thigh waste away.” And the woman shall say,
“Amĕn, amĕn.”
23 ‘And the kohĕn shall write these curses in a book,
and shall wipe them off into the bitter water,
24 and shall make the woman drink the bitter water
that brings the curse, and the water that brings the
curse shall enter her to become bitter.
25 ‘And the kohĕn shall take the grain offering of
jealousy from the woman’s hand, and shall wave the
offering before HWHY, and bring it to the altar.
26 ‘And the kohĕn shall take a hand filled with the
offering, as its remembrance offering, and burn it on
the altar, and afterward make the woman drink the
water.
27 ‘And when he has made her drink the water, then
it shall be, if she has defiled herself and has
committed a trespass against her husband, that the
water that brings the curse shall enter her and
become bitter, and her abdomen shall swell, and her
thigh shall waste away, and the woman shall become
a curse among her people.
28 ‘But if the woman has not defiled herself, and is
clean, then she shall be clear and shall conceive
children.
29 ‘This is the Torah of jealousy, when a wife turns
aside under her husband and defiles herself,
30 or when a spirit of jealousy comes upon a man,
and he becomes jealous of his wife. Then he shall
make the woman stand before hWhY, and the kohĕn
shall do to her all this Torah.
351

BEMIḎBAR

‘And the man shall be clear from wickedness, but
the woman bear her wickedness.’ ”
31

6 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When a man or woman separates, by making a vow
of a Nazirite, to be separate to hWhY,
3 he separates from wine and strong drink - he
drinks neither vinegar of wine nor vinegar of strong
drink, neither does he drink any grape juice, nor eat
grapes or raisins.
4 ‘All the days of his separation he does not eat
whatever is made of the grapevine, from seed to skin.
5 ‘All the days of the vow of his separation a razor
does not come upon his head. Until the days are
completed for which he separates himself to hWhY, he
is qodesh. He shall let the locks of the hair of his head
grow long.
6 ‘All the days of his separation to hWhY he does not
go near a dead body.
7 ‘He does not make himself unclean for his father,
or for his mother, for his brother or his sister, when
they die, because his separation to Elohim is on his
head.
8 ‘All the days of his separation he is qodesh to
hWhY.
9 ‘And when anyone dies beside him in an instant,
suddenly, and he has defiled the head of his
separation, then he shall shave his head on the day
of his cleansing - on the seventh day he shaves it.
10 ‘And on the eighth day he brings two turtledoves
or two young pigeons to the kohĕn, to the door of the
Tent of Appointment,
11 and the kohĕn shall prepare one as a sin offering
and the other as a burnt offering, and shall make
2

352

NUMBERS

atonement for him, because he sinned by reason of
the dead body. And he shall qadosh his head on that
day,
12 and shall separate to hWhY the days of his
separation, and shall bring a male lamb a year old, as
a guilt offering. But the former days are not counted,
because his separation was defiled.
13 ‘And this is the Torah of the Nazirite: When the
days of his separation are completed, he is brought
to the door of the Tent of Appointment,
14 and he shall bring his offering to hWhY: one male
lamb a year old, a perfect one, as a burnt offering,
and one ewe lamb a year old, a perfect one, as a sin
offering, and one ram, a perfect one, as a peace
offering,
15 and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine
flour mixed with oil, and unleavened thin cakes
anointed with oil, and their grain offering with their
drink offerings.
16 ‘And the kohĕn shall bring them before hWhY and
prepare his sin offering and his burnt offering.
17 ‘And he shall prepare the ram as a peace offering
to hWhY, together with the basket of unleavened
bread. And the kohĕn shall prepare its grain offering
and its drink offering.
18 ‘And the Nazirite shall shave the head of his
separation at the door of the Tent of Appointment,
and shall take the hair from the head of his separation
and shall put it on the fire which is under the
slaughtering of the peace offering.
19 ‘And the kohĕn shall take the boiled shoulder of
the ram, and one unleavened cake from the basket,
and one unleavened thin cake, and put them upon the
hands of the Nazirite after he has shaved his
dedicated hair.
353

BEMIḎBAR

‘Then the kohĕn shall wave them, a wave offering
before hWhY. It is qodesh for the kohĕn, besides the
breast of the wave offering and besides the thigh of
the contribution. And afterwards the Nazirite shall
drink wine.’
21 “This is the Torah of the Nazirite who vows to
hWhY the offering for his separation, and besides that,
whatever else his hand is able to provide. According
to the vow which he takes, so he shall do according
to the Torah of his separation.”
22 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
23 “Speak to Aharon and his sons, saying, ‘This is
how you baraḵ the children of Yisra’ĕl. Say to them:
24 “hWhY baraḵ you and guard you;
25 hWhY make His face shine upon you, and show
favour to you;
26 hWhY lift up His face upon you, and give you
peace.’ ”
27 “Thus they shall put My Name on the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and I Myself shall baraḵ them.”
20

7 And it came to be, when Mosheh finished putting
up the Mishkan, that he anointed it and qadosh it and
all its furnishings, as well as the altar and all its
utensils. Thus he anointed them and qadosh them.
2 And the leaders of Yisra’ĕl, heads of their fathers’
houses who were the leaders of the tribes and over
the ones registered, drew near,
3 and they brought their offering before HWHY: six
covered wagons and twelve cattle, a wagon for every
two of the leaders, and for each one a bull. And they
brought them near before the Mishkan.
4 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
5 “Accept from them, and they shall be used in doing
the service of the Tent of Appointment. And you shall
354

NUMBERS

give them to the Lĕwites, each one according to his
service.”
6 And Mosheh took the wagons and the cattle, and
gave them to the Lĕwites.
7 He gave two wagons and four cattle to the sons of
Gĕreshon, according to their service.
8 And he gave four wagons and eight cattle to the
sons of Merari, according to their service, under the
hand of Ithamar, son of Aharon the kohĕn.
9 But to the sons of Qehath he gave none, because
theirs was the service of the qodesh objects, which
they bore on their shoulders.
10 And the leaders brought the dedication of the altar
in the day it was anointed. So the leaders brought
their offering before the altar.
11 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Let them bring their
offering, one leader each day, for the dedication of the
altar.”
12 And the one who brought his offering on the first
day was Naḥshon, son of Amminaḏaḇ, from the tribe
of Yahuḏah.
13 And his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
14 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
15 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
16 one male goat as a sin offering;
17 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Naḥshon, son of Amminaḏaḇ.
18 On the second day Nethan’ĕl, son of Tsu’ar,
leader of Yissasḵar, brought near.
355

BEMIḎBAR

He brought his offering, one silver dish, the weight
of which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl
of seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
20 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
21 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
22 one male goat as a sin offering;
23 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Nethan’ĕl, son of Tsu’ar.
24 On the third day Eliyaḇ, son of Ḥĕlon, leader of the
children of Zeḇulun:
25 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
26 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
27 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
28 one male goat as a sin offering;
29 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Eliyaḇ, son of Ḥĕlon.
30 On the fourth day Elitsur, son of Sheḏĕy’ur, leader
of the children of Re’uḇĕn:
31 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
32 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
19

356

NUMBERS

one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
34 one male goat as a sin offering;
35 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Elitsur, son of Sheḏĕy’ur.
36 On the fifth day Shelumi’ĕl, son of Tsurishaddai,
leader of the children of Shim’on:
37 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
38 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
39 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
40 one male goat as a sin offering;
41 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Shelumi’ĕl, son of Tsurishaddai.
42 On the sixth day Elyasaph, son of Deu’ĕl, leader
of the children of Gaḏ:
43 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
44 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
45 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
46 one male goat as a sin offering;
47 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Elyasaph, son of Deu’ĕl.
33

357

BEMIḎBAR

On the seventh day Elishama, son of Ammihuḏ,
leader of the children of Ephrayim:
49 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
50 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
51 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
52 one male goat as a sin offering;
53 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Elishama, son of Ammihuḏ.
54 On the eighth day Gamli’ĕl, son of Peḏahtsur,
leader of the children of Menashsheh:
55 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
56 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
57 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
58 one male goat as a sin offering;
59 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Gamli’ĕl, son of Peḏahtsur.
60 On the ninth day Aḇiḏan, son of Giḏ’oni, leader of
the children of Binyamin:
61 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
48

358

NUMBERS

one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
63 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
64 one male goat as a sin offering;
65 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Aḇiḏan, son of Giḏ’oni.
66 On the tenth day Aḥi’ezer, son of Ammishaddai,
leader of the children of Dan:
67 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
68 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
69 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
70 one male goat as a sin offering;
71 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Aḥi’ezer, son of Ammishaddai.
72 On the eleventh day Paḡ’i’ĕl, son of Oḵran, leader
of the children of Ashĕr:
73 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
74 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
75 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
76 one male goat as a sin offering;
77 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Paḡ’i’ĕl, son of Oḵran.
62

359

BEMIḎBAR

On the twelfth day Aḥira, son of Ĕynan, leader of
the children of Naphtali:
79 his offering was one silver dish, the weight of
which was one hundred and thirty, one silver bowl of
seventy sheqels, according to the sheqel of the
qodesh place, both of them filled with fine flour mixed
with oil as a grain offering;
80 one gold ladle of ten, filled with incense;
81 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year
old, as a burnt offering;
82 one male goat as a sin offering;
83 and as a peace offering: two cattle, five rams, five
male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the
offering of Aḥira, son of Ĕynan
84 This was the dedication of the altar from the
leaders of Yisra’ĕl, when it was anointed: twelve silver
dishes, twelve silver bowls, twelve gold ladles.
85 Each silver dish was one hundred and thirty and
each bowl seventy. All the silver of the vessels was
two thousand four hundred according to the sheqel of
the qodesh place.
86 The twelve gold ladles filled with incense was ten
each, according to the sheqel of the qodesh place. All
the gold of the ladles was one hundred and twenty.
87 All the cattle for the burnt offering were twelve
young bulls, the rams twelve, the male lambs a year
old twelve, with their grain offering, and the male
goats as a sin offering twelve.
88 And all the cattle for the peace offerings were
twenty-four bulls, the rams sixty, the male goats sixty,
the lambs a year old sixty. This was the dedication of
the altar after it was anointed.
89 And when Mosheh went into the tent of
Appointment to speak with Him, he heard the voice of
One speaking to him from above the lid of atonement
78

360

NUMBERS

that was on the ark of the Witness, from between the
two keruḇim. Thus He spoke to him.

8 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to Aharon, and say to him, ‘When you put
up the lamps, let the seven lamps give light in front of
the lampstand.’ ”
3 And Aharon did so. He put up the lamps to face
toward the front of the lampstand, as hWhY
commanded Mosheh.
4 And this is the work of the lampstand: beaten work
of gold, from its base to its blossoms it is beaten work.
According to the pattern which hWhY had shown
Mosheh, so he made the lampstand.
5 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
6 “Take the Lĕwites from among the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and you shall cleanse them,
7 and do this to them to cleanse them: Sprinkle
water of sin offering on them, and they shall shave all
their body, and shall wash their garments, and
cleanse themselves,
8 and shall take a young bull with its grain offering
of fine flour mixed with oil, while you take another
young bull as a sin offering.
9 “And you shall bring the Lĕwites before the Tent of
Appointment, and you shall assemble all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 “And you shall bring the Lĕwites before hWhY, and
the children of Yisra’ĕl shall lay their hands on the
Lĕwites,
11 and Aharon shall wave the Lĕwites before HWHY,
a wave offering from the children of Yisra’ĕl - so shall
they be for doing the service of hWhY.
12 “And the Lĕwites shall lay their hands on the
heads of the young bulls. And one shall be prepared
2

361

BEMIḎBAR

as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to
hWhY, to make atonement for the Lĕwites.
13 “And you shall have the Lĕwites stand before
Aharon and his sons, and then wave them, a wave
offering to hWhY.
14 “Thus you shall separate the Lĕwites from among
the children of Yisra’ĕl, and the Lĕwites shall be Mine.
15 “Then after that the Lĕwites shall go in to do
service in the Tent of Appointment, when you have
cleansed them and waved them as a wave offering.
16 “For they are given ones, given to Me from among
the children of Yisra’ĕl. I have taken them for Myself
instead of all who open the womb, the first-born of all
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
17 “For all the first-born among the children of Yisra’ĕl
are Mine, both man and beast. On the day that I
smote all the first-born in the land of Mitsrayim I
qadosh them unto Myself.
18 “And I have taken the Lĕwites instead of all the
first-born of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
19 “And I have given the Lĕwites as a gift to Aharon
and his sons from among the children of Yisra’ĕl, to
do the service of the children of Yisra’ĕl in the Tent of
Appointment, and to make atonement for the children
of Yisra’ĕl, that there be no plague among the
children of Yisra’ĕl when the children of Yisra’ĕl come
near the qodesh place.”
20 Thus
Mosheh and Aharon and all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl did to the
Lĕwites according to all that HWHY commanded
Mosheh concerning the Lĕwites, so the children of
Yisra’ĕl did to them.
21 And the Lĕwites cleansed themselves and
washed their garments, and Aharon waved them, a
362

NUMBERS

wave offering before hWhY, and Aharon made
atonement for them to cleanse them.
22 Then after that the Lĕwites went in to do their
service in the Tent of Appointment before Aharon and
his sons as HWHY commanded Mosheh concerning
the Lĕwites, so they did to them.
23 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
24 “This applies to the Lĕwites: From twenty-five
years old and above let him come into active service
in the service of the Tent of Appointment,
25 and at the age of fifty years they retire from active
service of the service, and serve no more,
26 but they shall attend with their brothers in the Tent
of Appointment, to guard the duty, but shall do no
service. Thus you shall do to the Lĕwites regarding
their duties.”

9 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh in the Wilderness of
Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they
had come out of the land of Mitsrayim, saying,
2 “Now, let the children of Yisra’ĕl perform the
Pesaḥ at its Appointed Time.
3 “On the fourteenth day of this month, between the
evenings, perform it at its Appointed Time. According
to all its Laws and Right-Rulings you perform it.”
4 And Mosheh spoke to the children of Yisra’ĕl to
perform the Pesaḥ.
5 So they performed the Pesaḥ on the fourteenth
day of the first month, between the evenings, in the
Wilderness of Sinai. According to all that hWhY
commanded Mosheh, so the children of Yisra’ĕl did.
6 But there were men who were defiled for a being
of a man, so that they were not able to perform the
Pesaḥ on that day. So they came before Mosheh and
Aharon that day,
363

BEMIḎBAR

and those men said to him, “We are defiled for the
being of a man. Why are we withheld from bringing
near the offering of hWhY at its Appointed Time
among the children of Yisra’ĕl?”
8 And Mosheh said to them, “Wait, let me hear what
hWhY commands concerning you.”
9 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
10 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘When
any male of you or your generations is unclean for a
being, or is far away on a journey, he shall still
perform the Pesaḥ of hWhY.
11 ‘On the fourteenth day of the second month,
between the evenings, they perform it - with
unleavened bread and bitter herbs they eat it.
12 ‘They do not leave of it until morning, and they do
not break a bone of it. According to all the Laws of the
Pesaḥ they perform it.
13 ‘But the man who is clean and is not on a journey,
and has failed to perform the Pesaḥ, that same being
shall be cut off from among his people, because he
did not bring the offering of hWhY at its Appointed
Time - that man bears his sin.
14 ‘And when a stranger sojourns among you, then
he shall perform the Pesaḥ of hWhY. He shall do so
according to the Law of the Pesaḥ and according to
its Right-Ruling. You have one Law, both for the
stranger and the native of the land.’ ”
15 And on the day that the Mishkan was raised up,
the cloud covered the Mishkan, the Tent of the
Witness. From evening until morning it was above the
Mishkan like the appearance of fire.
16 Thus it was continually: the cloud covered it by
day, and the appearance of fire by night.
17 And whenever the cloud was taken up from above
the Tent, after that the children of Yisra’ĕl would
7

364

NUMBERS

depart. And in the place where the cloud dwelt, there
the children of Yisra’ĕl would camp.
18 At the command of hWhY the children of Yisra’ĕl
departed, and at the command of hWhY they camped.
They remained camped as long as the cloud dwelt
above the Mishkan.
19 Even when the cloud lingered many days above
the Mishkan, the children of Yisra’ĕl guarded the
Charge of hWhY, and did not depart.
20 And so it was, when the cloud was above the
Mishkan a few days: according to the command of
hWhY they camped, and according to the command
of hWhY they would depart.
21 And so it was, when the cloud dwelt only from
evening until morning: when the cloud was taken up
in the morning, then they departed. Whether by day
or by night, whenever the cloud was taken up, they
departed.
22 Whether two days, or a month, or a year that the
cloud lingered above the Mishkan to dwell upon it, the
children of Yisra’ĕl camped, and did not depart. But
when it was taken up, they departed.
23 At the command of hWhY they camped, and at the
command of hWhY they departed. They guarded the
Charge of hWhY, at the command of by the hand of
Mosheh.

10 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Make two silver trumpets for yourself, make them
of beaten work. And you shall use them for calling the
congregation and for breaking camp.
3 “And when they blow both of them, all the
congregation shall meet before you at the door of the
Tent of Appointment.
2

365

BEMIḎBAR

“And if they blow one, then the leaders, the heads
of the thousands of Yisra’ĕl, shall gather to you.
5 “And when you blow a shout, the camps that lie on
the east side shall depart.
6 “And when you blow a shout the second time, then
the camps that lie on the south side shall depart - they
blow a shout for them to depart.
7 “And when the assembly is to be assembled, you
blow, but do not shout.
8 “And the sons of Aharon, the kohenim, blow with
the trumpets. And it shall be to you for a Law forever
throughout your generations.
9 “And when you go into battle in your land against
the enemy that distresses you, then you shall shout
with the trumpets, and you shall be remembered
before hWhY your Elohim, and you shall be saved
from your enemies.
10 “And in the day of your gladness, and in your
Appointed Times, and at the beginning of your
months, you shall blow the trumpets over your burnt
offerings and over your peace offerings. And they
shall be a remembrance for you before your Elohim. I
am hWhY your Elohim.”
11 And it came to be on the twentieth day of the
second month, in the second year, that the cloud was
taken up from above the Mishkan of the Witness.
12 And the children of Yisra’ĕl departed, journeying
from the Wilderness of Sinai. And the cloud dwelt in
the Wilderness of Paran.
13 Thus they departed the first time, according to the
command of hWhY by the hand of Mosheh.
14 And the banner of the camp of the children of
Yahuḏah departed first according to their divisions.
And over their army was Naḥshon, son of
Amminaḏaḇ.
4

366

NUMBERS

And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Yissasḵar was Nethan’ĕl, son of Tsu’ar.
16 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Zeḇulun was Eliyaḇ, son of Ḥĕlon.
17 And the Mishkan was taken down. And the sons
of Gĕreshon and the sons of Merari departed, bearing
the Mishkan.
18 And the banner of the camp of Re’uḇĕn departed
according to their divisions. And over their army was
Elitsur, son of Sheḏĕy’ur.
19 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Shim’on was Shelumi’ĕl, son of Tsurishaddai.
20 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Gaḏ was Elyasaph, the son of Deu’ĕl.
21 And the Qehathites departed, bearing the
Miqdash, while the Mishkan was put up before they
came.
22 And the banner of the camp of the children of
Ephrayim departed according to their divisions. And
over their army was Elishama, son of Ammihuḏ.
23 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Menashsheh was Gamli’ĕl, son of Peḏahtsur.
24 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Binyamin was Aḇiḏan, son of Giḏ’oni.
25 Then the banner of the camp of the children of
Dan, which formed the rear guard of all the camps,
departed according to their divisions. And over their
army was Aḥi’ezer, son of Ammishaddai.
26 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Ashĕr was Paḡ’i’ĕl, the son of Oḵran.
27 And over the army of the tribe of the children of
Naphtali was Aḥira, the son of Ĕynan.
28 Such was the order of departure of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, according to their divisions, when they
departed.
15

367

BEMIḎBAR

And Mosheh said to Ḥoḇaḇ, the son of Re’uw’ĕl
the Miḏyanite, Mosheh’s father-in-law, “We are
departing for the place of which hWhY said, ‘I give it to
you.’ Come with us, and we shall do good to you, for
HWHY has spoken good concerning Yisra’ĕl.”
30 And he replied to him, “I am not going, but I am
going to my own land and to my relatives.”
31 Then he said, “Please do not leave us, because
you know how we are to camp in the wilderness, and
you shall be our eyes.
32 “And it shall be, when you go with us, then it shall
be that whatever good hWhY does to us, the same we
shall do to you.”
33 So they departed from the mountain of hWhY on a
journey of three days. And the ark of the Covenant of
hWhY went before them for the three days’ journey, to
seek out a resting place for them.
34 And the cloud of hWhY was above them by day
when they went out from the camp.
35 And it came to be, whenever the ark departed, that
Mosheh said, “Rise up, O hWhY! And let Your
enemies be scattered, and let those who hate You
flee before You.”
36 And when it rested, he said, “Return, O hWhY, to
the countless thousands of Yisra’ĕl.”
29

11 And it came to be, when the people were as
complainers, it was evil in the ears of hWhY. And hWhY
heard it, and His displeasure burned. And the fire of
hWhY burned among them, and consumed those in the
outskirts of the camp.
2 And the people cried out to Mosheh, and Mosheh
prayed to hWhY, and the fire died down.
3 Then he called the name of the place Taḇ’ĕrah,
because the fire of hWhY had burned among them.
368

NUMBERS

And the mixed multitude who were in their midst
lusted greatly, so the children of Yisra’ĕl also wept
again and said, “Who is giving us meat to eat?
5 “We remember the fish which we ate without cost
in Mitsrayim, the cucumbers, and the melons, and the
leeks, and the onions, and the garlic,
6 but now our life is dried up. There is naught to look
at but this manna!”
7 Now the manna was like coriander seed, and its
appearance like the appearance of bdellium.
8 The people went about and gathered it, ground it
on millstones or beat it in the mortar, and cooked it in
a pot, and made cakes of it. And its taste was as the
taste of cakes baked with oil.
9 And when the dew fell on the camp at night, the
manna fell on it.
10 And
Mosheh heard the people weeping
throughout their clans, each man at the door of his
tent. And the displeasure of hWhY burned
exceedingly. And in the eyes of Mosheh it was evil,
11 so Mosheh said to hWhY, “Why have You done evil
to Your servant? And why have I not found favour in
Your eyes, to put the burden of all these people on
me?
12 “Was it I who conceived all these people? Was it I
who brought them forth, that You should say to me,
‘Carry them in your bosom, as the foster father carries
a nursing child,’ to the land which You swore to their
fathers?
13 “Where am I to get meat to give to all these
people? For they weep before me, saying, ‘Give us
meat to eat.’
14 “I am unable to bear all these people alone,
because the burden is too heavy for me.
4

369

BEMIḎBAR

“And if You are doing this to me, please slay me
altogether, if I have found favour in Your eyes, and let
me not see my evil!”
16 Then hWhY said to Mosheh, “Gather to Me seventy
men of the elders of Yisra’ĕl, whom you know to be
the elders of the people and officers over them. And
bring them to the Tent of Appointment, and let them
stand there with you.
17 “And I shall come down and speak with you there,
and shall take of the Ruaḥ that is on you, and put on
them. And they shall bear the burden of the people
with you, so that you do not bear it yourself alone.
18 “And say to the people, ‘Qadosh yourselves for
tomorrow, and you shall eat meat, because you have
wept in the hearing of HWHY, saying, “Who is giving
us meat to eat? For it was well with us in Mitsrayim.”
And HWHY shall give you meat, and you shall eat.
19 ‘You are going to eat, not one day, nor two days,
nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days,
20 but for a month of days, until it comes out of your
nostrils and becomes an abomination to you,
because you have rejected hWhY who is among you,
and have wept before Him, saying, “Why did we come
up out of Mitsrayim?” ’ ”
21 And Mosheh said, “The people in whose midst I
am are six hundred thousand men on foot, and You,
You have said, ‘I give them meat to eat for a month of
days.’
22 “Could flocks and herds be slaughtered for them,
to be sufficient for them? Or could all the fish of the
sea be gathered together for them, to be sufficient for
them?”
23 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Is the arm of hWhY too
short? Now see whether My word meets you or not!”
15

370

NUMBERS

And Mosheh went out and spoke to the people the
words of hWhY, and he gathered the seventy men of
the elders of the people and stood them around the
Tent.
25 And hWhY came down in the cloud, and spoke to
him, and took of the Ruaḥ that was upon him, and
placed the same upon the seventy elders. And it
came to be, when the Ruaḥ rested upon them, that
they naḇu, but did not continue.
26 However, two men had remained in the camp. The
name of one was Eldaḏ, and the name of the other
Mĕyḏaḏ. And the Ruaḥ rested upon them. Now they
were among those listed, but did not go out to the
Tent. And they naḇu in the camp.
27 And a young man ran and informed Mosheh, and
said, “Eldaḏ and Mĕyḏaḏ naḇa in the camp.”
28 And Yahoshua son of Nun, Mosheh’s assistant
from his youth, answered and said, “Mosheh my
master, forbid them!”
29 Then Mosheh said to him, “Are you jealous for my
sake? Oh, that all the people of hWhY were neḇi’im,
that hWhY would put His Ruaḥ upon them!”
30 And Mosheh returned to the camp, both he and
the elders of Yisra’ĕl.
31 And a wind went forth from hWhY, and it brought
quail from the sea and let them fall beside the camp,
about a day’s journey on this side and about a day’s
journey on the other side, all around the camp, and
about two ammah above the surface of the ground.
32 And the people were up all that day, and all that
night, and all the next day, and gathered the quail. He
who had least gathered ten ḥomers. And they spread
them out for themselves all around the camp.
33 The meat was still between their teeth, before it
was chewed, and the wrath of hWhY burned against
24

371

BEMIḎBAR

the people, and hWhY smote the people with an
exceeding great plague.
34 Then he called the name of that place Qiḇroth
ha’Tta’awah, because there they buried the people
who had lusted.
35 From Qiḇroth ha’Tta’awah the people departed for
Ḥatsĕroth - and they were at Ḥatsĕroth.

12 Now Miryam and Aharon spoke against Mosheh
because of the Kushite wife whom he had taken, for
he had taken a Kushite wife.
2 And they said, “Has hWhY spoken only through
Mosheh? Has He not also spoken through us?” And
hWhY heard it.
3 And the man Mosheh was very humble, more than
all men who were on the face of the earth.
4 And suddenly hWhY said to Mosheh, and Aharon,
and Miryam, “You three, come out to the Tent of
Appointment!” So the three came out.
5 And hWhY came down in the column of cloud and
stood in the door of the Tent, and called Aharon and
Miryam. And they both went forward.
6 And He said, “Hear now My words: If your naḇi is
of hWhY, I make Myself known to him in a vision, and
I speak to him in a dream.
7 “Not so with My servant Mosheh, he is trustworthy
in all My house.
8 “I speak with him mouth to mouth, and plainly, and
not in riddles. And he sees the form of hWhY. So why
were you not afraid to speak against My servant
Mosheh?”
9 And the displeasure of hWhY burned against them,
and He left.

372

NUMBERS

And the cloud turned away from above the Tent,
and look: Miryam was leprous, as white as snow! And
Aharon turned toward Miryam, and look: a leper!
11 And Aharon said to Mosheh, “Oh, my master!
Please do not hold against us the sin in which we
have done foolishly and in which we have sinned.
12 “Please do not let her be as one dead when
coming out of its mother’s womb, with our flesh half
consumed!”
13 And Mosheh cried out to hWhY, saying, “O Ĕl,
please heal her, please!”
14 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “If her father had but
spit in her face, would she not be ashamed seven
days? Let her be shut out of the camp seven days,
and after that let her be re-admitted.”
15 And Miryam was shut out of the camp seven days,
and the people did not depart until Miryam was readmitted.
16 And
afterward the people departed from
Ḥatsĕroth, and they camped in the Wilderness of
Paran.
10

13 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Send men to spy out the land of Kena’an, which I
am giving to the children of Yisra’ĕl. Send one man
from each tribe of their fathers, every one a leader
among them.”
3 And by the command of hWhY Mosheh sent them
from the Wilderness of Paran, all of them men who
were heads of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And these were their names. From the tribe of
Re’uḇĕn: Shammua, son of Zakkur.
5 From the tribe of Shim’on: Shaphat, son of Ḥori.
6 From the tribe of Yahuḏah: Kalĕḇ, son of
Yephunneh.
2

373

BEMIḎBAR

From the tribe of Yissasḵar: Yiḡ’al, son of Yosĕph.
8 From the tribe of Ephrayim: Hoshĕa, son of Nun.
9 From the tribe of Binyamin: Palti, son of Raphu.
10 From the tribe of Zeḇulun: Gaddi’ĕl, son of Soḏi.
11 From the tribe of Yosĕph, from the tribe of
Menashsheh: Gaddi, son of Susi.
12 From the tribe of Dan: Ammi’ĕl, son of Gemalli.
13 From the tribe of Ashĕr: Shĕthur, son of Miḵa’ĕl.
14 From the tribe of Naphtali: Naḥbi, son of Wophsi.
15 From the tribe of Gaḏ: Geu’ĕl, son of Maḵi.
16 These are the names of the men whom Mosheh
sent to spy out the land. And Mosheh called Hoshĕa
the son of Nun, Yahoshua.
17 And Mosheh sent them to spy out the land of
Kena’an, and said to them, “Go up here into the
Negeḇ, and go up to the mountains,
18 and see what the land is like, and the people who
dwell in it, whether strong or weak, whether few or
many,
19 and whether the land they dwell in is good or evil,
whether the cities they inhabit are in camps or
strongholds,
20 and whether the land is rich or poor, and whether
there are forests there or not. And you shall be strong,
and bring some of the fruit of the land.” Now the time
was the season of the first-fruits of grapes.
21 So they went up and spied out the land from the
Wilderness of Tsin as far as Reḥoḇ, near the entrance
of Ḥamath.
22 And they went up through the Negeḇ and came to
Ḥeḇron. And Aḥiman, Shĕshai, and Talmai, the
descendants of Anaq, were there. Now Ḥeḇron had
been built seven years before Tso’an in Mitsrayim.
23 And they came to the wadi Eshkol, and cut down
from there a branch with one cluster of grapes. And
7

374

NUMBERS

they bore it between two of them on a pole, also of
the pomegranates and of the figs.
24 That place was called the wadi Eshkol, because of
the cluster which the men of Yisra’ĕl cut down from
there.
25 And they returned from spying out the land after
forty days.
26 And they went and came to Mosheh and Aharon
and all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl in
the Wilderness of Paran, at Qaḏĕsh. And they
brought back word to them and to all the
congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.
27 And they reported to him, and said, “We went to
the land where you sent us. And truly, it flows with
milk and honey, and this is its fruit.
28 “But the people who dwell in the land are strong,
and the cities are walled, very great. And we saw the
descendants of Anaq there too.
29 “The Amalĕqites dwell in the land of the Negeḇ,
while the Ḥittites and the Yeḇusites and the Amorites
dwell in the mountains. And the Kena’anites dwell by
the sea and along the banks of the Yardĕn.”
30 And Kalĕḇ silenced the people before Mosheh,
and said, “Let us go up at once and take possession,
for we are certainly able to overcome it.”
31 But the men who had gone up with him said, “We
are not able to go up against the people, for they are
stronger than we.”
32 And they gave the children of Yisra’ĕl an evil report
of the land which they had spied out, saying, “The
land through which we have gone as spies is a land
eating up its inhabitants, and all the people whom we
saw in it are men of great size.

375

BEMIḎBAR

“And we saw there the Nephilim, sons of Anaq, of
the Nephilim. And we were like grasshoppers in our
own eyes, and so we were in their eyes.”
33

14 Then all the congregation lifted up their voices
and cried, and the people wept that night.
2 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl grumbled against
Mosheh and against Aharon, and all the congregation
said to them, “If only we had died in the land of
Mitsrayim! Or if only we had died in this wilderness!
3 “And why is hWhY bringing us to this land to fall by
the sword, that our wives and children should become
a prey? Would it not be better for us to turn back to
Mitsrayim?”
4 And they said to each other, “Let us appoint a
leader, and let us turn back to Mitsrayim.”
5 Then Mosheh and Aharon fell on their faces
before all the assembly of the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
6 And Yahoshua son of Nun, and Kalĕḇ son of
Yephunneh, who were among those who had spied
out the land, tore their garments,
7 and they spoke to all the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “The land we passed
through to spy out is an exceedingly good land.
8 “If hWhY has delighted in us, then He shall bring us
into this land and give it to us, ‘a land which is flowing
with milk and honey.’
9 “Only, do not rebel against hWhY, nor fear the
people of the land, for they are our bread. Their
defence has turned away from them, and hWhY is with
us. Do not fear them.”
10 But all the congregation said to stone them with
stones. Then the esteem of hWhY appeared in the
Tent of Appointment before all the children of Yisra’ĕl.
376

NUMBERS

And hWhY said to Mosheh, “How long shall I be
scorned by these people? And how long shall I not be
trusted by them, with all the signs which I have done
in their midst?
12 “Let Me smite them with the pestilence and
disinherit them, and make of you a nation greater and
mightier than they.”
13 And Mosheh said to hWhY, “Then the Mitsrites
shall hear it, for by Your power You brought these
people up from their midst,
14 and they shall say to the inhabitants of this land
they have heard that You, hWhY, are in the midst of
these people, that You, hWhY, are seen eye to eye
and that Your cloud stands above them, and You go
before them in a column of cloud by day and in a
column of fire by night.
15 “Now if You shall kill these people as one man,
then the nations which have heard of Your report shall
speak, saying,
16 ‘Because hWhY was not able to bring this people
to the land which He swore to give them, therefore He
killed them in the wilderness.’
17 “And now, I pray, let the power of hWhY be great,
as You have spoken, saying,
18 ‘hWhY is patient and of great kindness, forgiving
wickedness and transgression, but by no means
leaving unpunished; visiting the wickedness of the
fathers on the children to the third and fourth
generation.’
19 “Please forgive the wickedness of this people,
according to the greatness of Your kindness, as You
have forgiven this people, from Mitsrayim even until
now.”
20 And hWhY said, “I shall forgive, according to your
word,
11

377

BEMIḎBAR

but truly, as I live and all the earth is filled with the
esteem of hWhY,
22 for none of these men who have seen My esteem
and the signs which I did in Mitsrayim and in the
wilderness, and have tried Me now these ten times,
and have disobeyed My voice,
23 shall see the land of which I swore to their fathers,
nor any of those who scorned Me see it.
24 “But My servant Kalĕḇ, because he has a different
spirit in him and has followed Me completely, I shall
bring into the land where he went, and his seed shall
inherit it.
25 “Since the Amalĕqites and the Kena’anites are
dwelling in the valley, turn back tomorrow and depart
into the wilderness by the Way of the Sea of Reeds.”
26 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, and to Aharon,
saying,
27 “How long shall this evil congregation have this
grumbling against Me? I have heard the grumblings
which the children of Yisra’ĕl are grumbling against
Me.
28 “Say to them, ‘As I live,’ declares hWhY, ‘as you
have spoken in My hearing, so I do to you:
29 ‘The carcasses of you who have grumbled against
Me are going to fall in this wilderness, all of you who
were registered, according to your entire number,
from twenty years old and above.
30 ‘None of you except Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh, and
Yahoshua son of Nun, shall enter the land which I
swore I would make you dwell in.
31 ‘But your little ones, whom you said would become
a prey, I shall bring in, and they shall know the land
which you have rejected.
32 ‘But as for you, your carcasses are going to fall in
this wilderness.
21

378

NUMBERS

‘And your sons shall be wanderers in the
wilderness forty years, and shall bear your whorings,
until your carcasses are consumed in the wilderness.
34 ‘According to the number of the days in which you
spied out the land, forty days - a day for a year, a day
for a year - you are to bear your wickednesses forty
years, and you shall know My breaking off.
35 ‘I am hWhY, I have spoken, I shall do this to all this
evil congregation who are meeting against Me: In this
wilderness they are consumed, and there they die.’ ”
36 And the men whom Mosheh sent to spy out the
land, who returned and made all the congregation
grumble against him by bringing an evil report of the
land,
37 even those men who brought the evil report about
the land, died by the plague before hWhY.
38 Of those men who went to spy out the land, only
Yahoshua son of Nun, and Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh
remained alive.
39 And when Mosheh spoke these words to all the
children of Yisra’ĕl, the people mourned greatly.
40 And they rose up early in the morning and went up
to the top of the mountain, saying, “See, we have
indeed sinned, but we shall go up to the place which
hWhY had spoken of!”
41 But Mosheh said, “Why do you now transgress the
command of hWhY, since it does not prosper?
42 “Do not go up, lest you be smitten by your
enemies, for hWhY is not in your midst.
43 “Because the Amalĕqites and the Kena’anites are
there before you, and you shall fall by the sword.
Because you have turned away from hWhY, hWhY is
not with you.”
33

379

BEMIḎBAR

But they presumed to go up to the mountaintop,
but neither the ark of the Covenant of hWhY nor
Mosheh left the camp.
45 So the Amalĕqites and the Kena’anites who dwelt
in that mountain came down and smote them, and
beat them down, even to Ḥormah.
44

15 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When you have come into the land of your dwellings,
which I am giving you,
3 and you make an offering by fire to hWhY, a burnt
offering or a slaughtering, to accomplish a vow or as
a voluntary offering or in your Appointed Times, to
make a sweet fragrance to hWhY, from the herd or the
flock,
4 then he who brings near his offering to hWhY shall
bring near a grain offering of one-tenth part of fine
flour mixed with one-fourth of a hin of oil,
5 and one-fourth of a hin of wine as a drink offering
you prepare with the burnt offering or the
slaughtering, for each lamb.
6 ‘Or for a ram you prepare as a grain offering twotenth parts of fine flour mixed with one-third of a hin
of oil,
7 and as a drink offering you bring one-third of a hin
of wine as a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
8 ‘And when you prepare a young bull as a burnt
offering, or as a slaughtering to accomplish a vow, or
as a peace offering to hWhY,
9 then shall be brought with the young bull a grain
offering of three-tenth parts of fine flour mixed with
half a hin of oil,
10 and bring as the drink offering half a hin of wine as
an offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY.
2

380

NUMBERS

‘This is what is done for each young bull, for each
ram, or for each lamb or young goat.
12 ‘According to the number that you prepare, so you
do for each one according to their number.
13 ‘Let all who are native do so with them, in bringing
near an offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to
hWhY.
14 ‘And when a stranger sojourns with you, or
whoever is among you throughout your generations,
and would make an offering made by fire, a sweet
fragrance to hWhY, as you do, so he does.
15 ‘One Law is for you of the assembly and for the
stranger who sojourns with you - a Law forever
throughout your generations. As you are, so is the
stranger before hWhY.
16 ‘One Torah and one Right-Ruling is for you and for
the stranger who sojourns with you.’ ”
17 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
18 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When you come into the land to which I bring you,
19 then it shall be, when you eat of the bread of the
land, that you present a contribution to hWhY.
20 ‘Present a cake of the first of your dough as a
contribution - as a contribution of the threshing-floor
you present it.
21 ‘Of the first of your dough you are to give to hWhY
a contribution throughout your generations.
22 ‘And when you sin by mistake, and do not do all
these Commands which hWhY has spoken to
Mosheh,
23 all that hWhY has commanded you by the hand of
Mosheh, from the day hWhY gave command and
onward throughout your generations,
24 then it shall be, if it is done by mistake, without the
knowledge of the congregation, that all the
11

381

BEMIḎBAR

congregation shall prepare one young bull as a burnt
offering, as a sweet fragrance to hWhY, with its grain
offering and its drink offering, according to the RightRuling, and one male goat as a sin offering.
25 ‘Then the kohĕn shall make atonement for all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and it shall be
forgiven them, for it was by mistake. And they shall
bring their offering, an offering made by fire to hWhY,
and their sin offering before hWhY, for their mistake.
26 ‘And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl and the stranger who sojourns in
their midst, because all the people did it by mistake.
27 ‘And if a being sins by mistake, then he shall bring
a female goat a year old as a sin offering.
28 ‘And the kohĕn shall make atonement for the
being who strays by mistake, when he sins by
mistake before HWHY, to make atonement for him,
and it shall be forgiven him.
29 ‘For him who makes a mistake there is one Torah,
both for him who is native among the children of
Yisra’ĕl and for the stranger who sojourns in their
midst.
30 ‘But the being who acts defiantly, whether he is
native or a stranger, he reviles hWhY, and that being
shall be cut off from among his people.
31 ‘Because he has despised the Word of hWhY, and
has broken His Command, that being shall certainly
be cut off, his wickedness is upon him.’ ”
32 And while the children of Yisra’ĕl were in the
wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks on the
Shabbath day.
33 And those who found him gathering sticks brought
him to Mosheh and to Aharon, and to all the
congregation.
382

NUMBERS

And they put him in under guard, because it had
not been declared what should be done to him.
35 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “The man shall
certainly be put to death, all the congregation stoning
him with stones outside the camp.”
36 And all the congregation brought him outside the
camp and stoned him with stones, as hWhY
commanded Mosheh, and he died.
37 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
38 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and you shall
say to them to make tsitsit on the corners of their
garments throughout their generations, and to put a
blue cord in the tsitsit of the corners.
39 “And it shall be to you for a tsitsit, and you shall
see it, and shall remember all the Commands of HWHY
and shall do them, and not search after your own
heart and your own eyes after which you went
whoring,
40 so that you remember, and shall do all My
Commands, and be qodesh unto your Elohim.
41 “I am hWhY your Elohim, who brought you out of
the land of Mitsrayim, to be your Elohim. I am hWhY
your Elohim.”
34

16 And Qoraḥ, son of Yitshar, son of Qehath, son of
Lĕwi, took both Dathan and Aḇiram the sons of Eliyaḇ,
and On, son of Peleth, sons of Re’uḇĕn,
2 and they rose up before Mosheh with some of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, two hundred and fifty leaders of
the congregation, called ones of the meeting, men of
name.
3 And they assembled against Mosheh and against
Aharon, and said to them, “Enough of you! For all the
congregation is qodesh, all of them, and hWhY is in
383

BEMIḎBAR

their midst. Why then do you lift up yourselves above
the assembly of hWhY?”
4 And when Mosheh heard, he fell on his face,
5 and spoke to Qoraḥ and all his company, saying,
“Tomorrow morning hWhY shall make known who is
His and who is qodesh, and come near to Him. And
let Him bring near to Him the one whom He chooses.
6 “Do this: Take fire holders, Qoraḥ and all your
company,
7 and put fire in them and put incense in them before
hWhY tomorrow. And it shall be that the one whom
hWhY chooses is the qadosh one. Enough of you,
sons of Lĕwi!”
8 And Mosheh said to Qoraḥ, “Hear now, you sons
of Lĕwi:
9 “Is it little to you that the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl has
separated you from the congregation of Yisra’ĕl, to
bring you near to Himself, to perform the service of
the Mishkan of hWhY, and to stand before the
congregation to serve them,
10 and that He has brought you near to Himself, you
and all your brothers, the sons of Lĕwi, with you? Yet
you seek the kehunnah as well?
11 “Therefore you and all your company are
assembled against hWhY. And Aharon, what is he that
you grumble against him?”
12 And Mosheh sent to call Dathan and Aḇiram the
sons of Eliyaḇ, but they said, “We are not coming up!
13 “Is it little that you have brought us up out of a land
flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the
wilderness, that you would also seize total rule over
us?
14 “Also, you have not brought us into a land flowing
with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields
384

NUMBERS

and vineyards. Would you bore out the eyes of these
men? We are not coming up!”
15 And Mosheh became very displeased, and said to
hWhY, “Do not respect their offering. I have not taken
one donkey from them, nor have I done harm to any
of them.”
16 Then Mosheh said to Qoraḥ, “Tomorrow, you and
all your company shall be there before hWhY, you and
they and Aharon.
17 “And take each one his fire holder, and you shall
put incense in it. And let each one bring his fire holder
before hWhY, two hundred and fifty fire holders, and
you and Aharon, each one with his fire holder.”
18 So each one took his fire holder, and put fire in it,
and laid incense on it, and stood at the door of the
Tent of Appointment with Mosheh and Aharon.
19 And Qoraḥ assembled all the congregation
against them at the door of the Tent of Appointment.
Then the esteem of hWhY appeared to all the
congregation.
20 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, and to Aharon,
saying,
21 “Separate yourselves from the midst of this
congregation, and let Me consume them in a
moment.”
22 But they fell on their faces, and said, “O Ĕl, Elohim
of the spirits of all flesh! When one man sins, are You
wroth with all the congregation?”
23 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
24 “Speak to the congregation, saying, ‘Move away
from around the tents of Qoraḥ, Dathan, and Aḇiram.’
”
25 So Mosheh rose up and went to Dathan and
Aḇiram, and the elders of Yisra’ĕl followed him.
385

BEMIḎBAR

And he spoke to the congregation, saying, “Please
turn away from the tents of these wicked men! Do not
touch whatever belongs to them, lest you be
consumed in all their sins.”
27 Then they moved away from around the tents of
Qoraḥ, Dathan, and Aḇiram. And Dathan and Aḇiram
came out and stood at the door of their tents, with
their wives, and their sons, and their little children.
28 And Mosheh said, “By this you know that hWhY
has sent me to do all these works, not because of my
own heart.
29 “If these die as all men do, or if they are visited as
all men are visited, then hWhY has not sent me.
30 “But if hWhY creates what is unheard of, and the
earth opens its mouth and swallows them up with all
that belongs to them, and they go down alive into the
grave, then you shall know that these men have
scorned hWhY.”
31 And it came to be, as he ended speaking all these
words, that the ground under them split apart,
32 and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed
them up, with their households and all the men with
Qoraḥ, with all their goods.
33 So they and all those with them went down alive
into the grave, and the earth closed over them, and
they perished from the midst of the assembly.
34 And all Yisra’ĕl who were round about them fled at
their cry, for they said, “Lest the earth swallow us up!”
35 And a fire came out from hWhY and consumed the
two hundred and fifty men who were offering incense.
36 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
37 “Say to El’azar, son of Aharon the kohĕn, to pick
up the fire holders out of the blaze, for they are
qodesh, and scatter the fire some distance away.
26

386

NUMBERS

“The fire holders of these men who sinned against
their own lives, let them be made into beaten plates
as a covering for the altar. Because they brought
them before hWhY, therefore they are qodesh. And let
them become a sign to the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
39 And El’azar the kohĕn took the bronze fire holders,
which those who were burned up had brought, and
they were beaten out as a covering on the altar 40 a remembrance to the children of Yisra’ĕl that no
stranger who is not of the seed of Aharon, should
come near to offer incense before hWhY, and not be
like Qoraḥ and his company - as hWhY had said to
him through Mosheh.
41 But all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
grumbled against Mosheh and against Aharon on the
next day, saying, “You, you have killed the people of
hWhY.”
42 And it came to be, when the congregation
assembled against Mosheh and against Aharon, that
they turned toward the Tent of Appointment. And see,
the cloud covered it, and the esteem of hWhY
appeared.
43 And Mosheh and Aharon came before the Tent of
Appointment.
44 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
45 “Arise from amidst this congregation, and let Me
consume them in a moment.” And they fell on their
faces.
46 So Mosheh said to Aharon, “Take the fire holder
and put fire in it from the altar, and lay incense on,
and go, hurry to the congregation and make
atonement for them, for wrath has gone out from
hWhY, the plague has begun.”
47 And Aharon took it as Mosheh commanded, and
ran into the midst of the assembly, and saw that the
38

387

BEMIḎBAR

plague had begun among the people. And he laid on
the incense and made atonement for the people,
48 and stood between the dead and the living. And
the plague was stopped.
49 And those who died in the plague were fourteen
thousand seven hundred, besides those who died on
account of Qoraḥ.
50 Then Aharon returned to Mosheh at the door of
the Tent of Appointment, for the plague had stopped.

17 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and take from
them a rod from each father’s house, all their leaders
according to their fathers’ houses, twelve rods. Write
each one’s name on his rod,
3 and write Aharon’s name on the rod of Lĕwi, for
there is one rod for the head of each father’s house.
4 “You shall then place them in the Tent of
Appointment before the Witness, where I meet with
you.
5 “And it shall be that the rod of the man whom I
choose buds, and I shall rid Myself of the grumblings
of the children of Yisra’ĕl, which they grumble against
you.”
6 And Mosheh spoke to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
all their leaders gave him a rod each, for each leader
according to their fathers’ houses, twelve rods. And
the rod of Aharon was among their rods.
7 So Mosheh placed the rods before hWhY in the
Tent of the Witness.
8 And it came to be on the next day that Mosheh
went into the Tent of the Witness and saw that the rod
of Aharon, of the house of Lĕwi, had budded, and
brought forth buds, and blossomed and bore ripe
almonds.
2

388

NUMBERS

And Mosheh brought out all the rods from before
hWhY to all the children of Yisra’ĕl. And they looked,
and each man took his rod.
10 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Bring Aharon’s rod
back before the Witness, to be kept as a sign against
the rebels, so that you put an end to their grumblings
against Me, lest they die.”
11 And Mosheh did as hWhY had commanded him,
so he did.
12 And the children of Yisra’ĕl spoke to Mosheh,
saying, “See, we shall die, we shall perish, we shall
all perish!
13 “Anyone who comes near the Mishkan of hWhY
dies. Shall we be consumed - to die?”
9

18 And hWhY said to Aharon, “You and your sons
and your father’s house with you are to bear the
wickedness against the Miqdash, and you and your
sons with you are to bear the wickedness against your
kehunnah.
2 “But bring with you your brothers of the tribe of
Lĕwi too, the tribe of your father to join you and serve
you while you and your sons are with you before the
Tent of the Witness.
3 “And they shall guard your charge, and the duty of
all the Tent, but they do not come near the furnishings
of the qodesh place and the altar, lest they die, both
they and you.
4 “And they shall be joined with you and guard the
duty to the Tent of Appointment, for all the service of
the Tent, but a stranger does not come near you.
5 “And you shall guard the duty of the qodesh place
and the duty of the altar, so that there be no more
wrath on the children of Yisra’ĕl.
389

BEMIḎBAR

“And see, I Myself have taken your brothers the
Lĕwites from the midst of the children of Yisra’ĕl - a
gift to you, given by hWhY, to do the service of the
Tent of Appointment.
7 “But you and your sons with you are to guard your
kehunnah for all matters at the altar and behind the
veil, and you shall serve. I have given you the
kehunnah as a gift for service, but the stranger who
comes near is put to death.”
8 And hWhY spoke to Aharon, “And see, I Myself
have also given you the charge of My contributions,
all the qodesh gifts of the children of Yisra’ĕl. I have
given them to you for the anointing, and to your sons,
as a Law forever.
9 “This is yours of the most qodesh gifts, from the
fire: all their offerings, all their grain offerings and all
their sin offerings and all their guilt offerings which
they render to Me, are most qodesh for you and your
sons.
10 “Eat it in the most qodesh place - every male eats
it. It is qodesh to you.
11 “This also is yours: the contribution of their gift,
with all the wave offerings of the children of Yisra’ĕl. I
have given them to you, and your sons and daughters
with you, as a Law forever. Everyone who is clean in
your house eats it.
12 “All the best of the oil, and all the best of the new
wine and the grain - their first-fruits which they give to
hWhY - I have given them to you.
13 “The first-fruits of all that is in their land, which they
bring to hWhY, are yours. Everyone who is clean in
your house eats it.
14 “All that is dedicated in Yisra’ĕl is yours.
15 “Everyone opening a womb of all flesh, which they
bring to hWhY, whether man or beast, is yours. But
6

390

NUMBERS

the first-born of man you shall certainly ransom, and
the first-born of the unclean beast you ransom.
16 “And ransom their ransomed ones when one
month old, according to your valuation, five sheqels
of silver, according to the sheqel of the qodesh place,
which is twenty gĕrahs.
17 “But the first-born of a cow, or the first-born of a
sheep, or the first-born of a goat you do not ransom,
they are qodesh. Sprinkle their blood on the altar, and
burn their fat as an offering made by fire for a sweet
fragrance to hWhY.
18 “And their flesh is yours, as the wave breast and
as the right thigh, it is yours.
19 “All the contributions of the qodesh gifts, which the
children of Yisra’ĕl present to hWhY, I have given to
you and your sons and daughters with you as a Law
forever. It is a covenant of salt forever before hWhY
with you and your seed with you.”
20 And hWhY said to Aharon, “You are not to have an
inheritance in their land, nor have any portion in their
midst. I am your portion and your inheritance among
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
21 “And see, I have given the children of Lĕwi all the
tithes in Yisra’ĕl as an inheritance in return for the
service which they are serving, the service of the Tent
of Appointment.
22 “And let the children of Yisra’ĕl no more come near
the Tent of Appointment, lest they bear sin and die,
23 because the Lĕwites shall do the service of the
Tent of Appointment, so they themselves bear their
wickedness. A Law forever, throughout your
generations: that among the children of Yisra’ĕl they
are to have no inheritance,
24 but the tithes of the children of Yisra’ĕl, which they
present as a contribution to hWhY, I have given to the
391

BEMIḎBAR

Lĕwites as an inheritance. That is why I have said to
them, ‘Among the children of Yisra’ĕl they have no
inheritance.’ ”
25 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
26 “Speak to the Lĕwites and say to them, ‘When you
take from the children of Yisra’ĕl the tithes which I
have given you from them as your inheritance, then
you shall present a contribution of it to hWhY, a tenth
of the tithe.
27 ‘And your contribution shall be reckoned to you as
grain from the threshing-floor and as filling from the
winepress.
28 ‘Thus you also present a contribution unto hWhY
from all your tithes which you receive from the
children of Yisra’ĕl. And you shall give from it the
contribution to hWhY to Aharon the kohĕn.
29 ‘From all your gifts you present every contribution
due to hWhY, from all the best of them, the qodesh
part of them.’
30 “And you shall say to them, ‘When you have
presented the best of it, then the rest shall be
reckoned to the Lĕwites as the yield of the threshingfloor and as the yield of the winepress.
31 ‘And you shall eat it in any place, you and your
households, for it is your reward for your service in
the Tent of Appointment,
32 and bear no sin because of it, when you have
presented the best of it, and do not profane the
qodesh gifts of the children of Yisra’ĕl, lest you die.’ ”

19 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
saying,
2 “This is a law of the Torah which hWhY has
commanded, saying, ‘Speak to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, that they bring you a red heifer, a perfect
392

NUMBERS

one, in which there is no blemish and on which a yoke
has never come.
3 ‘And you shall give it to El’azar the kohĕn, and he
shall bring it outside the camp, and shall slaughter it
before him.
4 ‘And El’azar the kohĕn shall take some of its blood
with his finger, and sprinkle some of its blood seven
times toward the front of the Tent of Appointment.
5 ‘And the heifer shall be burned before his eyes he burns its hide, and its flesh, and its blood, and its
dung.
6 ‘And the kohĕn shall take cedar wood and hyssop
and scarlet, and throw them into the midst of the fire
burning the heifer.
7 ‘The kohĕn shall then wash his garments, and
shall bathe his body in water, and afterward come into
the camp, but the kohĕn is unclean until evening.
8 ‘And he who is burning it washes his garments in
water, and shall bathe his body in water, and is
unclean until evening.
9 ‘And a clean man shall gather up the ashes of the
heifer, and shall place them outside the camp in a
clean place. And they shall be kept for the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl for the water
for uncleanness, it is for cleansing from sin.
10 ‘And he who gathers the ashes of the heifer shall
wash his garments, and is unclean until evening. And
it shall be a Law forever to the children of Yisra’ĕl and
to the stranger who sojourns in their midst.
11 ‘He who touches the dead of any human being is
unclean for seven days.
12 ‘He is to cleanse himself with the water on the third
day, and on the seventh day he is clean. But if he
does not cleanse himself on the third day, then on the
seventh day he is not clean.
393

BEMIḎBAR

‘Anyone who touches the dead of a human being,
and does not cleanse himself, defiles the Mishkan of
hWhY. And that being shall be cut off from Yisra’ĕl. He
is unclean, for the water for uncleanness was not
sprinkled on him, his uncleanness is still upon him.
14 ‘This is the Torah when a man dies in a tent: All
who come into the tent and all who are in the tent are
unclean for seven days,
15 and every open vessel which has no cover
fastened on it, is unclean.
16 ‘Anyone in the open field who touches someone
slain by a sword or who has died, or a bone of a man,
or a grave, is unclean for seven days.
17 ‘And for the unclean being they shall take some of
the ashes of the heifer burnt for cleansing from sin,
and running water shall be put on them in a vessel.
18 ‘And a clean man shall take hyssop and dip it in
the water, and shall sprinkle it on the tent, and on all
the vessels, and on the beings who were there, or on
the one who touched a bone, or the slain, or the dead,
or a grave.
19 ‘And the clean one shall sprinkle the unclean on
the third day and on the seventh day. And on the
seventh day he shall cleanse himself, and shall wash
his garments and bathe in water, and shall be clean
in the evening.
20 ‘But the man who is unclean and does not cleanse
himself, that being shall be cut off from among the
assembly, because he has defiled the Miqdash of
hWhY - water for uncleanness has not been sprinkled
on him, he is unclean.
21 ‘And it shall be a Law for them forever. And the
one who sprinkles the water for uncleanness washes
his garments. And the one who touches the water for
uncleanness is unclean until evening.
13

394

NUMBERS

‘And whatever the unclean being touches is
unclean. And the being who touches it is unclean until
evening.’ ”
22

20 And the children of Yisra’ĕl, all the congregation,
came into the Wilderness of Tsin in the first month, and
the people stayed in Qaḏĕsh. And Miryam died there
and was buried there.
2 Now there was no water for the congregation and
they assembled against Mosheh and against Aharon.
3 And the people contended with Mosheh and
spoke, saying, “If only we had died when our brothers
died before hWhY!
4 “Why have you brought up the assembly of hWhY
into this wilderness, that we and our livestock should
die here?
5 “And why have you brought us up out of Mitsrayim,
to bring us to this evil place? - not a place of grain or
figs or vines or pomegranates, and there is no water
to drink.”
6 Then Mosheh and Aharon went from the presence
of the assembly to the door of the Tent of
Appointment, and they fell on their faces. And the
esteem of hWhY appeared to them.
7 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
8 “Take the rod and assemble the congregation, you
and your brother Aharon. And you shall speak to the
rock before their eyes, and it shall give its water. And
you shall bring water for them out of the rock and give
drink to the congregation and their livestock.”
9 And Mosheh took the rod from before hWhY as He
commanded him.
10 And Mosheh and Aharon assembled the assembly
before the rock. And he said to them, “Hear now, you
rebels, shall we bring water for you out of this rock?”
395

BEMIḎBAR

Then Mosheh lifted his hand and struck the rock
twice with his rod. And much water came out, and the
congregation and their livestock drank.
12 But hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon,
“Because you did not believe Me, to qadosh Me in the
eyes of the children of Yisra’ĕl, therefore you do not
bring this assembly into the land which I have given
them.”
13 These were the waters of Meriḇah, because the
children of Yisra’ĕl contended with hWhY, and He was
qadosh among them.
14 And Mosheh sent messengers from Qaḏĕsh to the
sovereign of Eḏom. “This is what your brother Yisra’ĕl
said, ‘You know all the hardship that has befallen us,
15 that our fathers went down to Mitsrayim, and we
dwelt in Mitsrayim a long time, and the Mitsrites did
evil to us and our fathers.
16 ‘And we cried out to hWhY, and He heard our voice
and sent the Messenger and brought us up out of
Mitsrayim. And see, we are in Qaḏĕsh, a city on the
edge of your border.
17 ‘Please let us pass over, through your land. We
shall not pass over through fields or vineyards, nor
drink water from wells, we shall go along the
sovereign’s highway. We shall not turn aside, right or
left, until we have passed over your border.’ ”
18 But Eḏom said to him, “You do not pass over
through me, lest I come out against you with the
sword.”
19 And the children of Yisra’ĕl said to him, “We shall
go by the highway, and if I or my livestock drink any
of your water, then I shall pay for it. Let me only pass
over on foot, without a word.”
11

396

NUMBERS

But he said, “You do not pass over.” And Eḏom
came out against them with many men and with a
strong hand.
21 So when Eḏom refused to let Yisra’ĕl pass over
through his border, Yisra’ĕl turned away from him.
22 And the children of Yisra’ĕl, all the company,
departed from Qaḏĕsh and came to Mount Hor.
23 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh and to Aharon in
Mount Hor near the border of the land of Eḏom,
saying,
24 “Aharon is to be gathered to his people, for he is
not to enter the land which I have given to the children
of Yisra’ĕl, because you rebelled against My mouth at
the water of Meriḇah.
25 “Take Aharon and El’azar his son, and bring them
up to Mount Hor,
26 and strip Aharon of his garments and put them on
El’azar his son, for Aharon is to be gathered to his
people and die there.”
27 And Mosheh did as hWhY commanded, and they
went up to Mount Hor before the eyes of all the
congregation.
28 And Mosheh stripped Aharon of his garments and
put them on El’azar his son. And Aharon died there
on the top of the mountain. And Mosheh and El’azar
came down from the mountain.
29 And when all the congregation saw that Aharon
was dead, all the house of Yisra’ĕl wept for Aharon,
thirty days.
20

21 And the sovereign of Araḏ, the Kena’anite, who
dwelt in the Negeḇ, heard that Yisra’ĕl was coming on
the way to Atharim, and he fought against Yisra’ĕl and
took some of them captive.
397

BEMIḎBAR

Then Yisra’ĕl made a vow to HWHY, and said, “If
You deliver this people into my hand indeed, then I
shall put their cities under the ban.”
3 And hWhY listened to the voice of Yisra’ĕl and
gave up the Kena’anites, and they put them and their
cities under the ban. So the name of that place was
called Ḥormah.
4 And they departed from Mount Hor by the way of
the Sea of Reeds, to go around the land of Eḏom. But
the being of the people grew impatient because of the
way.
5 And the people spoke against Elohim and against
Mosheh, “Why have you brought us up out of
Mitsrayim to die in the wilderness? For there is no
food and no water, and our being loathes this light
bread.”
6 And HWHY sent fiery serpents among the people,
and they bit the people. And many of the people of
Yisra’ĕl died.
7 Then the people came to Mosheh, and said, “We
have sinned, for we have spoken against hWhY and
against you. Pray to hWhY to take away the serpents
from us.” So Mosheh prayed on behalf of the people.
8 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Make a fiery serpent,
and put it on a pole. And it shall be that everyone who
is bitten, when he looks at it, shall live.”
9 So Mosheh made a bronze serpent, and put it on
a pole. And it came to be, if a serpent had bitten
anyone, when he looked at the bronze serpent, he
lived.
10 And the children of Yisra’ĕl departed and camped
in Oḇoth.
11 And they departed from Oḇoth and camped at lyĕ
ha’Aḇiram, in the wilderness which is east of Mo’aḇ,
toward sunrise.
2

398

NUMBERS

From there they departed and camped at the wadi
Zereḏ.
13 From there they departed and camped on the
other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that
extends from the border of the Amorites, for the Arnon
is the border of Mo’aḇ, between Mo’aḇ and the
Amorites.
14 Therefore it is said in the Book of the Battles of
hWhY, “Wahĕḇ in Suphah, the wadi Arnon,
15 and the slope of the wadi that turns aside to the
dwelling of Ar, and lies on the border of Mo’aḇ.”
16 And from there on to Be’ĕr, which is the well
where hWhY said to Mosheh, “Gather the people, and
let Me give them water.”
17 Yisra’ĕl then sang this song: “Spring up, O well!
Sing to it,
18 a well the leaders sank, which the nobles of the
people dug by hacking with their staves.” Then from
the wilderness on to Mattanah,
19 from Mattanah to Naḥali’ĕl, from Naḥali’ĕl to
Bamoth,
20 and from Bamoth, in the valley that is in the
country of Mo’aḇ, to the top of Pisgah which looks
down on the wasteland.
21 And Yisra’ĕl sent messengers to Siḥon sovereign
of the Amorites, saying,
22 “Let me pass through your land. We shall not turn
off into fields or vineyards, we shall not drink water
from wells, but go by the sovereign’s highway until we
have passed over your border.”
23 But Siḥon would not allow Yisra’ĕl to pass through
his border. So Siḥon gathered all his people together
and went out against Yisra’ĕl in the wilderness, and
he came to Yahats and fought against Yisra’ĕl.
12

399

BEMIḎBAR

And Yisra’ĕl smote him with the edge of the sword,
and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the
Yabboq, as far as the children of Ammon, for the
border of the children of Ammon was strong.
25 And Yisra’ĕl took all these cities, and Yisra’ĕl dwelt
in all the cities of the Amorites - in Ḥeshbon and in all
its villages,
26 for Ḥeshbon was the city of Siḥon the sovereign of
the Amorites, who had fought against the former
sovereign of Mo’aḇ, and had taken all his land from
his hand as far as the Arnon.
27 That is why those who speak in proverbs say,
“Come to Ḥeshbon, let the city of Siḥon be built and
established.
28 “For fire went out from Ḥeshbon, a flame from the
city of Siḥon. It consumed Ar of Mo’aḇ, the masters of
the heights of the Arnon.
29 “Woe to you, Mo’aḇ! You have perished, O people
of Kemosh! He has given his sons as fugitives, and
his daughters into captivity, to Siḥon the sovereign of
the Amorites.
30 “Then we shot them - Ḥeshbon has perished as
far as Diḇon. And we laid waste as far as Nophaḥ,
which reaches to Mĕyḏeḇa.”
31 So Yisra’ĕl dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
32 And Mosheh sent to spy out Ya’zĕr. And they took
its villages and drove out the Amorites who were
there,
33 and turned and went up by the way to Bashan.
And Oḡ sovereign of Bashan went out against them,
he and all his people, to battle at Eḏre’i.
34 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Do not fear him, for I
have given him into your hand, with all his people and
his land. And you shall do to him as you did to Siḥon
sovereign of the Amorites, who dwelt at Ḥeshbon.”
24

400

NUMBERS

And they smote him, and his sons, and all his
people, until no remnant was left to him. And they
took possession of his land.
35

22 And the children of Yisra’ĕl departed and camped
in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ beyond the Yardĕn of
Yeriḥo.
2 And Balaq son of Tsippor saw all that Yisra’ĕl had
done to the Amorites.
3 And Mo’aḇ was exceedingly afraid of the people
because they were many, and Mo’aḇ was in dread
because of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And Mo’aḇ said to the elders of Miḏyan, “Now this
company is licking up all that is around us, as an ox
licks up the grass of the field.” Now Balaq son of
Tsippor was sovereign of the Mo’aḇites at that time,
5 and he sent messengers to Bil’am son of Be’or at
Pethor, which is near the River in the land of the sons
of his people, to call him, saying, “See, a people has
come from Mitsrayim. See, they have covered the
surface of the land, and are settling next to me!
6 “And now, please come at once, curse this people
for me, for they are too strong for me. It might be that
I smite them and drive them out of the land, for I know
that he whom you baraḵ is baruḵ, and he whom you
curse is cursed.”
7 And the elders of Mo’aḇ and the elders of Miḏyan
left with divination fee in their hand, and they came to
Bil’am and spoke the words of Balaq to him.
8 And he said to them, “Spend the night here, and I
shall bring back word to you, as hWhY speaks to me.”
So the heads of Mo’aḇ stayed with Bil’am.
9 And Elohim came to Bil’am and said, “Who are
these men with you?”
401

BEMIḎBAR

And Bil’am said to Elohim, “Balaq, son of Tsippor,
sovereign of Mo’aḇ, has sent to me, saying,
11 ‘See, a people has come out of Mitsrayim and
cover the surface of the land. Come now, curse them
for me. It might be that I am able to fight against them
and drive them out.’ ”
12 And Elohim said to Bil’am, “Do not go with them.
You do not curse the people, for they are baruḵ.”
13 And Bil’am rose in the morning and said to the
heads of Balaq, “Go back to your land, for hWhY has
refused to allow me to go with you.”
14 And the heads of Mo’aḇ arose and went to Balaq,
and said, “Bil’am refuses to come with us.”
15 Then Balaq again sent heads, more numerous
and more esteemed than they.
16 And they came to Bil’am and said to him, “This is
what Balaq son of Tsippor said: ‘Do not be withheld
from coming to me, please,
17 for I esteem you very greatly, and whatever you
say to me, I do. Therefore please come, curse this
people for me.’ ”
18 And Bil’am answered and said to the servants of
Balaq, “Though Balaq were to give me his house filled
with silver and gold, I am unable to go beyond the
word of hWhY my Elohim, to do less or more.
19 “And now, please, you also stay here tonight, and
let me find out what more hWhY says to me.”
20 And Elohim came to Bil’am at night and said to
him, “If the men come to call you, rise and go with
them, but only the word which I speak to you that you
do.”
21 And Bil’am rose in the morning and saddled his
donkey, and went with the heads of Mo’aḇ.
22 But the displeasure of Elohim burned because he
went, and the Messenger of hWhY stationed Himself
10

402

NUMBERS

in the way as an adversary against him. And he was
riding on his donkey, and his two servants were with
him.
23 And the donkey saw the Messenger of hWhY
standing in the way with His drawn sword in His hand,
and the donkey turned aside out of the way and went
into the field. So Bil’am beat the donkey to turn her
back onto the way.
24 Then the Messenger of hWhY stood in a narrow
passage between the vineyards, with a wall on this
side and a wall on that side.
25 And when the donkey saw the Messenger of
hWhY, she pushed herself against the wall and
crushed Bil’am’s foot against the wall, so he beat her
again.
26 And the Messenger of hWhY went further, and
stood in a narrow place where there was no way to
turn aside, right or left.
27 And when the donkey saw the Messenger of
hWhY, she lay down under Bil’am. So Bil’am’s
displeasure burned, and he beat the donkey with his
staff.
28 Then hWhY opened the mouth of the donkey, and
she said to Bil’am, “What have I done to you, that you
have beaten me these three times?”
29 And Bil’am said to the donkey, “Because you have
mocked me. If there were a sword in my hand, for I
would have killed you by now!”
30 And the donkey said to Bil’am, “Am I not your
donkey on which you have ridden, ever since I
became yours, to this day? Was I ever known to do
so to you?” And he said, “No.”
31 Then hWhY opened Bil’am’s eyes, and he saw the
Messenger of HWHY standing in the way with His
403

BEMIḎBAR

drawn sword in His hand. And he bowed his head and
fell on his face.
32 And the Messenger of hWhY said to him, “Why
have you beaten your donkey these three times?
See, I have come out to stand against you, because
your way is reckless before Me.
33 “And the donkey saw Me and turned aside from
Me these three times. If she had not turned aside from
Me, I certainly would have killed you by now, and let
her live.”
34 And Bil’am said to the Messenger of hWhY, “I have
sinned, for I did not know You stood in the way
against me. And now, if evil is in Your eyes, let me
turn back.”
35 And the Messenger of hWhY said to Bil’am, “Go
with the men, but only the word that I speak to you,
that you speak.” Bil’am then went with the heads of
Balaq.
36 And when Balaq heard that Bil’am was coming, he
went out to meet him at the city of Mo’aḇ, which is on
the border at the Arnon, which was in the extremity of
the border.
37 And Balaq said to Bil’am, “Did I not urgently send
to you, calling for you? Why did you not come to me?
Am I not able to esteem you?”
38 And Bil’am said to Balaq, “See, I have come to
you! Now, am I at all able to say somewhat? The word
that Elohim puts in my mouth, that I speak.”
39 And Bil’am went with Balaq, and they came to
Qiryath Ḥutsoth.
40 And Balaq slaughtered cattle and sheep, and he
sent some to Bil’am and to the heads who were with
him.

404

NUMBERS

And it came to be in the morning, that Balaq took
Bil’am and brought him up to the high places of Ba’al,
and from there he saw the extremity of the camp.
41

23 And Bil’am said to Balaq, “Build seven altars for
me here, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for
me here.”
2 And Balaq did as Bil’am had spoken, and Balaq
and Bil’am offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
3 Bil’am then said to Balaq, “Stand by your burnt
offering, and let me go on. It might be that hWhY
comes to meet me, and whatever He shows me I shall
declare to you.” And he went to a bare height.
4 And Elohim came to Bil’am, and he said to Him, “I
have prepared the seven altars, and I have offered on
each altar a bull and a ram.”
5 And hWhY put a word in the mouth of Bil’am, and
said, “Return to Balaq, and this is what you say.”
6 And he returned to him and saw him standing by
his burnt offering, he and all the heads of Mo’aḇ.
7 And he took up his proverb and said, “Balaq the
sovereign of Mo’aḇ has brought me from Aram, from
the mountains of the east. ‘Come, curse Ya’aqoḇ for
me, and come, rage at Yisra’ĕl!’
8 “How do I curse whom Ĕl has not cursed? And
how do I rage at whom hWhY has not raged?
9 “For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from
the hills I observe him. Look, a people dwelling alone,
not reckoning itself among the nations.
10 “Who shall count the dust of Ya’aqoḇ, and the
number of one-fourth of Yisra’ĕl? Let me die the death
of the upright, and let my end be like his!”
11 And Balaq said to Bil’am, “What have you done to
me? I took you to curse my enemies, and look, you
have kept on beraḵah!”
405

BEMIḎBAR

And he answered and said, “Should I not take
heed to speak what hWhY has put in my mouth?”
13 And Balaq said to him, “Please come with me to
another place from where you see them. You only see
the extremity but not all of them. Curse them for me
from there.”
14 And he took him to the field of Trophism, to the top
of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bull
and a ram on each altar.
15 And he said to Balaq, “Stand here by your burnt
offering while I meet over there.”
16 And hWhY came to Bil’am, and put a word in his
mouth, and said, “Go back to Balaq, and say this.”
17 So he went to him and saw him standing by his
burnt offering, and the heads of Mo’aḇ with him. And
Balaq asked him, “What did hWhY say?”
18 And he took up his proverb and said, “Rise up,
Balaq, and hear! Listen to me, son of Tsippor!
19 “Ĕl is not a man, to lie; nor a son of man, to repent!
Has He said, and would He not do it; or spoken, and
would not confirm it?
20 “See, I have received, to baraḵ. And He has baraḵ,
and I do not reverse it.
21 “He has not looked upon wickedness in Ya’aqoḇ,
nor has He seen trouble in Yisra’ĕl. HWHY his Elohim
is with him, and the shout of a Sovereign is in him.
22 “Ĕl who brought them out of Mitsrayim, is for them
like the horns of a wild ox.
23 “For there is no sorcery against Ya’aqoḇ, nor is
there any divination against Yisra’ĕl. Now it is said to
Ya’aqoḇ and to Yisra’ĕl, ‘What has Ĕl done!’
24 “Look, a people rises like a lioness, and lifts itself
up like a lion; it lies not down until it devours the prey,
and drinks the blood of the slain.”
12

406

NUMBERS

And Balaq said to Bil’am, “Do not curse them at
all, nor baraḵ them at all!”
26 And Bil’am answered and said to Balaq, “Have I
not spoken to you, saying, ‘All that hWhY speaks, that
I do’?”
27 And Balaq said to Bil’am, “Please come, let me
take you to another place. It might be right in the eyes
of Elohim that you curse them for me from there.”
28 And Balaq took Bil’am to the top of Pe’or, that
overlooks the wasteland.
29 And Bil’am said to Balaq, “Build seven altars for
me here, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for
me here.”
30 And Balaq did as Bil’am had said, and offered a
bull and a ram on each altar.
25

24 And when Bil’am saw that it pleased hWhY to
baraḵ Yisra’ĕl, he did not go as at other times, to seek
to use sorcery, but he put his face toward the
wilderness.
2 And Bil’am lifted up his eyes and saw Yisra’ĕl
encamped according to their tribes. And the Ruaḥ of
Elohim came upon him.
3 And he took up his proverb and said, “The saying
of Bil’am, son of Be’or, and the saying of the man
whose eyes are opened,
4 the saying of him who hears the words of Ĕl, who
sees the vision of Ĕl Shaddai, who falls down, with
eyes opened wide:
5 “How good are your tents, O Ya’aqoḇ, your
dwellings, O Yisra’ĕl!
6 “Like wadis that stretch out, like gardens by a river,
like aloes planted by hWhY, like cedars beside waters.

407

BEMIḎBAR

“He makes water flow from his buckets, and his
seed is in many waters. His sovereign is higher than
Aḡaḡ, and his reign is exalted.
8 “Ĕl who brought him out of Mitsrayim is for them
like the horns of a wild ox; he devours nations, his
enemies; and he breaks their bones, and he strikes
through with his arrows.
9 “He bowed down, he lay down like a lion. And, like
a lion, who would rouse him? Baruḵ is he who baraḵ
you, and cursed is he who curses you.”
10 Then the displeasure of Balaq burned against
Bil’am, and he struck his hands together. Balaq then
said to Bil’am, “I summoned you to curse my
enemies, and see, you have kept on beraḵah, these
three times!
11 “And now flee to your place. I said I would greatly
esteem you, and see, hWhY has kept you back from
esteem.”
12 And Bil’am said to Balaq, “Did I not also speak to
your messengers whom you sent to me, saying,
13 ‘If Balaq should give me his house filled with silver
and gold, I am unable to go beyond the word of hWhY,
to do either good or evil of my own heart. What hWhY
speaks, that I speak’?
14 “And now, see, I am going to my people. Come,
let me advise you what this people is going to do to
your people in the latter days.”
15 And he took up his proverb and said, “The saying
of Bil’am, son of Be’or, and the saying of the man
whose eyes are opened,
16 the saying of him who hears the words of Ĕl, and
knows the knowledge of the Most High, who sees the
vision of Ĕl Shaddai, who falls down, with eyes
opened wide:
7

408

NUMBERS

“I see Him, but not now; I observe Him, but not
near. A Star shall come out of Ya’aqoḇ, and a Sceptre
shall rise out of Yisra’ĕl, and shall smite the corners
of Mo’aḇ, and shall destroy all the sons of Shĕth.
18 “And Eḏom shall be a possession; and Sĕ’ir shall
be a possession - enemies - and Yisra’ĕl is doing
mightily.
19 “And a Ruler shall come from Ya’aqoḇ and destroy
the remnant from Ar.”
20 He then looked on Amalĕq, and he took up his
proverb and said, “Amalĕq was first among the
nations, but his latter end is to perish forever.”
21 He then looked on the Qĕynites, and he took up
his proverb and said, “Firm is your dwelling place, and
your nest is placed in the rock,
22 but Qayin is to be burned. Till when does Asshur
keep you captive?”
23 And he took up his proverb and said, “Oh, who
lives when Ĕl does this?
24 And ships shall come from the coast of Kittim, and
they shall afflict Asshur and afflict Ĕḇer, and so shall
Amalĕq, and he also perishes.”
25 And Bil’am arose and left, and returned to his
place. And Balaq also went his way.
17

25 And Yisra’ĕl dwelt in Shittim, and the people
began to whore with the daughters of Mo’aḇ,
2 and they invited the people to the slaughterings of
their mighty ones, and the people ate and bowed
down to their mighty ones.
3 Thus Yisra’ĕl was joined to Ba’al Pe’or, and the
displeasure of hWhY burned against Yisra’ĕl.
4 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Take all the leaders of
the people and hang them up before HWHY, before the
409

BEMIḎBAR

sun, so that the burning displeasure of hWhY turns
away from Yisra’ĕl.”
5 And Mosheh said to the judges of Yisra’ĕl, “Each
one of you slay his men who were joined to Ba’al
Pe’or.”
6 And see, one of the children of Yisra’ĕl came and
brought to his brothers a Miḏyanite woman before the
eyes of Mosheh and before the eyes of all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl, who were
weeping at the door of the Tent of Appointment.
7 And when Pineḥas, son of El’azar, son of Aharon
the kohĕn, saw it, he rose up from among the
congregation and took a spear in his hand,
8 and he went after the man of Yisra’ĕl into the tent
and thrust both of them through, the man of Yisra’ĕl,
and the woman through her abdomen. Thus the
plague among the children of Yisra’ĕl came to a stop.
9 And those who died in the plague were twenty-four
thousand.
10 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
11 “Pineḥas, son of El’azar, son of Aharon the kohĕn,
has turned back My wrath from the children of
Yisra’ĕl, because he was ardent with My ardour in
their midst, so that I did not consume the children of
Yisra’ĕl in My ardour.
12 “Therefore say, ‘See, I am giving him My covenant
of peace,
13 and it shall be to him and to his seed after him a
covenant of an everlasting kehunnah, because he
was ardent for his Elohim, and made atonement for
the children of Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
14 And the name of the Yisra’ĕlite who was killed,
who was killed with the Miḏyanite woman, was Zimri,
son of Salu, a leader of a father’s house among the
Shim’onites.
410

NUMBERS

And the name of the Miḏyanite woman who was
killed was Kozbi the daughter of Tsur. He was head
of the people of a father’s house in Miḏyan.
16 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
17 “Distress the Miḏyanites! And you shall smite
them,
18 for they distressed you with their tricks with which
they deceived you in the matter of Pe’or and in the
matter of Kozbi, the daughter of a leader of Miḏyan,
their sister, who was killed in the day of the plague
because of Pe’or.”
15

26 And it came to be, after the plague, that hWhY
spoke to Mosheh and El’azar, son of Aharon the
kohĕn, saying,
2 “Take a census of all the congregation of the
children of Yisra’ĕl from twenty years old and above,
by their fathers’ houses, everyone going out to the
army in Yisra’ĕl.”
3 So Mosheh and El’azar the kohĕn spoke with them
in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ by the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo,
saying,
4 “From twenty years old and above, as HWHY
commanded Mosheh and the children of Yisra’ĕl who
came out of the land of Mitsrayim.”
5 Re’uḇĕn, first-born of Yisra’ĕl, sons of Re’uḇĕn: of
Ḥanoḵ, the clan of the Ḥanoḵites; of Pallu, the clan of
the Palluites;
6 of Ḥetsron, the clan of the Ḥetsronites; of Karmi,
the clan of the Karmites.
7 These are the clans of the Re’uḇĕnites, and their
registered ones were forty-three thousand seven
hundred and thirty.
8 And the son of Pallu: Eliyaḇ.
411

BEMIḎBAR

And the sons of Eliyaḇ: Nemu’ĕl, and Dathan, and
Aḇiram. This Dathan and Aḇiram, were the called
ones of the congregation, who contended against
Mosheh and against Aharon in the company of
Qoraḥ, when they contended against hWhY,
10 and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed
them up together with Qoraḥ when that company
died, when the fire consumed two hundred and fifty
men. And they became a sign,
11 but the sons of Qoraḥ did not die.
12 Sons of Shim’on according to their clans: of
Nemu’ĕl, the clan of the Nemu’ĕlites; of Yamin, the
clan of the Yaminites; of Yaḵin, the clan of the
Yaḵinites;
13 of Zeraḥ, the clan of the Zarḥites; of Sha’ul, the
clan of the Sha’ulites.
14 These are the clans of the Shim’onites: twenty-two
thousand two hundred.
15 Sons of Gaḏ according to their clans: of Tsephon,
the clan of the Tsephonites; of Ḥaggi, the clan of the
Ḥaggites; of Shuni, the clan of the Shunites;
16 of Ozni, the clan of the Oznites; of Ĕri, the clan of
the Ĕrites;
17 of Aroḏ, the clan of the Aroḏites; of Arĕli, the clan
of the Arĕlites.
18 These are the clans of the sons of Gaḏ according
to their registered ones: forty thousand five hundred.
19 Sons of Yahuḏah: Ĕr and Onan. And Ĕr and Onan
died in the land of Kena’an.
20 And sons of Yahuḏah according to their clans: of
Shĕlah, the clan of the Shĕlanites; of Perets, the clan
of the Partsites; of Zeraḥ, the clan of the Zarḥites.
21 And sons of Perets: of Ḥetsron, the clan of the
Ḥetsronites; of Ḥamul, the clan of the Ḥamulites.
9

412

NUMBERS

These are the clans of Yahuḏah according to their
registered ones: seventy-six thousand five hundred.
23 Sons of Yissasḵar according to their clans: of Tola,
the clan of the Tolaites; of Puwwah, the clan of the
Punites;
24 of Yashuḇ, the clan of the Yashuḇites; of Shimron,
the clan of the Shimronites.
25 These are the clans of Yissasḵar according to their
registered ones: sixty-four thousand three hundred.
26 Sons of Zeḇulun according to their clans: of Sereḏ,
the clan of the Sardites; of Ĕlon, the clan of the
Ĕlonites; of Yaḥle’ĕl, the clan of the Yaḥle’ĕlites.
27 These are the clans of the Zeḇulunites according
to their registered ones: sixty thousand five hundred.
28 Sons of Yosĕph according to their clans, by
Menashsheh and Ephrayim:
29 Sons of Menashsheh: of Maḵir, the clan of the
Maḵirites. And Maḵir brought forth Gil’aḏ; of Gil’aḏ,
the clan of the Gil’aḏites.
30 These are sons of Gil’aḏ: of lyezer, the clan of the
lyezerites; of Ḥĕleq, the clan of the Ḥĕleqites;
31 of Asri’ĕl, the clan of the Asri’ĕlites; of Sheḵem, the
clan of the Sheḵemites;
32 of Shemiḏa, the clan of the Shemiḏaites; of
Ḥĕpher, the clan of the Ḥĕpherites.
33 And Tselapheḥaḏ son of Ḥĕpher had no sons, but
daughters. And the names of the daughters of
Tselapheḥaḏ: Maḥlah, and No’ah, Ḥoḡlah, Milkah,
and Tirtsah.
34 These are the clans of Menashsheh, and their
registered ones: fifty-two thousand seven hundred.
35 These are the sons of Ephrayim according to their
clans: of Shuthelaḥ, the clan of the Shuthalḥites; of
Beḵer, the clan of the Baḵrites; of Taḥan, the clan of
the Taḥanites.
22

413

BEMIḎBAR

And these are sons of Shuthelaḥ: of Ĕran, the clan
of the Ĕranites.
37 These are the clans of the sons of Ephrayim
according to their registered ones: thirty-two
thousand five hundred. These are the sons of Yosĕph
according to their clans.
38 Sons of Binyamin according to their clans: of Bela,
the clan of the Belaites; of Ashbĕl, the clan of the
Ashbĕlites; of Aḥiram, the clan of the Aḥiramites;
39 of Shephupham, the clan of the Shephuphamites;
of Ḥupham, the clan of the Ḥuphamites.
40 And sons of Bela were Ard and Na’aman: of Ard,
the clan of the Ardites; of Na’aman, the clan of the
Na’amites.
41 These are sons of Binyamin according to their
clans, and their registered ones: forty-five thousand
six hundred.
42 These are sons of Dan according to their clans: of
Shuḥam, the clan of the Shuḥamites. These are the
clans of Dan according to their clans.
43 All the clans, of the Shuḥamites, according to their
registered ones: sixty-four thousand four hundred.
44 Sons of Ashĕr according to their clans: of Yimna,
the clan of the Yimnahites; of Yishwi, the clan of the
Yishwites; of Beri’ah, the clan of the Beri’ites.
45 Of the sons of Beri’ah: of Ḥeḇer, the clan of the
Ḥeḇerites; of Malki’ĕl, the clan of the Malki’ĕlites.
46 And the name of the daughter of Ashĕr was Seraḥ.
47 These are the clans of the sons of Ashĕr according
to their registered ones: fifty-three thousand four
hundred.
48 Sons of Naphtali according to their clans: of
Yaḥtse’ĕl, the clan of the Yaḥtse’ĕlites; of Guni, the
clan of the Gunites;
36

414

NUMBERS

of Yĕtser, the clan of the Yĕtserites; of Shillĕm, the
clan of the Shillĕmites.
50 These are the clans of Naphtali according to their
clans, and their registered ones: forty-five thousand
four hundred.
51 These are the registered ones of the children of
Yisra’ĕl: six hundred and one thousand seven
hundred and thirty.
52 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
53 “The land is to be divided to these as an
inheritance, according to the number of names.
54 “To the large one you give a larger inheritance,
and to the small one you give a smaller inheritance.
Each shall be given its inheritance according to their
registered ones.
55 “But the land is divided by lot, they inherit
according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
56 “According to the lot their inheritance is divided
between the larger and the smaller.”
57 And these are the registered ones of the Lĕwites
according to their clans: of Gĕreshon, the clan of the
Gĕreshonites; of Qehath, the clan of the Qehathites;
of Merari, the clan of the Merarites.
58 These are the clans of the Lĕwites: the clan of the
Liḇnites, the clan of the Ḥeḇronites, the clan of the
Maḥlites, the clan of the Mushites, and the clan of the
Qorḥites. And Qehath brought forth Amram.
59 And the name of Amram’s wife was Yoḵeḇeḏ the
daughter of Lĕwi, who was born to Lĕwi in Mitsrayim.
And to Amram she bore Aharon and Mosheh and
their sister Miryam.
60 And to Aharon were born Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu,
El’azar and Ithamar.
61 And Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu died when they brought
strange fire before hWhY.
49

415

BEMIḎBAR

And their registered ones were twenty-three
thousand, every male from a month old and above.
For they were not registered among the other children
of Yisra’ĕl, because there was no inheritance given to
them among the children of Yisra’ĕl.
63 These are the ones registered by Mosheh and
El’azar the kohĕn, who registered the sons of Yisra’ĕl
in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ by the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo.
64 But among these there was not a man of those
registered by Mosheh and Aharon the kohĕn when
they registered the sons of Yisra’ĕl in the Wilderness
of Sinai.
65 For hWhY had said of them, “They shall certainly
die in the wilderness.” And not a man was left of them,
except Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh, and Yahoshua son
of Nun.
62

27 Then came the daughters of Tselapheḥaḏ, son
of Ḥĕpher, son of Gil’aḏ, son of Maḵir, son of
Menashsheh, from the clans of Menashsheh, son of
Yosĕph. And these were the names of his daughters:
Maḥlah, No’ah, and Ḥoḡlah, and Milkah, and Tirtsah.
2 And they stood before Mosheh, and before El’azar
the kohĕn, and before the leaders and all the
congregation, by the doorway of the Tent of
Appointment, saying,
3 “Our father died in the wilderness, yet he was not
in the company of those who were met together
against hWhY, in company with Qoraḥ, but he died in
his own sin. And he had no sons.
4 “Why should the name of our father be removed
from among his clan because he had no son? Give
us a possession among the brothers of our father.”
5 Mosheh then brought their case before hWhY.
6 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
416

NUMBERS

“The daughters of Tselapheḥaḏ speak what is
right. You should certainly give them a possession of
inheritance among their father’s brothers, and cause
the inheritance of their father to pass to them.
8 “And speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘When a man dies and has no son, then you shall
cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.
9 ‘And if he has no daughter, then you shall give his
inheritance to his brothers.
10 ‘And if he has no brothers, then you shall give his
inheritance to his father’s brothers.
11 ‘And if his father has no brothers, then you shall
give his inheritance to the nearest relative in his clan,
and he shall possess it.’ ” And it shall be to the
children of Yisra’ĕl a Law of Right-Ruling, as hWhY
commanded Mosheh.
12 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Go up into this Mount
Aḇiram, and see the land which I have given to the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
13 “And when you have seen it, you also shall be
gathered to your people as Aharon your brother was
gathered,
14 because you rebelled against My mouth in the
Wilderness of Tsin, in the strife of the congregation,
to qadosh Me at the waters before their eyes.” These
were the waters of Meriḇah, at Qaḏĕsh in the
Wilderness of Tsin.
15 And Mosheh spoke to hWhY, saying,
16 “Let hWhY, the Elohim of the spirits of all flesh,
appoint a man over the congregation,
17 who goes out before them and comes in before
them, who leads them out and brings them in, so that
the congregation of hWhY be not like sheep without a
shepherd.”
7

417

BEMIḎBAR

And hWhY said to Mosheh, “Take Yahoshua son
of Nun with you, a man in whom is the Ruaḥ. And you
shall lay your hand on him,
19 and shall stand him before El’azar the kohĕn and
before all the congregation, and give him charge
before their eyes,
20 and shall put some of your esteem upon him, so
that all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
obey.
21 “And he is to stand before El’azar the kohĕn, who
shall inquire before hWhY for him by the right-ruling of
the Urim. At his word they go out, and at his word they
come in, both he and all the children of Yisra’ĕl with
him, all the congregation.”
22 And Mosheh did as hWhY commanded him, and
took Yahoshua and stood him before El’azar the
kohĕn and before all the congregation,
23 and laid his hands on him and commissioned him,
as hWhY commanded by the hand of Mosheh.
18

28 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Command the children of Yisra’ĕl, and you shall
say to them, ‘Take heed to bring My offering, My food
for My offerings made by fire as a sweet fragrance to
Me, at their Appointed Time.’
3 “And you shall say to them, ‘This is the offering
made by fire which you bring to hWhY: two male lambs
a year old, perfect ones, daily, a continual burnt
offering.
4 ‘The one lamb you prepare in the morning, and the
other lamb you prepare between the evenings,
5 with one-tenth of an ĕphah of fine flour as a grain
offering mixed with one-fourth of a hin of pressed oil,
2

418

NUMBERS

a continual burnt offering which was offered at
Mount Sinai for a sweet fragrance, an offering made
by fire to hWhY,
7 and its drink offering, one-fourth of a hin for each
lamb. Pour out the drink to hWhY as an offering in the
qodesh place.
8 ‘And the other lamb you prepare between the
evenings. As the morning grain offering and its drink
offering, you prepare it as an offering made by fire, a
sweet fragrance to hWhY.
9 ‘And on the Shabbath day two lambs a year old,
perfect ones, and two-tenth parts of fine flour as a
grain offering, mixed with oil, with its drink offering,
10 the burnt offering for every Shabbath, besides the
continual burnt offering with its drink offering.
11 ‘And on the beginnings of your months you bring
near a burnt offering to hWhY: two young bulls and
one ram, and seven lambs a year old, perfect ones;
12 three-tenth parts of fine flour as a grain offering,
mixed with oil, for each bull; two-tenth parts of fine
flour as a grain offering, mixed with oil, for the one
ram;
13 and one-tenth part of fine flour, mixed with oil, as
a grain offering for each lamb, as a burnt offering of
sweet fragrance, an offering made by fire to hWhY.
14 ‘And their drink offering is half a hin of wine for a
bull, and one-third of a hin for a ram, and one-fourth
of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt offering for each
month throughout the months of the year,
15 and one male goat as a sin offering to hWhY is
prepared, besides the continual burnt offering and its
drink offering.
16 ‘And in the first month, on the fourteenth day, is
the Pesaḥ of hWhY,
6

419

BEMIḎBAR

and on the fifteenth day of this month is a Festival.
For seven days unleavened bread is eaten.
18 ‘On the first day is a qodesh gathering, you do no
servile work.
19 ‘And you shall bring near an offering made by fire
as a burnt offering to hWhY: two young bulls and one
ram, and seven lambs a year old, perfect ones they
are for you,
20 and their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil.
Prepare three-tenth parts for a bull, and two-tenth
parts for a ram.
21 ‘Prepare one-tenth part for each of the seven
lambs,
22 and one goat as a sin offering, to make atonement
for you.
23 ‘Prepare these besides the burnt offering of the
morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.
24 ‘According to these you are to prepare the food of
the offering made by fire daily for seven days, as a
sweet fragrance to hWhY. It is prepared besides the
continual burnt offering and its drink offering.
25 ‘And on the seventh day you have a qodesh
gathering, you do no servile work.
26 ‘And on the day of the first-fruits, when you bring
a new grain offering to hWhY at your Festival of
Shaḇuoth, you have a qodesh gathering, you do no
servile work.
27 ‘And you shall bring near a burnt offering as a
sweet fragrance to hWhY: two young bulls, one ram,
and seven lambs a year old,
28 with their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil:
three-tenth parts for each bull, two-tenth parts for the
one ram,
29 one-tenth part for each of the seven lambs,
30 one male goat to make atonement for you,
17

420

NUMBERS

perfect ones they are for you. Prepare them with
their drink offerings, besides the continual burnt
offering with its grain offering.
31

29 ‘And in the seventh month, on the first of the
month, you have a qodesh gathering, you do no servile
work, it is a Yom Teruah for you.
2 ‘And you shall prepare a burnt offering as a sweet
fragrance to hWhY: one young bull, one ram, seven
lambs a year old, perfect ones,
3 and their grain offering: fine flour mixed with oil,
three-tenth parts for the bull, two-tenth parts for the
ram,
4 and one-tenth part for each of the seven lambs,
5 and one male goat as a sin offering, to make
atonement for you,
6 besides the burnt offering with its grain offering for
the New Moon, the continual burnt offering with its
grain offering, and their drink offerings, according to
their Right-Ruling, as a sweet fragrance, an offering
made by fire to hWhY.
7 ‘And on the tenth of this seventh month you have
a qodesh gathering, and you shall afflict your beings,
you do no work.
8 ‘And you shall bring near a burnt offering to hWhY,
a sweet fragrance: one young bull, one ram, seven
lambs a year old, perfect ones they are for you,
9 and their grain offering: fine flour mixed with oil,
three-tenth parts for the bull, two-tenth parts for the
one ram,
10 one-tenth part for each of the seven lambs,
11 one male goat as a sin offering, besides the sin
offering for atonement the continual burnt offering
with its grain offering, and their drink offerings.
421

BEMIḎBAR

‘And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month you
have a qodesh gathering, you do no servile work. And
you shall celebrate a Festival to hWhY seven days,
13 and you shall bring near a burnt offering, an
offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY:
thirteen young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs a year
old, perfect ones they are,
14 and their grain offering: fine flour mixed with oil,
three-tenth parts for each of the thirteen bulls, twotenth parts for each of the two rams,
15 and one-tenth part for each of the fourteen lambs,
16 and one male goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
17 ‘Then on the second day: twelve young bulls, two
rams, fourteen lambs a year old, perfect ones,
18 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
19 and one male goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering with its grain offering, and
their drink offerings.
20 ‘And on the third day eleven bulls, two rams,
fourteen lambs a year old perfect ones,
21 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
22 and one goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
23 ‘Then on the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams,
fourteen lambs a year old perfect ones,
24 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
12

422

NUMBERS

and one male goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
26 ‘Then on the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams,
fourteen lambs a year old perfect ones,
27 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
28 and one goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
29 ‘Then on the sixth day: eight bulls, two rams,
fourteen lambs a year old perfect ones,
30 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
31 and one goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
32 ‘Then on the seventh day: seven bulls, two rams,
fourteen lambs a year old, perfect ones,
33 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for
the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, by their
number, according to the Right-Ruling,
34 and one goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
35 ‘On the eighth day you have an assembly, you do
no servile work,
36 and you shall bring near a burnt offering, an
offering made by fire, a sweet fragrance to hWhY: one
bull, one ram, seven lambs a year old perfect ones,
37 their grain offering and their drink offerings for the
bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, by their number,
according to the Right-Ruling,
25

423

BEMIḎBAR

and one goat as a sin offering, besides the
continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.
39 ‘These you prepare to hWhY at your Appointed
Times, besides your vowed offerings and your
voluntary offerings, as your burnt offerings and your
grain offerings, as your drink offerings and your peace
offerings.’ ”
40 And Mosheh spoke to the children of Yisra’ĕl
according to all hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
38

30 And Mosheh spoke to the heads of the tribes
concerning the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “This is the
word which hWhY has commanded:
2 “When a man vows a vow to hWhY, or swears an
oath to bind himself by some agreement, he does not
break his word, he does according to all that comes
out of his mouth.
3 “Or if a woman vows a vow to hWhY, and binds
herself by some agreement while in her father’s
house in her youth,
4 and her father hears her vow and the agreement
by which she has bound herself, and her father has
kept silent towards her, then all her vows shall stand,
and every agreement with which she has bound
herself stands.
5 “But if her father forbids her on the day that he
hears, then none of her vows nor her agreements by
which she has bound herself stand. And hWhY
pardons her, because her father has forbidden her.
6 “But if she at all belongs to a husband, while bound
by her vows or by a rash utterance from her lips by
which she bound herself,
7 and her husband hears it, and he has kept silent
towards her on the day that he hears, then her vows
424

NUMBERS

shall stand, and her agreements by which she bound
herself do stand.
8 “But if her husband forbids her on the day that he
hears it, then he has nullified her vow which she
vowed, and the rash utterance of her lips by which
she bound herself, and hWhY pardons her.
9 “But any vow of a widow or a divorced woman, by
which she has bound herself, stands against her.
10 “And if she vowed in her husband’s house, or
bound herself by agreement with an oath,
11 and her husband heard it, and has kept silent
towards her and did not forbid her, then all her vows
shall stand, and every agreement by which she bound
herself stands.
12 “But if her husband clearly nullified them on the
day he heard them, then whatever came from her lips
concerning her vows or concerning the agreement
binding her, it does not stand - her husband has
nullified them, and hWhY pardons her.
13 “Every vow and every binding oath to afflict her
being, let her husband confirm it, or let her husband
nullify it.
14 “But if her husband is altogether silent at her from
day to day, then he confirms all her vows or all the
agreements that bind her - he confirms them,
because he kept silent towards her on the day that he
heard.
15 “But if he nullifies them after he has heard, then he
shall bear her wickedness.”
16 These are the Laws which hWhY commanded
Mosheh, between a man and his wife, and between a
father and his daughter in her youth in her father’s
house.

31 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
425

BEMIḎBAR

“Take vengeance for the children of Yisra’ĕl on the
Miḏyanites. After that you are to be gathered to your
people.”
3 And Mosheh spoke to the people, saying, “Arm
some of yourselves for the campaign, and let them go
against the Miḏyanites to take vengeance for hWhY
on Miḏyan.
4 “Send a thousand from each tribe of all the tribes
of Yisra’ĕl for the campaign.”
5 So there were supplied from the tribes of Yisra’ĕl
one thousand from each tribe, twelve thousand
armed ones for the campaign.
6 And Mosheh sent them on the campaign, one
thousand from each tribe, them and Pineḥas son of
El’azar the kohĕn on the campaign, with the qodesh
utensils and the trumpets for sounding in his hand.
7 And they fought against the Miḏyanites, as hWhY
commanded Mosheh, and slew all the males.
8 And they slew the sovereigns of Miḏyan with the
rest of those who were pierced: Ewi, and Reqem, and
Tsur, and Ḥur, and Reḇa, the five sovereigns of
Miḏyan. And they slew Bil’am son of Be’or with the
sword.
9 And the sons of Yisra’ĕl took all the women of
Miḏyan captive, with their little ones, and took as spoil
all their livestock, and all their possessions.
10 And they burned with fire all the cities where they
dwelt, and all their settlements.
11 And they took all the spoil and all the booty, both
of man and beast.
12 And they brought the captives, and the booty, and
the spoil to Mosheh, and to El’azar the kohĕn, and to
the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl, to the
camp in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ by the Yardĕn of
Yeriḥo.
2

426

NUMBERS

And Mosheh, and El’azar the kohĕn, and all the
leaders of the congregation, went to meet them
outside the camp.
14 But Mosheh was wroth with the officers of the
army, with the commanders of thousands and
commanders of hundreds, who had come from the
campaign.
15 And Mosheh said to them, “Have you kept all the
women alive?
16 “Look, they are the ones who caused the children
of Yisra’ĕl, through the word of Bil’am, to trespass
against hWhY in the matter of Pe’or, and there was a
plague among the congregation of hWhY.
17 “And now, slay every male among the little ones.
And every woman who has known a man by lying with
a man you shall slay.
18 “But keep alive for yourselves all the female
children who have not known a man by lying with a
man.
19 “And you, camp outside the camp seven days.
Whoever has slain any being, and whoever has
touched any slain, cleanse yourselves and your
captives on the third day and on the seventh day.
20 “And cleanse every garment, and every object of
leather and whatever is made of goats’ hair, and
every object of wood.”
21 And El’azar the kohĕn said to the men of the
campaign who went to the battle, “This is the Law of
the Torah which hWhY commanded Mosheh:
22 “Only the gold, and the silver, the bronze, the iron,
the tin, and the lead,
23 every object that passes through fire, you put
through the fire, and it shall be clean; only, let it be
cleansed with the water for uncleanness. And
13

427

BEMIḎBAR

whatever does not pass through fire you pass through
water.
24 “And you shall wash your garments on the seventh
day and be clean, and afterwards come into the
camp.”
25 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
26 “Count up the plunder that was taken, of man and
of beast, you and El’azar the kohĕn and the heads of
the fathers of the congregation.
27 “And you shall divide the plunder into two parts,
between those who took part in the battle, who went
out on the campaign, and all the congregation.
28 “And put aside a levy for hWhY on the men of battle
who went out on the campaign: one out of every five
hundred, of man, and of the cattle, and of the
donkeys, and of the sheep.
29 “Take it from their half, and give it to El’azar the
kohĕn as a contribution to hWhY.
30 “And from the children of Yisra’ĕl’s half you shall
take one of every fifty, of man, of the cattle, of the
donkeys, and of the sheep, of all the livestock, and
give them to the Lĕwites guarding the duty of the
Mishkan of hWhY.”
31 And Mosheh and El’azar the kohĕn did as hWhY
commanded Mosheh.
32 And the booty remaining from the plunder, which
the people of the campaign had taken, was six
hundred and seventy-five thousand sheep,
33 and seventy-two thousand cattle,
34 and sixty-one thousand donkeys,
35 and thirty-two thousand human beings in all, of
women who had not known a man by lying with a
man.

428

NUMBERS

And the half, the portion for those who went out on
the campaign, was in number three hundred and
thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep,
37 and the levy unto hWhY of the sheep was six
hundred and seventy-five.
38 And the cattle were thirty-six thousand, of which
the levy unto hWhY was seventy-two.
39 And the donkeys were thirty thousand five
hundred, of which the levy unto hWhY was sixty-one.
40 And the human beings were sixteen thousand, of
which the levy unto hWhY was thirty-two beings.
41 So Mosheh gave the levy which was the
contribution unto hWhY to El’azar the kohĕn, as hWhY
commanded Mosheh.
42 And from the children of Yisra’ĕl’s half, which
Mosheh divided from the men who campaigned:
43 now the half belonging to the congregation was
three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five
hundred sheep,
44 and thirty-six thousand cattle,
45 and thirty thousand five hundred donkeys,
46 and sixteen thousand human beings.
47 Then Mosheh took from the children of Yisra’ĕl’s
half: one out of every fifty, drawn from man and beast,
and gave them to the Lĕwites, who guarded the duty
of the Mishkan of hWhY, as hWhY commanded
Mosheh.
48 And the officers who were over thousands of the
campaign, the commanders of thousands and
commanders of hundreds, came near to Mosheh,
49 and they said to Mosheh, “Your servants have
taken a count of the fighting men under our
command, and not a man of us is missing.
50 “So we have brought an offering for hWhY, what
every man found of ornaments of gold: armlets and
36

429

BEMIḎBAR

bracelets and signet rings and earrings and
necklaces, to make atonement for ourselves before
hWhY.”
51 And Mosheh and El’azar the kohĕn received the
gold from them, all the fashioned ornaments.
52 And all the gold of the offering that they presented
to hWhY, from the commanders of thousands and
commanders of hundreds, was sixteen thousand
seven hundred and fifty sheqels.
53 The men of the campaign had taken spoil, every
man for himself.
54 And Mosheh and El’azar the kohĕn received the
gold from the commanders of thousands and of
hundreds, and brought it into the Tent of Appointment
as a remembrance for the children of Yisra’ĕl before
hWhY.

32 And the children of Re’uḇĕn and the children of
Gaḏ had much livestock, a large number. And they
saw the land of Ya’zĕr and the land of Gil’aḏ and saw
that the place was a place for livestock.
2 So the children of Gaḏ and the children of Re’uḇĕn
came and spoke to Mosheh, and to El’azar the kohĕn,
and to the leaders of the congregation, saying,
3 “Ataroth, and Diḇon, and Ya’zĕr, and Nimrah, and
Ḥeshbon, and El’alĕh, and Seḇam, and Neḇo, and
Be’on,
4 the land which hWhY had smitten before the
congregation of Yisra’ĕl, is a land for livestock, and
your servants have livestock.”
5 And they said, “If we have found favour in your
eyes, let this land be given to your servants as a
possession, and do not let us pass over the Yardĕn.”

430

NUMBERS

And Mosheh said to the children of Gaḏ and to the
children of Re’uḇĕn, “Are your brothers to go into the
battle while you yourselves sit here?
7 “Now why do you discourage the heart of the
children of Yisra’ĕl from passing over into the land
which hWhY has given them?
8 “Thus your fathers did when I sent them away from
Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa to see the land.
9 “For when they went up to the wadi Eshkol and
saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, so that they did not go into the
land which hWhY had given them.
10 Then the displeasure of hWhY burned on that day,
and He swore an oath, saying,
11 ‘Not one of the men who came up from Mitsrayim,
from twenty years old and above, is to see the land of
which I swore to Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ,
because they did not follow Me completely,
12 except Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh, the Qenizzite,
and Yahoshua son of Nun, for they have followed
hWhY completely.’
13 “So the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl, and He made them wander in the wilderness
forty years, until all the generation that had done evil
in the eyes of hWhY was destroyed.
14 “And see, you have risen in your father’s place, an
increase of men, sinners, to add still more the burning
displeasure of hWhY against Yisra’ĕl.
15 “For if you turn away from following Him, He shall
once again leave them in the wilderness, and you
shall destroy all these people.”
16 Then they came near to him and said, “Let us build
sheep-enclosures here for our livestock, and cities for
our little ones,
6

431

BEMIḎBAR

but let us ourselves be armed, hastening before
the children of Yisra’ĕl until we have brought them to
their place. And our little ones shall dwell in the walled
cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
18 “We shall not return to our homes until every one
of the children of Yisra’ĕl has received his inheritance.
19 “For we shall not inherit with them on the other
side of the Yardĕn and beyond, because our
inheritance has fallen to us on this eastern side of the
Yardĕn.”
20 And Mosheh said to them, “If you make this
promise: if you arm yourselves before hWhY for battle,
21 and all your armed ones pass over the Yardĕn
before hWhY until He has driven out His enemies from
before Him,
22 and the land has been subdued before HWHY, then
afterward you shall return, and be guiltless before
hWhY and before Yisra’ĕl. And this land shall be your
possession before hWhY.
23 “But if you do not do so, then see, you shall sin
against hWhY, and know: your sin is going to find you
out.
24 “Build cities for your little ones and enclosures for
your sheep, and do what you have promised.”
25 And the children of Gaḏ and the children of
Re’uḇĕn spoke to Mosheh, saying, “Your servants are
going to do as my master commands.
26 “Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our
livestock are going to be there in the cities of Gil’aḏ,
27 but your servants are passing over, every armed
one of the army, before hWhY, to battle, as my master
says.”
28 And Mosheh gave command concerning them to
El’azar the kohĕn, to Yahoshua son of Nun, and to
17

432

NUMBERS

the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
29 And Mosheh said to them, “If the children of Gaḏ
and the children of Re’uḇĕn pass over the Yardĕn
with you, every man armed for battle before hWhY,
and the land has been subdued before you, then you
shall give them the land of Gil’aḏ as a possession.
30 “But if they do not pass over armed with you, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of
Kena’an.”
31 Then the children of Gaḏ and the children of
Re’uḇĕn answered, saying, “As hWhY has said to your
servants, so we do.
32 “We ourselves are passing over armed before
hWhY into the land of Kena’an, but the possession of
our inheritance remains with us beyond the Yardĕn.”
33 So Mosheh gave to the children of Gaḏ, to the
children of Re’uḇĕn, and to half the tribe of
Menashsheh, son of Yosĕph, the reign of Siḥon
sovereign of the Amorites and the reign of Oḡ
sovereign of Bashan, the land with its cities within the
borders, the cities of the land round about.
34 And the children of Gaḏ built Diḇon and Ataroth
and Aro’ĕr,
35 and Atroth, Shophan and Ya’zĕr and Yoḡbehah,
36 and Bĕyth Nimrah and Bĕyth Haran, walled cities,
and enclosures for sheep.
37 And the children of Re’uḇĕn built Ḥeshbon and
Elalĕh and Qiryathayim,
38 Neḇo and Ba’al Me’on - the names being changed
- and Shiḇmah. And they gave other names to the
cities which they built.
39 And the sons of Maḵir son of Menashsheh went to
Gil’aḏ and took it, and dispossessed the Amorites
who were in it.
433

BEMIḎBAR

So Mosheh gave Gil’aḏ to Maḵir, son of
Menashsheh, and he dwelt in it.
41 And Ya’ir son of Menashsheh went and took its
small towns, and called them Ḥawoth Ya’ir.
42 And Noḇaḥ went and took Qenath and its villages,
and he called it Noḇaḥ, after his own name.
40

33 These are the departures of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, who went out of the land of Mitsrayim by their
divisions under the hand of Mosheh and Aharon.
2 And Mosheh wrote down the starting points of their
departures at the command of hWhY, and these are
their departures according to their starting points:
3 So they departed from Ra’meses in the first
month, on the fifteenth day of the first month, on the
morrow of the Pesaḥ the children of Yisra’ĕl went out
with a high hand before the eyes of all the Mitsrites,
4 and the Mitsrites were burying all their first-born,
whom hWhY had smitten among them. Also on their
mighty ones hWhY had executed judgments.
5 Then the children of Yisra’ĕl departed from
Ra’meses and camped at Sukkoth.
6 And they departed from Sukkoth and camped at
Ĕtham, which is on the edge of the wilderness.
7 And they departed from Ĕtham and turned back to
Pi ha’Ḥiroth, which is before Ba’al Tsephon. And they
camped near Miḡdol.
8 And they departed from before ha’Ḥiroth and
passed over through the midst of the sea into the
wilderness, went three days’ journey in the
Wilderness of Ĕtham, and camped at Marah.
9 And they departed from Marah and came to Ĕlim.
And at Ĕlim were twelve springs of water and seventy
palm trees, so they camped there.
434

NUMBERS

And they departed from Ĕlim and camped by the
Sea of Reeds.
11 And they departed from the Sea of Reeds and
camped in the Wilderness of Sin.
12 And they departed from the Wilderness of Sin and
camped at Dophqah.
13 And they departed from Dophqah and camped at
Alush.
14 And they departed from Alush and camped at
Rephiḏim, and there was no water for the people to
drink.
15 And they departed from Rephiḏim and camped in
the Wilderness of Sinai.
16 And they departed from the Wilderness of Sinai
and camped at Qiḇroth ha’Tta’awah.
17 And they departed from Qiḇroth ha’Tta’awah and
camped at Ḥatsĕroth.
18 And they departed from Ḥatsĕroth and camped at
Rithmah.
19 And they departed from Rithmah and camped at
Rimmon Perets.
20 And they departed from Rimmon Perets and
camped at Liḇnah.
21 And they departed from Liḇnah and camped at
Rissah.
22 And they departed from Rissah and camped at
Qehĕlathah.
23 And they departed from Qehĕlathah and camped
at Mount Shapher.
24 And they departed from Mount Shapher and
camped at Ḥaraḏah.
25 And they departed from Ḥaraḏah and camped at
Maqhĕloth.
26 And they departed from Maqhĕloth and camped at
Taḥath.
10

435

BEMIḎBAR

And they departed from Taḥath and camped at
Teraḥ.
28 And they departed from Teraḥ and camped at
Mithqah.
29 And they departed from Mithqah and camped at
Ḥashmonah.
30 And they departed from Ḥashmonah and camped
at Mosĕroth.
31 And they departed from Mosĕroth and camped at
Benĕy Ya’aqan.
32 And they departed from Benĕy Ya’aqan and
camped at Ḥor ha’Giḏgaḏ.
33 And they departed from Ḥor ha’Giḏgaḏ and
camped at Yotḇathah.
34 And they departed from Yotḇathah and camped at
Aḇronah.
35 And they departed from Aḇronah and camped at
Etsyon Geḇer.
36 And they departed from Etsyon Geḇer and
camped in the Wilderness of Tsin, which is Qaḏĕsh.
37 And they departed from Qaḏĕsh and camped at
Mount Hor, on the boundary of the land of Eḏom.
38 Then Aharon the kohĕn went up to Mount Hor at
the command of hWhY and died there in the fortieth
year after the children of Yisra’ĕl had come out of the
land of Mitsrayim, on the first day of the fifth month.
39 Now Aharon was one hundred and twenty-three
years old when he died on Mount Hor.
40 And the sovereign of Araḏ, the Kena’anite, who
dwelt in the Negeḇ in the land of Kena’an, heard of
the coming of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
41 So they departed from Mount Hor and camped at
Tsalmonah.
42 And they departed from Tsalmonah and camped
at Punon.
27

436

NUMBERS

And they departed from Punon and camped at
Oḇoth.
44 And they departed from Oḇoth and camped at Iyĕ
ha’Aḇiram, at the border of Mo’aḇ.
45 And they departed from Iyim and camped at Diḇon
Gaḏ.
46 And they departed from Diḇon Gaḏ and camped
at Almon Diḇlathayemah.
47 And they departed from Almon Diḇlathayemah
and camped in the mountains of Aḇiram, before
Neḇo.
48 And they departed from the mountains of Aḇiram
and camped in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ by the
Yardĕn of Yeriḥo.
49 And they camped by the Yardĕn, from Bĕyth
Yeshimoth as far as Aḇĕl ha’Shittim in the desert
plains of Mo’aḇ.
50 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh in the desert plains of
Mo’aḇ by the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo, saying,
51 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When you have passed over the Yardĕn into the land
of Kena’an,
52 then you shall drive out all the inhabitants of the
land from before you, and shall destroy all their
engraved stones, and shall destroy all their moulded
images, and lay waste all their high places,
53 and you shall possess the land and dwell in it, for
I have given you the land to possess.
54 ‘And you shall divide the land by lot as an
inheritance among your clans. To the larger you give
a larger inheritance, and to the smaller you give a
smaller inheritance. Wherever the lot falls to anyone,
that is his. You inherit according to the tribes of your
fathers.
43

437

BEMIḎBAR

‘And if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the
land from before you, then it shall be that those whom
you let remain shall be pricks in your eyes and thorns
in your sides, and they shall trouble you in the land
where you dwell.
56 ‘And it shall be that I do to you as I thought to do
to them.’ ”
55

34 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
“Command the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to
them, ‘When you come into the land of Kena’an, this
is the land which falls to you as an inheritance, the
land of Kena’an to its boundaries:
3 ‘Then your southern border shall be from the
Wilderness of Tsin along the border of Eḏom, and
your southern border shall be eastward from the end
of the Salt Sea.
4 ‘Then your border shall turn from the southern side
of the Ascent of Aqrabbim, continue to Tsin, and be
on the south of Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa, and it shall go on to
Ḥatsar Addar, and continue to Atsmon.
5 ‘And the border shall turn from Atsmon to the wadi
of Mitsrayim, and it shall end at the Sea.
6 ‘As for the western border, you shall have the
Great Sea for a border, this is your western border.
7 ‘And this is your northern border: From the Great
Sea you mark out your borderline to Mount Hor,
8 from Mount Hor you mark out your border to the
entrance of Ḥamath, and the edge of the border shall
be toward Tseḏaḏ,
9 and the border shall proceed to Ziphron, and it
shall end at Ḥatsar Ĕynan. This is your northern
border.
10 ‘And you shall mark out your eastern border from
Ḥatsar Ĕynan to Shepham,
2

438

NUMBERS

and the border shall go down from Shepham to
Riḇlah on the east side of Ayin, and the border shall
go down and reach to the eastern side of the Sea of
Kinnereth.
12 ‘And the border shall go down along the Yardĕn,
and it shall end at the Salt Sea. This is your land with
its surrounding boundaries.’ ”
13 And Mosheh commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “This is the land which you inherit by lot, which
hWhY has commanded to give to the nine tribes and
to the half-tribe.
14 “For the tribe of the children of Re’uḇĕn according
to the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the
children of Gaḏ according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance. And the halftribe of Menashsheh has received its inheritance.
15 “The two tribes and the half-tribe have received
their inheritance beyond the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo
eastward, toward the sunrise.”
16 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
17 “These are the names of the men who divide the
land among you as an inheritance: El’azar the kohĕn,
and Yahoshua son of Nun.
18 “And take one leader of every tribe to divide the
land for the inheritance.
19 “And these are the names of the men. From the
tribe of Yahuḏah: Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh.
20 “And from the tribe of the children of Shim’on:
Shemu’ĕl son of Ammihuḏ.
21 “From the tribe of Binyamin: Eliḏaḏ son of Kislon.
22 “And a leader from the tribe of the children of Dan:
Buqqi son of Yoḡli.
23 “From the sons of Yosĕph: a leader from the tribe
of the children of Menashsheh, Ḥanni’ĕl son of
Ĕphoḏ.
11

439

BEMIḎBAR

“And a leader from the tribe of the children of
Ephrayim: Qemu’ĕl son of Shiphtan.
25 “And a leader from the tribe of the children of
Zeḇulun: Elitsaphan son of Parnaḵ.
26 “And a leader from the tribe of the children of
Yissasḵar: Palti’ĕl son of Azzan.
27 “And a leader from the tribe of the children of
Ashĕr: Aḥihuḏ son of Shelomi.
28 “And a leader from the tribe of the children of
Naphtali: Peḏah’ĕl son of Ammihuḏ.”
29 These are the ones hWhY commanded to divide
the inheritance among the children of Yisra’ĕl in the
land of Kena’an.
24

35 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh in the desert plains
of Mo’aḇ by the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo, saying,
2 “Command the children of Yisra’ĕl that they shall
give the Lĕwites cities to dwell in from the inheritance
of their possession. Also give the Lĕwites open land
around the cities.
3 “And they shall have the cities to dwell in, and their
open land for their cattle, and for their herds, and for
all their livestock.
4 “And the open land of the cities which you give the
Lĕwites are from the wall of the city outward a
thousand ammah all around.
5 “And you shall measure outside the city on the
east side two thousand ammah, and on the south side
two thousand ammah, and on the west side two
thousand ammah, and on the north side two thousand
ammah. And the city is in the middle. This is to them
the open land for the cities.
6 “And the cities which you give to the Lĕwites are
the six cities of refuge, which you give to him who
440

NUMBERS

killed someone to flee to, and to these you add fortytwo cities.
7 “All the cities which you give to the Lĕwites are
forty-eight, these with their open land.
8 “And the cities which you give are from the
possession of the children of Yisra’ĕl. From the larger
you give many, from the smaller you give few, each
one gives some of its cities to the Lĕwites, in
proportion to the inheritance that each inherits.”
9 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh, saying,
10 “Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and say to them,
‘When you pass over the Yardĕn into the land of
Kena’an,
11 then you shall choose cities to be cities of refuge
for you, that the one who accidentally killed someone
shall flee there.
12 ‘And they shall be cities of refuge for you from the
revenger, and the one who killed someone is not to
die until he stands before the congregation in rightruling.
13 ‘And of the cities which you give, six are to be
cities of refuge.
14 ‘Give three cities beyond the Yardĕn, and give
three cities in the land of Kena’an, as cities of refuge.
15 ‘These six cities are for refuge for the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and for the sojourner, and for the settler in
their midst, for anyone who accidentally kills someone
to flee there.
16 ‘But if he has smitten him with an instrument of
iron, so that he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer
shall certainly be put to death.
17 ‘And if he has smitten him with a stone in the hand,
by which one could die, and he dies, he is a murderer.
The murderer shall certainly be put to death.
441

BEMIḎBAR

‘Or if he has smitten him with a wooden instrument
that could kill, and he dies, he is a murderer. The
murderer shall certainly be put to death.
19 ‘The revenger of blood himself puts the murderer
to death. When he meets him, he puts him to death.
20 ‘And if he thrusts him through in hatred, or throws
at him while lying in wait, so that he dies,
21 or in enmity he smites him with his hand so that he
dies, the one who smote him shall certainly be put to
death, for he is a murderer. The revenger of blood
puts the murderer to death when he meets him.
22 ‘But if he pushes him suddenly without enmity, or
throws at him without lying in wait,
23 or uses a stone, by which a man could die,
throwing it at him without seeing him, so that he dies,
while he was not his enemy or seeking his harm,
24 then the congregation shall judge between him
who killed someone and the revenger of blood,
according to these Right-Rulings.
25 ‘And the congregation shall rescue the one who
killed someone from the hand of the revenger of
blood, and the congregation shall return him to the
city of refuge where he had fled, and he shall remain
there until the death of the kohĕn ha’gadol who was
anointed with the qodesh oil.
26 ‘But if the one who killed someone at any time
goes outside the limits of the city of refuge where he
fled,
27 and the revenger of blood finds him outside the
limits of his city of refuge, and the revenger of blood
kills him who killed someone, he is not guilty of blood,
28 because he should have remained in his city of
refuge until the death of the kohĕn ha’gadol. But after
the death of the kohĕn ha’gadol he who killed
someone is to return to the land of his possession.
18

442

NUMBERS

‘And these shall be for a Law of Right-Ruling to
you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
30 ‘Whoever kills someone has to be put to death as
a murderer by the mouth of witnesses, but one
witness does not bear witness against someone to
die.
31 ‘And take no ransom for the life of a murderer who
is guilty of death, but he shall certainly be put to death.
32 ‘And take no ransom for him who has fled to his
city of refuge to return to dwell in the land before the
death of the kohĕn.
33 ‘And do not profane the land where you are, for
blood profanes the land, and the land is not pardoned
for the blood that is shed on it, except by the blood of
him who shed it.
34 ‘And do not defile the land which you inhabit, in the
midst of which I dwell, for I, hWhY, am dwelling in the
midst of the children of Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
29

36 And the heads of the fathers of the clans of the
children of Gil’aḏ, son of Maḵir, son of Menashsheh, of
the clans of the sons of Yosĕph, came near and spoke
before Mosheh and before the leaders, the heads of
the fathers of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
2 and said, “HWHY commanded my master to give
the land as an inheritance by lot to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and my master was commanded by HWHY to
give the inheritance of our brother Tselapheḥaḏ to his
daughters.
3 “Now if they are married to any of the sons of the
other tribes of the children of Yisra’ĕl, then their
inheritance shall be taken from the inheritance of our
fathers, and shall be added to the inheritance of the
tribe into which they marry, and taken from the lot of
our inheritance.
443

BEMIḎBAR

“And if the Yoḇĕl of the children of Yisra’ĕl takes
place, then their inheritance shall be added to the
inheritance of the tribe into which they marry, and
their inheritance taken away from the inheritance of
the tribe of our fathers.”
5 And Mosheh commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl
according to the word of hWhY, saying, “What the tribe
of the sons of Yosĕph speaks is right.
6 “This is the word which hWhY has commanded, for
the daughters of Tselapheḥaḏ, saying, ‘Let them
marry who is good in their eyes, but let them marry
only within the clan of their father’s tribe.’
7 “And the inheritance of the children of Yisra’ĕl is
not to change hands from tribe to tribe, for every one
of the children of Yisra’ĕl is to cling to the inheritance
of the tribe of his fathers.
8 “And every daughter possessing an inheritance in
any tribe of the children of Yisra’ĕl is to be the wife of
one of the clan of her father’s tribe, so that the
children of Yisra’ĕl possess each the inheritance of
his fathers.
9 “Thus the inheritance is not to change hands from
one tribe to another, but every tribe of the children of
Yisra’ĕl is to cling to its own inheritance.”
10 As hWhY commanded Mosheh, so did the
daughters of Tselapheḥaḏ.
11 For Maḥlah, Tirtsah, and Ḥoḡlah, and Milkah, and
No’ah, the daughters of Tselapheḥaḏ, were married
to the sons of their father’s brothers.
12 And they were married into the clans of the
children of Menashsheh, the son of Yosĕph, and their
inheritance remained in the tribe of their father’s clan.
13 These are the Commands and the Right-Rulings
which hWhY commanded the children of Yisra’ĕl by
4

444

NUMBERS

the hand of Mosheh in the desert plains of Mo’aḇ by
the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo.

445

DEUTERONOMY

DEḆARIM
‫ דברים‬mYRBd

1 These are the words which Mosheh spoke to all
Yisra’ĕl beyond the Yardĕn in the wilderness, in the
desert plain opposite Suph, between Paran and
Tophel, and Laḇan, and Ḥatsĕroth, and Di Zahaḇ,
2 eleven days from Ḥorĕḇ by way of Mount Sĕ’ir to
Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa.
3 And it came to be in the fortieth year, in the
eleventh month, on the first of the month, that Mosheh
spoke to the children of Yisra’ĕl according to all that
hWhY had commanded him concerning them,
4 after he had smitten Siḥon sovereign of the
Amorites, who dwelt in Ḥeshbon, and Oḡ sovereign
of Bashan, who dwelt at Ashtaroth in Eḏre’i.
5 Beyond the Yardĕn, in the land of Mo’aḇ, Mosheh
undertook to declare this Torah, saying,
6 “hWhY our Elohim spoke to us in Ḥorĕḇ, saying,
‘You have dwelt long enough at this mountain.
7 ‘Turn and depart on your way, and go into the
mountains of the Amorites, and to all the
neighbouring places in the desert plain, in the
mountains and in the low country, and in the Negeḇ
and on the seacoast, to the land of the Kena’anites
and to Leḇanon, as far as the great river, the River
Perath.
8 ‘See, I have put the land before you. Go in and
possess the land which hWhY swore to your fathers,
to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ, to give to
them and their seed after them.’
9 “And I spoke to you at that time, saying, ‘I am
unable to bear you by myself.
446

DEḆARIM

‘EHWHY your Elohim has increased you, and see,
you are today as numerous as the stars of the
shamayim.
11 ‘hWhY Elohim of your fathers is going to add to you
a thousand times more than you are, and baraḵ you
as He has spoken to you!
12 ‘How do I bear your pressure and your burden and
your strife, by myself?
13 ‘Choose men, wise and understanding, and
known to your tribes, and let me appoint them as your
heads.’
14 “And you answered me and said, ‘The word which
you have spoken to us to do is good.’
15 “And I took the heads of your tribes, wise men and
known, and made them heads over you, leaders of
thousands, and leaders of hundreds, and leaders of
fifties, and leaders of tens, and officers for your tribes.
16 “And I commanded your judges at that time,
saying, ‘When hearing between your brothers, judge
righteously between a man and his brother or the
stranger who is with him.
17 ‘Do not show partiality in right-ruling, hear the
small as well as the great. Do not be afraid of
anyone’s face, for the right-ruling belongs to Elohim.
And the case which is too hard for you, bring it to me,
and I shall hear it.’
18 “And I commanded you at that time all the words
which you should do.
19 “Then we departed from Ḥorĕḇ, and went through
all that great and awesome wilderness which you saw
on the way to the mountains of the Amorites, as hWhY
our Elohim had commanded us. And we came to
Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa.
10

447

DEUTERONOMY

“And I said to you, ‘You have come to the
mountains of the Amorites, which hWhY our Elohim is
giving us.
21 ‘See, hWhY your Elohim has put the land before
you. Go up and possess it, as hWhY Elohim of your
fathers has spoken to you. Do not fear, nor be
discouraged.’
22 “And all of you came near to me and said, ‘Let us
send men before us, and let them search out the land
for us, and bring back word to us of the way by which
we should go up, and of the cities into which we would
come.’
23 “And the matter was good in my eyes, so I took
twelve of your men, one man from each tribe.
24 “And they turned and went up into the mountains,
and came to the wadi Eshkol, and spied it out.
25 “And they took some of the fruit of the land in their
hands and brought it down to us. And they brought
back word to us, saying, ‘The land which hWhY our
Elohim is giving us is good.’
26 “But you would not go up and rebelled against the
word of hWhY your Elohim,
27 and grumbled in your tents, and said, ‘Because
hWhY was hating us, He has brought us out of the
land of Mitsrayim to give us into the hand of the
Amorites, to destroy us.
28 ‘Where are we going to? Our brothers have made
our hearts melt, saying, “The people are greater and
taller than we, the cities are great and walled up to the
shamayim, and we saw the sons of the Anaqim there
too.” ’
29 “Then I said to you, ‘Have no dread or fear of them.
30 ‘hWhY your Elohim, who is going before you, He
fights for you, according to all He did for you in
Mitsrayim before your eyes,
20

448

DEḆARIM

and in the wilderness, where you saw how hWhY
your Elohim has borne you, as a man bears his son,
in all the way that you went until you came to this
place.’
32 “Yet in this matter you are putting no trust in hWhY
your Elohim,
33 who is going before you in the way to seek out a
place for you to pitch your tents, to show you the way
you should go, in fire by night and in a cloud by day.
34 “And hWhY heard the voice of your words, and was
wroth, and took an oath, saying,
35 ‘Not one of these men of this evil generation shall
see that good land of which I swore to give to your
fathers,
36 except Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh. He shall see it,
and to him and his children I give the land on which
he walked, because he followed hWhY completely.’
37 “And hWhY was enraged with me for your sakes,
saying, ‘You do not go in there, either.
38 ‘Yahoshua the son of Nun, who stands before you,
he shall go in there. Strengthen him, for he shall
cause Yisra’ĕl to inherit.
39 ‘And your little ones and your children, who you
say are for a prey, who today have no knowledge of
good and evil, they are going in there. And to them I
give it, and they are to possess it.
40 ‘But you, turn and take your journey into the
wilderness by the Way of the Sea of Reeds.’
41 “Then you answered and said to me, ‘We have
sinned against hWhY. We ourselves are going up, and
we shall fight, as hWhY our Elohim commanded us.’
And when each one of you had girded on his battle
gear, you were ready to go up into the mountain.
31

449

DEUTERONOMY

“And hWhY said to me, ‘Say to them, “Do not go up
nor fight, for I am not in your midst, lest you be smitten
before your enemies.” ’
43 “So I spoke to you, but you would not listen and
rebelled against the word of hWhY, and acted proudly,
and went up into the mountain.
44 “Then the Amorites who dwelt in that mountain
came out against you and chased you as bees do,
and beat you back from Sĕ’ir to Ḥormah.
45 “And you returned and wept before hWhY, but
hWhY would not listen to your voice nor give ear to
you.
46 “So you dwelt in Qaḏĕsh many days, according to
the days that you dwelt.
42

2 “Then we turned and departed into the wilderness,
the way of the Sea of Reeds, as hWhY spoke to me,
and we went round Mount Sĕ’ir, many days.
2 “And hWhY spoke to me, saying,
3 ‘You have gone around this mountain long
enough, turn northward.
4 ‘And command the people, saying, “You are about
to pass over into the border of your brothers, the
descendants of Ĕsaw, who live in Sĕ’ir, and they are
afraid of you. So be on your guard.
5 “Do not strive with them, for I do not give you any
of their land, no, not so much as one footstep,
because I have given Mount Sĕ’ir to Ĕsaw as a
possession.
6 “What food you buy from them with silver you shall
eat. And also, what water you buy from them with
silver you shall drink.
7 “For hWhY your Elohim has baraḵ you in all the
work of your hand. He has known your wandering
through this great wilderness. These forty years hWhY
450

DEḆARIM

your Elohim has been with you, you have not lacked
any matter.” ’
8 “And when we passed beyond our brothers, the
descendants of Ĕsaw who dwell in Sĕ’ir, away from
the way of the desert plain, away from Ĕylath and
Etsyon Geḇer, we turned and passed over by way of
the Wilderness of Mo’aḇ.
9 “And hWhY said to me, ‘Do not distress Mo’aḇ, nor
stir yourself up against them in battle, for I do not give
you any of their land as a possession, because I have
given Ar to the descendants of Lot as a possession.’
”
10 The Ĕymites had dwelt there formerly, a people as
great and numerous and tall as the Anaqim.
11 They were also reckoned as Repha’ites, like the
Anaqim, but the Mo’aḇites call them Ĕymites.
12 And the Ḥorites formerly dwelt in Sĕ’ir, but the
descendants of Ĕsaw dispossessed them and
destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their
place, as Yisra’ĕl did to the land of their possession
which hWhY gave them.
13 “ ‘Now rise up, and pass over the wadi Zereḏ.’ So
we passed over the wadi Zereḏ.
14 “And the time we took to come from Qaḏĕsh
Barnĕa until we passed over the wadi Zereḏ was
thirty-eight years, until all the generation of the men
of battle was consumed from the midst of the camp,
as hWhY had sworn to them.
15 “And also, the hand of hWhY was against them, to
destroy them from the midst of the camp until they
were consumed.
16 “And it came to be, when all the men of battle had
finally perished from among the people,
17 that hWhY spoke to me, saying,
451

DEUTERONOMY

‘This day you are to pass over at Ar, the boundary
of Mo’aḇ.
19 ‘And when you come near the children of Ammon,
do not distress them nor stir yourself up against them,
for I do not give you any of the land of the children of
Ammon as a possession, because I have given it to
the descendants of Lot as a possession.’
20 That was also reckoned as a land of Repha’ites.
Repha’ites formerly dwelt there. But the Ammonites
call them Zamzummim,
21 a people as great and numerous and tall as the
Anaqim. But hWhY destroyed them before them, and
they dispossessed them and dwelt in their place,
22 as He had done for the descendants of Ĕsaw, who
dwelt in Sĕ’ir, when He destroyed the Ḥorites from
before them. They dispossessed them and dwelt in
their place, even to this day.
23 And the Awwim who dwelt in villages as far as
Azzah, the Kaphtorim who came from Kaphtor,
destroyed them and dwelt in their place.
24 ‘Arise, depart and pass over the wadi Arnon. See,
I have given into your hand Siḥon the Amorite,
sovereign of Ḥeshbon, and his land. Begin to possess
it, and stir up yourself against him in battle.
25 ‘This day I begin to put the dread and fear of you
upon the peoples under all the shamayim, who, when
they hear the report of you, shall tremble and shake
because of you.’
26 “Then I sent messengers from the Wilderness of
Qeḏĕmoth to Siḥon sovereign of Ḥeshbon, with
words of peace, saying,
27 ‘Let me pass over through your land on the
highway. I shall go on the highway and turn neither to
the right nor to the left.
18

452

DEḆARIM

‘What food you sell me for silver I shall eat, and
what water you give me for silver I shall drink. Only let
me pass over on foot,
29 as the descendants of Ĕsaw who dwell in Sĕ’ir and
the Mo’aḇites who dwell in Ar did for me - until I pass
over the Yardĕn to the land hWhY our Elohim is giving
us.’
30 “But Siḥon sovereign of Ḥeshbon would not let us
pass over, for hWhY your Elohim hardened his spirit
and strengthened his heart, to give him into your
hand, as it is this day.
31 “And hWhY said to me, ‘See, I have begun to give
Siḥon and his land over to you. Begin to possess - in
order to possess his land.’
32 “And Siḥon and all his people came out against us
to fight at Yahats,
33 and hWhY our Elohim gave him over to us, so we
smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
34 “And we took all his cities at that time, and we put
the men, women, and little ones of every city under
the ban, we left none remaining.
35 “Only the livestock we took as plunder for
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we
captured.
36 “From Aro’ĕr, which is on the edge of the wadi
Arnon, and the city that is by the wadi, as far as Gil’aḏ,
there was not one city too high for us. hWhY our
Elohim gave all to us.
37 “Only you did not go near the land of the children
of Ammon - anywhere along the wadi Yabboq, or to
the cities of the mountains, or wherever hWhY our
Elohim had commanded us.
28

453

DEUTERONOMY

3 “Then we turned and went up the way to Bashan.
And Oḡ sovereign of Bashan came out against us, he
and all his people, to battle at Eḏre’i.
2 “And hWhY said to me, ‘Do not fear him, for I have
given him and all his people and his land into your
hand. And you shall do to him as you did to Siḥon
sovereign of the Amorites, who dwelt at Ḥeshbon.’
3 “So hWhY our Elohim also gave into our hands Oḡ
sovereign of Bashan, with all his people, and we
smote him until he had no survivors remaining.
4 “And we captured all his cities at that time. There
was not a city which we did not take from them: sixty
cities, all the district of Argoḇ, the reign of Oḡ in
Bashan.
5 “All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates
and bars, besides a great many unwalled towns.
6 “And we put them under the ban, as we did to
Siḥon sovereign of Ḥeshbon, putting the men, the
women, and the children of every city under the ban.
7 “But all the livestock and the spoil of the cities we
took as booty for ourselves.
8 “And at that time we took the land, from the hand
of the two sovereigns of the Amorites, that was
beyond the Yardĕn, from the wadi Arnon to Mount
Ḥermon 9 Tsiḏonians call Ḥermon, Siryon and the Amorites
call it Senir 10 all the cities of the plain, all Gil’aḏ, and all Bashan,
as far as Salḵah and Eḏre’i, cities of the reign of Oḡ
in Bashan.
11 “For only Oḡ sovereign of Bashan was left of the
remnant of the Repha’ites. See, his bedstead was an
iron bedstead. Is it not in Rabbah of the children of
454

DEḆARIM

Ammon? Nine ammah is its length and four ammah
its width, according to the ammah of a man.
12 “And this land, which we possessed at that time,
from Aro’ĕr, which is by the wadi Arnon, and half the
mountains of Gil’aḏ and its cities, I gave to the
Re’uḇĕnites and the Gaḏites.
13 “And the rest of Gil’aḏ, and all Bashan, the reign
of Oḡ, I gave to half the tribe of Menashsheh - all the
district of Argoḇ, with all Bashan, called the land of
the Repha’ites.
14 “Ya’ir son of Menashsheh had taken all the district
of Argoḇ, as far as the border of the Geshurites and
the Ma’aḵathites, and called them after his own name:
ha’Bashan Ḥawoth Ya’ir, to this day.
15 “And to Maḵir I gave Gil’aḏ.
16 “And to the Re’uḇĕnites and the Gaḏites I gave
from Gil’aḏ as far as the wadi Arnon, the middle of the
wadi as the border, as far as the wadi Yabboq, the
border of the children of Ammon,
17 and the desert plain, with the Yardĕn as the
border, from Kinnereth as far as the Sea of the
Araḇah, the Salt Sea, below the slopes of Pisgah on
the east.
18 “And I commanded you at that time, saying, ‘hWhY
your Elohim has given you this land to possess. All
you sons of might, pass over armed before your
brothers, the children of Yisra’ĕl.
19 ‘But let your wives and your little ones, and your
livestock - I know that you have much livestock - stay
in your cities which I have given you,
20 until hWhY has given rest to brothers as to you, and
they also possess the land which hWhY your Elohim
is giving them beyond the Yardĕn. Then you shall
return, each man to his possession which I have
given you.’
455

DEUTERONOMY

“And I commanded Yahoshua at that time, saying,
‘Your eyes have seen all that hWhY your Elohim has
done to these two sovereigns. hWhY does the same
to all the reigns which you are passing over.
22 ‘Do not fear them, for hWhY your Elohim Himself
fights for you.’
23 “And I pleaded with hWhY at that time, saying,
24 ‘O Aḏonai hWhY, You have begun to show Your
servant Your greatness and Your strong hand, for
who is a mighty one in the shamayim or on earth who
does according to Your works and according to Your
might?
25 ‘I pray, let me pass over and see the good land
beyond the Yardĕn, this good hill country, and
Leḇanon.’
26 “But hWhY was enraged with me, for your sake,
and would not listen to me, and hWhY said to me,
‘Enough of that! Speak no more to Me about this
matter.
27 ‘Go up to the top of Pisgah, and lift up your eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and
eastward, and look with your eyes, for you do not
pass over this Yardĕn.
28 ‘But command Yahoshua, and strengthen him and
make him brave, for he shall pass over before this
people and causes them to inherit the land which you
see.’
29 “And we dwelt in the valley opposite Bĕyth Pe’or.
21

4 “And now, O Yisra’ĕl, listen to the Laws and the
Right-Rulings which I am teaching you to do, so that
you live, and shall go in and possess the land which
hWhY Elohim of your fathers is giving you.
2 “Do not add to the Word which I command you,
and do not take away from it, so as to guard the
456

DEḆARIM

Commands of hWhY your Elohim which I am
commanding you.
3 “Your eyes have seen what hWhY did at Ba’al
Pe’or, for hWhY your Elohim has destroyed from your
midst all the men who followed Ba’al Pe’or.
4 “But you who are clinging to hWhY your Elohim are
alive today, every one of you.
5 “See, I have taught you Laws and Right-Rulings,
as hWhY my Elohim commanded me, to do thus in the
land which you go to possess.
6 “And you shall guard and do them, for this is your
wisdom and your understanding before the eyes of
the peoples who hear all these Laws, and they shall
say, ‘Only a wise and understanding people is this
great nation!’
7 “For what great nation is there which has Elohim
so near to it, as HWHY our Elohim is to us, whenever
we call on Him?
8 “And what great nation is there that has such Laws
and righteous Right-Rulings like all this Torah which I
put before you this day?
9 “Only, guard yourself, and guard your ḥai
diligently, lest you forget the Words your eyes have
seen, and lest they turn aside from your heart all the
days of your life. And you shall make them known to
your children and your grandchildren.
10 “The day when you stood before hWhY your
Elohim in Ḥorĕḇ, hWhY said to me, ‘Assemble the
people to Me and I make them hear My Words, so
that they learn to revere Me all the days they live on
the earth and teach their children.’
11 “And you came near and stood at the foot of the
mountain, and the mountain burned with fire to the
heart of the shamayim - darkness and cloud, dense
cloud.
457

DEUTERONOMY

“And hWhY spoke to you out of the midst of the fire.
You heard a voice of words, but saw no form, you only
heard a voice.
13 “And He made known to you His Covenant which
He commanded you to do, the Ten Words, and He
wrote them on two tablets of stone.
14 “And hWhY commanded me at that time to teach
you Laws and Right-Rulings, for you to do them in the
land which you pass over to possess.
15 “Therefore, diligently guard yourselves, for you
saw no form when hWhY spoke to you at Ḥorĕḇ out of
the midst of the fire,
16 lest you should do corruptly and shall make for
yourselves a carved image in the form of any figure the likeness of male or female,
17 the likeness of any beast that is on the earth or the
likeness of any winged bird that flies in the shamayim,
18 the likeness of any creature that creeps on the
ground or the likeness of any fish that is in the water
under the earth;
19 and lest you lift up your eyes to the shamayim, and
shall see the sun, and the moon, and the stars - all
the host of the shamayim - and you be drawn away
into bowing down to them and serving them, which
hWhY your Elohim has allotted to all the peoples
under all the shamayim.
20 “But hWhY has taken you and brought you out of
the iron furnace, out of Mitsrayim, to be His people,
an inheritance, as it is today.
21 “And hWhY was enraged with me because of your
words, and swore that I would not pass over the
Yardĕn, and that I would not enter the good land
which hWhY your Elohim is giving you as an
inheritance.
12

458

DEḆARIM

“For I am to die in this land, I am not passing over
the Yardĕn, but you are passing over, and shall
possess that good land.
23 “Guard yourselves, lest you forget the Covenant of
hWhY your Elohim which He made with you, and shall
make for yourselves a carved image in any likeness
HWHY your Elohim has commanded you.
24 “For HWhY your Elohim is a consuming fire, a
jealous Ĕl.
25 “When you bring forth children and grandchildren,
and shall grow old in the land, and shall do corruptly
and make a carved image in any likeness, and shall
do what is evil in the eyes of hWhY your Elohim to
provoke Him,
26 “I shall call the shamayim and earth to witness
against you on that day, that you soon completely
perish from the land which you pass over the Yardĕn
to possess - you do not prolong your days in it but are
completely destroyed.
27 “And hWhY shall scatter you among the peoples,
and you shall be left few in number among the
gentiles where hWhY drives you.
28 “And there you shall serve mighty ones, the work
of men’s hands, wood and stone, which neither see
nor hear nor eat nor smell.
29 “But from there you shall seek hWhY your Elohim,
and shall find, when you search for Him with all your
heart and with all your being.
30 “In your distress, when all these words shall come
upon you in the latter days, then you shall return to
hWhY your Elohim and shall obey His voice.
31 “For hWhY your Elohim is a compassionate Ĕl, He
does not forsake you, nor destroy you, nor forget the
Covenant of your fathers which He swore to them.
22

459

DEUTERONOMY

“For ask now of the days that are past, which were
before you, since the day that Elohim created man on
the earth, and ask from one end of the shamayim to
the other end of the shamayim, whether there has
been a Word as great as this, or has been heard like
it.
33 “Has a people heard the voice of Elohim speaking
out of the midst of the fire, as you have heard, and
live?
34 “Or has Elohim tried to go and take for Himself a
nation from the midst of a nation by trials, and by
signs, and by wonders, and by battle, and by a strong
hand and an outstretched arm, and by great fearsome
deeds, according to all that hWhY your Elohim did for
you in Mitsrayim before your eyes?
35 “You have been shown it, to know that hWhY
Himself is Elohim; there is no one beside Him.
36 “From the shamayim He let you hear His voice, to
instruct you, and on earth He showed you His great
fire, and you heard His words out of the midst of the
fire.
37 “And because He loved your fathers, therefore He
chose their seed after them, and brought you out of
Mitsrayim with His Presence, with His great power,
38 to drive out from before you nations greater and
stronger than you, to bring you in, to give you their
land as an inheritance, as it is today.
39 “And you shall know today, and shall recall to your
heart that hWhY Himself is Elohim in the shamayim
above and on the earth beneath; there is none else.
40 “And you shall guard His Laws and His
Commands which I command you today, so that it is
well with you and with your children after you, and so
that you prolong your days on the land which hWhY
your Elohim is giving you for all time.”
32

460

DEḆARIM

Then Mosheh separated three cities beyond the
Yardĕn, toward the rising of the sun,
42 for him who killed someone to flee there, he who
kills his neighbour unintentionally, without having
hated him in time past, and might flee to one of these
cities and live:
43 Betser in the wilderness in the level land for the
Re’uḇĕnites, and Ramoth in Gil’aḏ for the Gaḏites,
and Golan in Bashan for the Menashshites.
44 And this is the Torah which Mosheh put before the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
45 These are the Witnesses, and the Laws, and the
Right-Rulings which Mosheh spoke to the children of
Yisra’ĕl after they came out of Mitsrayim,
46 beyond the Yardĕn, in the valley opposite Bĕyth
Pe’or, in the land of Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites,
who dwelt at Ḥeshbon, whom Mosheh and the
children of Yisra’ĕl had smitten after they came out of
Mitsrayim.
47 And they took possession of his land and the land
of Oḡ sovereign of Bashan, two sovereigns of the
Amorites, who were beyond the Yardĕn, toward the
rising of the sun,
48 from Aro’ĕr, which is on the bank of the wadi
Arnon, even to Mount Siyon, which is Ḥermon,
49 and all the desert plain beyond the Yardĕn as far
as the Sea of the Araḇah, below the slopes of Pisgah.
41

5 And Mosheh called all Yisra’ĕl, and said to them,
“Hear, O Yisra’ĕl, the Laws and Right-Rulings which I
speak in your hearing today. And you shall learn them,
and guard to do them.
2 “hWhY our Elohim made a Covenant with us in
Ḥorĕḇ.
461

DEUTERONOMY

“hWhY did not make this Covenant with our
fathers, but with us, those who are here today, all of
us who are alive.
4 “hWhY spoke with you face to face on the mountain
from the midst of the fire.
5 “I stood between hWhY and you at that time, to
declare to you the Word of hWhY - for you were afraid
because of the fire, and you did not go up the
mountain - saying:
6 ‘I am hWhY your Elohim who brought you out of the
land of Mitsrayim, out of the house of bondage.
7 ‘You have no other mighty ones against My face.
8 ‘You do not make for yourself a carved image, any
likeness of which is in the shamayim above, or which
is in the earth beneath, or which is in the waters under
the earth,
9 you do not bow down to them nor serve them. For
I, hWhY your Elohim, am a jealous Ĕl, visiting the
wickedness of the fathers upon the children to the
third and fourth generations of those who hate Me,
10 but showing kindness to thousands, to those who
love Me and guard My Commands.
11 ‘You do not bring the Name of hWhY your Elohim
to naught, for hWhY does not leave him unpunished
who brings His Name to naught.
12 ‘Guard the Shabbath day, to qadosh it, as hWhY
your Elohim commanded you.
13 ‘Six days you labour, and shall do all your work,
14 but the seventh day is a Shabbath of hWhY your
Elohim. You do not do any work - you, nor your son,
nor your daughter, nor your male servant, nor your
female servant, nor your ox, nor your donkey, nor any
of your cattle, nor your stranger who is within your
gates, so that your male servant and your female
servant rest as you do.
3

462

DEḆARIM

‘And you shall remember that you were a slave in
the land of Mitsrayim, and that hWhY your Elohim
brought you out from there by a strong hand and by
an outstretched arm. Therefore hWhY your Elohim
commanded you to perform the Shabbath day.
16 ‘Respect your father and your mother, as hWhY
your Elohim has commanded you, so that your days
are prolonged, and so that it is well with you on the
land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you.
17 ‘You do not murder.
18 ‘You do not commit adultery.
19 ‘You do not steal.
20 ‘You do not bear false witness against your
neighbour.
21 ‘You do not covet your neighbour’s wife, nor do
you desire your neighbour’s house, his field, nor his
male servant, nor his female servant, his ox, nor his
donkey, or whatever belongs to your neighbour.’
22 “These Words hWhY spoke to all your assembly,
in the mountain from the midst of the fire, of the cloud,
and of the dense cloud, with a loud voice, and He
added no more. And He wrote them on two tablets of
stone and gave them to me.
23 “And it came to be, when you heard the voice from
the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was
burning with fire, that you came near to me, all the
heads of your tribes and your elders,
24 and said, ‘See, hWhY our Elohim has shown us His
esteem and His greatness, and we have heard His
voice from the midst of the fire. Today we have seen
that Elohim speaks with man - and he lives!
25 ‘And now why should we die? For this great fire is
consuming us. If we hear the voice of hWhY our
Elohim any more, then we shall die.
15

463

DEUTERONOMY

‘For who is there of all flesh who has heard the
voice of the living Elohim speaking from the midst of
the fire, as we have, and lived?
27 ‘You go near and hear all that hWhY our Elohim
says, and speak to us all that hWhY our Elohim says
to you, and we shall hear and do it.’
28 “And hWhY heard the voice of your words when
you spoke to me, and hWhY said to me, ‘I have heard
the voice of the words of this people which they have
spoken to you. They have done well in all that they
have spoken.
29 ‘Oh, that they had such a heart in them, to revere
Me and to guard all My Commands always, so that it
might be well with them and with their children
forever!
30 ‘Go, say to them, “Return to your tents.”
31 ‘But you, stand here by Me, and let Me speak to
you all the Commands, and the Laws, and the RightRulings which you are to teach them. And they shall
do them in the land which I am giving them to
possess.’
32 “And you shall guard to do as hWhY your Elohim
has commanded you - do not turn aside, to the right
or to the left.
33 “Walk in all the Way which hWhY your Elohim has
commanded you, so that you live and it be well with
you. And you shall prolong your days in the land
which you possess.
26

6 “And this is the Command, the Laws and RightRulings which hWhY your Elohim has commanded, to
teach you to do in the land which you are passing over
to possess,
2 so that you revere hWhY your Elohim, to guard all
His Laws and His Commands which I command you,
464

DEḆARIM

you and your son and your grandson, all the days of
your life, and that your days be prolonged.
3 “And you shall hear, O Yisra’ĕl, and shall guard to
do, that it might be well with you, and that you
increase greatly as hWhY Elohim of your fathers has
spoken to you, a land flowing with milk and honey.
4 “Hear, O Yisra’ĕl: hWhY our Elohim, HWHY is one!
5 “And you shall love hWhY your Elohim with all your
heart, and with all your being, and with all your might.
6 “And these Words which I am commanding you
today shall be in your heart,
7 and you shall impress them upon your children,
and shall speak of them when you sit in your house,
and when you walk by the way, and when you lie
down, and when you rise up,
8 and shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and
they shall be as frontlets between your eyes.
9 “And you shall write them on the doorposts of your
house and on your gates.
10 “And it shall be, when hWhY your Elohim brings
you into the land of which He swore to your fathers,
to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ, to give you
great and good cities which you did not build,
11 and houses filled with all kinds of goods, which you
did not fill, and wells dug which you did not dig,
vineyards and olive trees which you did not plant, and
you shall eat and be satisfied 12 be on guard, lest you forget hWhY who brought you
out of the land of Mitsrayim, from the house of
bondage.
13 “Revere hWhY your Elohim and serve Him, and
swear by His Name.
14 “Do not go after other mighty ones, the mighty
ones of the peoples who are all around you,
465

DEUTERONOMY

for hWhY your Elohim is a jealous Ĕl in your midst,
lest the displeasure of hWhY your Elohim burn against
you, then He shall destroy you from the face of the
earth.
16 “Do not try hWhY your Elohim as you tried Him in
Massah.
17 “Diligently guard the Commands of hWhY your
Elohim, and His Witnesses, and His Laws which He
has commanded you.
18 “And you shall do what is right and good in the
eyes of hWhY, that it might be well with you, and you
shall go in and possess the good land of which hWhY
swore to your fathers,
19 to drive out all your enemies from before you, as
hWhY has spoken.
20 “When your son asks you in time to come, saying,
‘What is the meaning of the Witnesses, and the Laws,
and the Right-Rulings which hWhY our Elohim has
commanded you?’
21 then you shall say to your son, ‘We were slaves of
Pharaoh in Mitsrayim, and hWhY brought us out of
Mitsrayim with a strong hand,
22 and hWhY sent signs and wonders, great and
grievous, upon Mitsrayim, upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his household, before our eyes.
23 ‘And He brought us out from there, to bring us in,
to give us the land of which He swore to our fathers.
24 ‘And hWhY commanded us to do all these Laws, to
revere hWhY our Elohim, for our good always, to keep
us alive, as it is today.
25 ‘And it is righteousness for us when we guard to
do all this Command before hWhY our Elohim, as He
has commanded us.’
15

466

DEḆARIM

7 “When hWhY your Elohim brings you into the land
which you go to possess, He shall also clear away
many nations before you: the Ḥittites and the
Girgashites and the Amorites and the Kena’anites
and the Perizzites and the Ḥiwwites and the
Yeḇusites, seven nations greater and mightier than
you.
2 “And when hWhY your Elohim gives them over to
you, you shall smite them and put them under the
ban, completely. Make no covenant with them, and
show them no favour.
3 “And do not intermarry with them - you do not give
your daughter to his son, and you do not take his
daughter for your son,
4 for he turns your sons away from following Me, to
serve other mighty ones. Then the displeasure of
hWhY shall burn against you and promptly destroy
you.
5 “But this is what you do to them: Break down their
altars, and destroy their pillars, and cut down their
Ashĕrim, and burn their carved images with fire.
6 “For you are a qodesh people to hWhY your
Elohim. hWhY your Elohim has chosen you to be a
people for Himself, a treasured possession above all
the peoples on the face of the earth.
7 “hWhY did not place His love on you nor choose
you because you were more numerous than any
other people, for you were the least of all peoples,
8 but because of hWhY loving you, and because of
Him guarding the oath which He swore to your
fathers, hWhY has brought you out with a strong hand,
and redeemed you from the house of bondage, from
the hand of Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim.
467

DEUTERONOMY

“And you shall know that hWhY your Elohim, He is
Elohim, the trustworthy Ĕl guarding Covenant and
kindness for a thousand generations with those who
love Him, and those who guard His Commands,
10 but repaying those who hate Him to their face, to
destroy them. He does not delay with him who hates
Him, He repays him to his face.
11 “And you shall guard the Command, and the Laws,
and the Right-Rulings which I command you today, to
do them.
12 “And it shall be, because you hear these RightRulings, and shall guard and do them, that hWhY your
Elohim shall guard with you the Covenant and the
kindness which He swore to your fathers,
13 and shall love you and baraḵ you and increase
you, and shall baraḵ the fruit of your womb and the
fruit of your land, your grain and your new wine and
your oil, the increase of your cattle and the offspring
of your flock, in the land of which He swore to your
fathers to give you.
14 “Baruḵ are you above all peoples - there is not
going to be a barren man or a barren woman among
you or among your livestock.
15 “And hWhY shall turn away from you all sickness
and put on you none of the evil diseases of Mitsrayim
which you have known, but He shall put them on all
those who hate you.
16 “And you shall consume all the peoples whom
hWhY your Elohim is delivering over to you - your eye
shall not pardon them. And do not serve their mighty
ones, for that is a snare to you.
17 “When you say in your heart, ‘These nations are
greater than I, I am unable to drive them out,’
18 do not be afraid of them. Remember well what
hWhY your Elohim did to Pharaoh and to all Mitsrayim,
9

468

DEḆARIM

the great trials which your eyes saw, and the signs
and the wonders, the strong hand and the
outstretched arm, by which hWhY your Elohim
brought you out. hWhY your Elohim does so to all the
peoples of whose presence you are afraid.
20 “And hWhY your Elohim also sends the hornet
among them until those who are left, who hide
themselves from you, are destroyed.
21 “Do not be afraid of them, for hWhY your Elohim,
the great and awesome Ĕl, is in your midst.
22 “And hWhY your Elohim shall drive out those
nations before you, little by little. You are not allowed
to destroy them at once, lest the beasts of the field
become too numerous for you.
23 “But hWhY your Elohim shall deliver them over to
you and destroy them with a great destruction until
they are consumed.
24 “And He shall give their sovereigns into your hand,
and you shall destroy their name from under the
shamayim. No one is going to be able to stand
against you until you have destroyed them.
25 “The carved images of their mighty ones you are
to burn with fire. Do not covet the silver or gold that is
on them, nor take it for yourselves, lest you be snared
by it, for it is an abomination to hWhY your Elohim.
26 “And do not bring an abomination into your house,
lest you be accursed like it. Utterly loathe it and utterly
hate it, for it is accursed.
19

8 “Guard to do every Command which I command
you today, that you might live, and shall increase, and
go in, and shall possess the land of which hWhY swore
to your fathers.
2 “And you shall remember that hWhY your Elohim
led you all the way these forty years in the wilderness,
469

DEUTERONOMY

to humble you, prove you, to know what is in your
heart, whether you guard His Commands or not.
3 “And He humbled you, and let you suffer hunger,
and fed you with manna which you did not know nor
did your fathers know, to make you know that man
does not live by bread alone, but by all that comes
from the mouth of hWhY.
4 “Your garments did not wear out on you, nor did
your foot swell these forty years.
5 “Thus you shall know in your heart that as a man
disciplines his son, so hWhY your Elohim disciplines
you,
6 therefore you shall guard the Commands of hWhY
your Elohim, to walk in His Ways and to revere Him.
7 “For hWhY your Elohim is bringing you into a good
land, a land of streams of water, of fountains and
springs, that flow out of valleys and hills,
8 a land of wheat and barley, of vines and fig trees
and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey,
9 a land in which you eat bread without scarcity, in
which you do not lack at all, a land whose stones are
iron and out of whose hills you dig copper.
10 “And you shall eat and be satisfied, and shall
baraḵ hWhY your Elohim for the good land which He
has given you.
11 “Be on guard, lest you forget hWhY your Elohim by
not guarding His Commands, and His Right-Rulings,
and His Laws which I command you today,
12 lest you eat and shall be satisfied, and build lovely
houses and shall dwell in them,
13 and your herds and your flocks increase, and your
silver and your gold are increased, and all that you
have is increased,

470

DEḆARIM

that your heart then becomes lifted up, and you
forget hWhY your Elohim who brought you out of the
land of Mitsrayim, from the house of bondage,
15 who led you through that great and awesome
wilderness - fiery serpents and scorpions and thirst where there was no water, who brought water for you
out of the flinty rock,
16 who fed you in the wilderness with manna, which
your fathers did not know, in order to humble you and
to try you, to do you good in the end,
17 you then shall say in your heart, ‘My power and
the strength of my hand have made for me this
wealth!’
18 “But you shall remember hWhY your Elohim, for it
is He who gives you power to get wealth, in order to
establish His Covenant which He swore to your
fathers, as it is today.
19 “And it shall be, if you by any means forget hWhY
your Elohim, and follow other mighty ones, and serve
them and bow yourself to them, I have warned you
this day that you shall certainly perish.
20 “Like the nations which hWhY is destroying before
you, so you are to perish, because you did not obey
the voice of hWhY your Elohim.
14

9 “Hear, O Yisra’ĕl: You are passing over the Yardĕn
today, to go in to dispossess nations greater and
stronger than yourself, cities great and walled up to
the shamayim,
2 a people great and tall, the descendants of the
Anaqim, whom you know, and of whom you heard it
said, ‘Who stands before the descendants of Anaq?’
3 “And you shall know today that hWhY your Elohim
is He who is passing over before you as a consuming
fire - He destroys them and subdues them before you.
471

DEUTERONOMY

So you shall dispossess them and destroy them
quickly, as hWhY has said to you.
4 “Do not think in your heart, after hWhY your Elohim
has driven them out before you, saying, ‘Because of
my righteousness hWhY has brought me in to possess
this land.’ But it is because of the wickedness of these
nations that hWhY is driving them out from before you.
5 “It is not because of your righteousness or the
uprightness of your heart that you go in to possess
their land, but because of the wickedness of these
nations that hWhY your Elohim drives them out from
before you, in order to establish the word which hWhY
swore to your fathers, to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to
Ya’aqoḇ.
6 “And you shall know that hWhY your Elohim is not
giving you this good land to possess because of your
righteousness, for you are a stiff-necked people.
7 “Remember, do not forget how you provoked to
wrath hWhY your Elohim in the wilderness. From the
day that you came out of the land of Mitsrayim until
you came to this place, you have been rebellious
against hWhY.
8 “Even in Ḥorĕḇ you made hWhY wroth, so that
hWhY was enraged with you, to destroy you.
9 “When I went up into the mountain to receive the
tablets of stone, the tablets of the Covenant which
hWhY made with you, then I stayed on the mountain
forty days and forty nights. I did not eat bread nor did
I drink water.
10 “Then hWhY gave me the two tablets of stone
written with the finger of Elohim, and on them were all
the Words which hWhY had spoken to you on the
mountain from the midst of the fire in the day of the
assembly.
472

DEḆARIM

“And it came to be, at the end of forty days and
forty nights, that hWhY gave me the two tablets of
stone, the tablets of the Covenant.
12 “Then hWhY said to me, ‘Arise, go down quickly
from here, for your people whom you brought out of
Mitsrayim have acted corruptly. They have quickly
turned aside from the Way which I commanded them,
they have made themselves a moulded image.’
13 “And hWhY spoke to me, saying, ‘I have seen this
people, and look, they are a stiff-necked people.
14 ‘Leave Me alone, so that I destroy them and blot
out their name from under the shamayim, and make
of you a nation stronger and greater than they.’
15 “So I turned and came down from the mountain,
and the mountain burned with fire. And the two tablets
of the Covenant were in my two hands.
16 “And I looked and saw that you had sinned against
hWhY your Elohim, and had made for yourselves a
moulded calf! You had quickly turned aside from the
Way which hWhY had commanded you.
17 “And I took the two tablets and threw them out of
my two hands and broke them before your eyes,
18 and I fell down before hWhY, as at the first, forty
days and forty nights. I did not eat bread and I did not
drink water, because of all your sins which you
committed in doing evil in the eyes of hWhY, to
provoke Him.
19 “For I was afraid of the displeasure and rage with
which hWhY was wroth with you, to destroy you. But
hWhY listened to me that time once more.
20 “And hWhY was very enraged with Aharon, to
destroy him, so I prayed for Aharon at that time also.
21 “And I took your sin, the calf which you had made,
and burned it with fire and crushed it and ground it
very small, until it was as fine as dust. And I threw its
11

473

DEUTERONOMY

dust into the stream that came down from the
mountain.
22 “And at Taḇ’ĕrah and at Massah and at Qiḇroth
ha’Tta’awah you made hWhY wroth.
23 “And when hWhY sent you from Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa,
saying, ‘Go up and possess the land which I have
given you,’ then you rebelled against the word of
hWhY your Elohim, and you neither trusted Him nor
listened to His voice.
24 “You have been rebellious against hWhY from the
day that I knew you.
25 “So I fell down before hWhY the forty days and forty
nights, for I fell down because hWhY had said He
would destroy you.
26 “And I prayed to hWhY, and said, O Aḏonai hWhY,
do not destroy Your people and Your inheritance
whom You have redeemed in Your greatness, whom
You have brought out of Mitsrayim with a strong hand.
27 ‘Remember Your servants, Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq,
and Ya’aqoḇ. Do not look on the stubbornness of this
people, or on their wickedness or on their sin,
28 lest the land from which You brought us should
say, “Because hWhY was not able to bring them to the
land which He promised them, and because He hated
them, He has brought them out to kill them in the
wilderness.”
29 ‘And they are Your people and Your inheritance,
whom You brought out by Your great power and by
Your outstretched arm.’

10 “At that time hWhY said to me, ‘Hew for yourself
two tablets of stone like the first, and come up to Me
on the mountain. And you shall make yourself an ark
of wood,
474

DEḆARIM

then I write on the tablets the Words that were on
the first tablets, which you broke. And you shall put
them in the ark.’
3 “So I made an ark of acacia wood, hewed two
tablets of stone like the first, and went up the
mountain, with the two tablets in my hand.
4 “And He wrote on the tablets according to the first
writing, the Ten Words, which hWhY had spoken to
you in the mountain from the midst of the fire in the
day of the assembly. Then hWhY gave them to me,
5 and I turned and came down from the mountain,
and put the tablets in the ark which I had made. And
they are there, as hWhY commanded me.”
6 Now the children of Yisra’ĕl departed from the
wells of Benĕy Ya’aqan to Mosĕrah. Aharon died
there, and he was buried there. And El’azar his son
became kohĕn in his place.
7 From there they departed to Guḏgoḏah, and from
Guḏgoḏah to Yotḇathah, a land of rivers of water.
8 At that time hWhY separated the tribe of Lĕwi to
bear the ark of the Covenant of hWhY, to stand before
to hWhY, serve Him, and to baraḵ in His Name, to this
day.
9 Therefore Lĕwi has no portion nor inheritance with
his brothers. hWhY is his inheritance, as hWhY your
Elohim promised him.
10 “And I stayed in the mountain for forty days and
forty nights. And hWhY heard me at that time also, and
hWhY chose not to destroy you.
11 “And hWhY said to me, ‘Arise, go before the
people, to depart, and let them go in and possess the
land which I swore to their fathers to give them.’
12 “And now, Yisra’ĕl, what is hWhY your Elohim
asking of you, but to revere hWhY your Elohim, to walk
2

475

DEUTERONOMY

in all His Ways and to love Him, and to serve hWhY
your Elohim with all your heart and with all your being,
13 to guard the Commands of hWhY and His Laws
which I command you today for your good?
14 “See, the shamayim and the shamayim of
shamayim belong to hWhY your Elohim, also the earth
with all that is in it.
15 “hWhY delighted only in your fathers, to love them.
And He chose their seed after them, you above all
peoples, as it is today.
16 “And you shall circumcise the foreskin of your
heart, and harden your neck no more.
17 “For hWhY your Elohim is Elohim of mighty ones
and Aḏon of masters, the great Ĕl, mighty and
awesome, who shows no partiality nor takes a bribe.
18 “He executes right-ruling for the fatherless and the
widow, and loves the stranger, giving him food and a
garment.
19 “And you shall love the stranger, for you were
strangers in the land of Mitsrayim.
20 “Revere hWhY your Elohim. Serve Him, and cling
to Him, and swear by His Name.
21 “He is your praise, and He is your Elohim, who has
done for you these great and awesome deeds which
your eyes have seen.
22 “Your fathers went down to Mitsrayim with seventy
beings, and now hWhY your Elohim has made you as
numerous as the stars of the shamayim.

11 “And you shall love hWhY your Elohim and guard
His Charge: even His Laws, and His Right-Rulings,
and His Commands, always.
2 “And you shall know today - for it is not your
children who have not known and who have not seen
476

DEḆARIM

the discipline of hWhY your Elohim, His greatness, His
strong hand and His outstretched arm,
3 and His signs, and His works which He had done
in the midst of Mitsrayim, to Pharaoh sovereign of
Mitsrayim, and to all his land;
4 and that which He had done to the army of
Mitsrayim, to their horses and their chariots, when He
made the waters of the Sea of Reeds overflow them
as they pursued you, and how hWhY has destroyed
them to this day;
5 and what He had done for you in the wilderness till
you came to this place;
6 and what He had done to Dathan and Aḇiram the
sons of Eliyaḇ, son of Re’uḇĕn, when the earth
opened its mouth and swallowed them up, and their
households, and their tents, and all the living
creatures that were in their possession, in the midst
of all Yisra’ĕl.
7 “For yours are the eyes that saw all the great work
of hWhY, which He did.
8 “And you shall guard every Command which I
command you today, so that you are strong, and shall
go in, and shall possess the land which you are
passing over to possess,
9 and to prolong your days in the land which hWhY
swore to give your fathers, to them and their
descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey.
10 “For the land which you are going in to possess is
not like the land of Mitsrayim from which you have
come, where you sowed your seed and watered it by
foot, as a vegetable garden,
11 but the land which you are passing over to
possess is a land of hills and valleys, which drinks
water from the rain of the shamayim,
477

DEUTERONOMY

a land which hWhY your Elohim looks after. The
eyes of hWhY your Elohim are always on it, from the
beginning of the year to the latter end of the year.
13 ‘And it shall be that if you diligently obey My
Commands which I command you today, to love
hWhY your Elohim and to serve Him with all your heart
and with all your being,
14 then I shall give you the rain for your land in its
season, the early rain and the latter rain, and you
shall gather in your grain, and your new wine, and
your oil.
15 ‘And I shall give grass in your fields for your
livestock, and you shall eat and be satisfied.
16 ‘Guard yourselves, lest your heart be deceived,
and you turn aside and serve other mighty ones and
bow down to them.
17 ‘Then the displeasure of hWhY shall burn against
you, and He shall shut up the shamayim, and there
be no rain, and the land not give its increase. And you
shall perish quickly from the good land which hWhY is
giving you.
18 ‘And you shall lay up these Words of Mine in your
heart and in your being, and shall bind them as a sign
on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
your eyes.
19 ‘And you shall teach them to your children,
speaking of them when you sit in your house, and
when you walk by the way, and when you lie down,
and when you rise up,
20 and shall write them on the doorposts of your
house and on your gates,
21 so that your days and the days of your children are
increased on the land of which hWhY swore to your
fathers to give them, as the days of the shamayim on
the earth.
12

478

DEḆARIM

‘For if you diligently guard all these Commands
which I command you, to do it, to love hWhY your
Elohim, to walk in all His Ways, and to cling to Him,
23 then hWhY shall drive out all these nations before
you, and you shall dispossess greater and stronger
nations than you.
24 ‘Every place on which the sole of your foot treads
is yours: from the wilderness, and Leḇanon, from the
river, the River Perath, even to the Western Sea is
your border.
25 ‘No man shall stand against you. hWhY your
Elohim shall put the dread of you and the fear of you
upon all the land where you tread, as He has spoken
to you.
26 ‘See, I am putting before you today a beraḵah and
a curse:
27 the beraḵah, when you obey the Commands of
HWHY your Elohim which I command you today;
28 and the curse, if you do not obey the Commands
of hWhY your Elohim, but turn aside from the Way
which I command you today, to go after other mighty
ones which you have not known.
29 ‘And it shall be, when hWhY your Elohim has
brought you into the land which you go to possess,
that you shall put the beraḵah on Mount Gerizim and
the curse on Mount Ĕyḇal.
30 ‘Are they not beyond the Yardĕn, following the way
of the sun westward, in the land of the Kena’anites
who dwell in the desert plain opposite Gilgal, beside
the terebinth trees of Moreh?
31 ‘For you are passing over the Yardĕn to go in to
possess the land which hWhY your Elohim is giving
you, and you shall possess it and dwell in it,
32 and shall guard to do all the Laws and RightRulings which I am putting before you today.’
22

479

DEUTERONOMY

12 “These are the Laws and Right-Rulings which
you guard to do in the land which hWhY Elohim of your
fathers is giving you to possess, all the days that you
live on the land.
2 “Completely destroy all the places where the
nations which you are dispossessing served their
mighty ones, on the high mountains and on the hills
and under every green tree.
3 “And you shall break down their altars, and destroy
their pillars, and burn their Ashĕrim with fire. And you
shall cut down the carved images of their mighty ones
and shall destroy their name out of that place.
4 “Do not do so to hWhY your Elohim,
5 but seek the place which hWhY your Elohim
chooses, out of all your tribes, to put His Name there,
for His Dwelling Place, and there you shall enter.
6 “And there you shall take your burnt offerings, and
your offerings, and your tithes, and the contributions
of your hand, and your vowed offerings, and your
voluntary offerings, and the firstlings of your herd and
of your flock.
7 “And there you shall eat before hWhY your Elohim,
and shall rejoice in all that you put your hand to, you
and your households, in which hWhY your Elohim has
baraḵ you.
8 “Do not do all that we do here today - each one
whatever is right in his own eyes.
9 “Because you have not yet entered the rest and
the inheritance which hWhY your Elohim is giving you.
10 “But you shall pass over the Yardĕn, and shall
dwell in the land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you
to inherit, and He shall give you rest from all your
enemies round about, and you shall dwell in safety.
480

DEḆARIM

“And it shall be, that unto the place which hWhY
your Elohim chooses to make His Name dwell there,
there you are to bring all that I command you: your
burnt offerings, and your offerings, and your tithes,
and the contributions of your hand, and all your
choice offerings which you vow to hWhY.
12 “And you shall rejoice before hWhY your Elohim,
you and your sons and your daughters, and your male
servants and your female servants, and the Lĕwite
who is within your gates, since he has no portion nor
inheritance with you.
13 “Guard yourself that you do not offer your burnt
offerings in every place that you see,
14 except in the place which hWhY chooses, in one of
your tribes, there you are to offer your burnt offerings,
and there you are to do all that I command you.
15 “Only, whatever your being desires you shall
slaughter and eat, according to the beraḵah of hWhY
your Elohim which He has given you, within all your
gates. The unclean and the clean do eat of it, of the
gazelle and the deer alike.
16 “Only, the blood you do not eat, pour it on the earth
like water.
17 “You are not allowed to eat within your gates the
tithe of your grain, or of your new wine, or of your oil,
or of the firstlings of your herd or your flock, or of any
of your offerings which you vow, or of your voluntary
offerings, or of the contribution of your hand.
18 “But eat them before hWhY your Elohim, in the
place which hWhY your Elohim chooses, you and your
son and your daughter, and your male servant and
your female servant, and the Lĕwite who is within
your gates. And you shall rejoice before hWhY your
Elohim in all that you put your hands to.
11

481

DEUTERONOMY

“Guard yourself that you do not forsake the Lĕwite
as long as you live in your land.
20 “When hWhY your Elohim enlarges your border as
He has promised you, and you say, ‘Let me eat meat,’
because you long to eat meat, you eat as much meat
as your being desires.
21 “When the place where hWhY your Elohim
chooses to put His Name is too far from you, then you
shall slaughter from your herd and from your flock
which hWhY has given you, as I have commanded
you, and you shall eat within your gates as much as
your being desires.
22 “Only, as the gazelle and the deer are eaten, so
you are to eat of it. The unclean and the clean alike
eat of it.
23 “Only, be firm not to eat the blood, for the blood is
the life, do not eat the life with the meat.
24 “Do not eat it, you pour it on the earth like water.
25 “Do not eat it, that it might be well with you and
your children after you, when you do what is right in
the eyes of hWhY.
26 “Only, the qodesh gifts which you have, and your
vowed offerings, you are to take up and go to the
place which hWhY chooses.
27 “And you shall make your burnt offerings, the meat
and the blood, on the altar of hWhY your Elohim. And
the blood of your offerings is poured out on the altar
of hWhY your Elohim, and you eat the meat.
28 “Guard, and obey all these Words which I
command you, that it might be well with you and your
children after you forever, when you do what is good
and right in the eyes of hWhY your Elohim.
29 “When hWhY your Elohim cuts off from before you
the nations which you go to dispossess, and you
dispossess them and dwell in their land,
19

482

DEḆARIM

guard yourself that you are not ensnared to follow
them, after they are destroyed from before you, and
that you do not inquire about their mighty ones,
saying, ‘How did these nations serve their mighty
ones? And let me do so too.’
31 “Do not do so to hWhY your Elohim, for every
abomination which hWhY hates they have done to
their mighty ones, for they even burn their sons and
daughters in the fire to their mighty ones.
32 “All the Words I am commanding you, guard to do
it - do not add to it nor take away from it.
30

13 “When there arises among you a naḇi or a
dreamer of dreams, and he shall give you a sign or a
wonder,
2 and the sign or the wonder shall come true, of
which he has spoken to you, saying, ‘Let us go after
other mighty ones - which you have not known - and
serve them,’
3 do not listen to the words of that naḇi or that
dreamer of dreams, for hWhY your Elohim is trying
you to know whether you love HWHY your Elohim with
all your heart and with all your being.
4 “Walk after hWhY your Elohim and revere Him, and
guard His Commands and obey His voice, and serve
Him and cling to Him.
5 “And that naḇi or that dreamer of dreams is put to
death, because he has spoken apostasy against
hWhY your Elohim - who brought you out of the land
of Mitsrayim and redeemed you from the house of
bondage - to make you stray from the Way in which
hWhY your Elohim commanded you to walk. Thus you
shall purge the evil from your midst.
6 “When your brother, the son of your mother, or
your son or your daughter, or the wife of your bosom,
483

DEUTERONOMY

or your friend who is as your own being, entices you
secretly, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other mighty
ones’ - which you have not known, neither you nor
your fathers,
7 of the mighty ones of the people which are all
around you, near to you or far off from you, from one
end of the earth to the other end of the earth 8 do not agree with him or listen to him, nor shall
your eye pardon him, nor spare him or conceal him,
9 but you shall certainly kill him. Your hand is first
against him to put him to death, and afterward the
hand of all the people,
10 and you shall stone him with stones until he dies,
because he sought to entice you away from hWhY
your Elohim, who brought you out of the land of
Mitsrayim, from the house of bondage.
11 “And let all Yisra’ĕl hear and revere, and not again
do any such evil matter as this in your midst.
12 “When you hear someone in one of your cities,
which hWhY your Elohim gives you to dwell in, saying,
13 ‘Some men, sons of Beliya’al, have gone out of
your midst and led the inhabitants of their city astray,
saying, “Let us go and serve other mighty ones” ’ which you have not known 14 then you shall inquire, search out, and ask
diligently. And see if the matter is true and established
that this abomination was done in your midst,
15 you shall certainly smite the inhabitants of that city
with the edge of the sword, putting it under the ban,
and all that is in it and its livestock, with the edge of
the sword.
16 “And gather all its plunder into the middle of the
street, and completely burn with fire the city and all its
plunder, before hWhY your Elohim. And it shall be a
heap forever, never to be built again.
484

DEḆARIM

“And none of that which is put under the ban is to
cling to your hand, so that hWhY turns from the
fierceness of His displeasure and shall show you
compassion, love you and increase you, as He swore
to your fathers,
18 when you obey the voice of hWhY your Elohim, to
guard all His Commands which I command you today,
to do what is right in the eyes of hWhY your Elohim.
17

14 “You are the children of hWhY your Elohim. Do
not cut yourselves nor shave the front of your head for
the dead,
2 for you are a qodesh people to hWhY your Elohim,
and hWhY has chosen you to be a people for Himself,
a treasured possession above all the peoples who are
on the face of the earth.
3 “Do not eat whatever is abominable.
4 “These are the living creatures which you do eat:
ox, sheep, and goat,
5 deer, and gazelle, and roebuck, and wild goat, and
mountain goat, and antelope, and mountain sheep.
6 “And every beast that has a split hoof divided in
two, chewing the cud, among the beasts, you do eat.
7 “But of those chewing the cud or those having a
split hoof completely divided, you do not eat, such as
these: the camel, and the hare, and the rabbit, for
they chew the cud but do not have a split hoof, they
are unclean for you.
8 “And the pig is unclean for you, because it has a
split hoof, but does not chew the cud. You do not eat
their flesh or touch their dead carcasses.
9 “These you do eat of all that are in the waters: all
that have fins and scales you do eat.
10 “And whatever does not have fins and scales you
do not eat, it is unclean for you.
485

DEUTERONOMY

“Any clean bird you do eat,
12 but these you do not eat: the eagle, and the
vulture, and the black vulture,
13 and the red kite, and the falcon, and the buzzard
after their kinds,
14 and every raven after its kind,
15 and the ostrich, and the nighthawk, and the
seagull, and the hawk after their kinds,
16 the little owl, and the great owl, and the white owl,
17 and the pelican, and the carrion vulture, and the
fisher owl,
18 and the stork, and the heron after its kind, and the
hoopoe and the bat.
19 “And every creeping creature that flies is unclean
for you, they are not eaten.
20 “Any clean bird you do eat.”
21 “Do not eat whatever dies of itself. Give it to the
stranger who is within your gates, to eat it, or sell it to
a foreigner. For you are a qodesh people to hWhY
your Elohim. Do not cook a young goat in its mother’s
milk.
22 “You shall tithe without fail all the yield of your
grain that the field brings forth year by year.
23 “And you shall eat before hWhY your Elohim, in the
place where He chooses to make His Name dwell, the
tithe of your grain and your new wine and your oil, and
of the firstlings of your herds and your sheep, so that
you learn to revere hWhY your Elohim always.
24 “But when the way is too long for you, so that are
not able to bring the tithe, or when the place where
hWhY your Elohim chooses to put His Name is too far
from you, when hWhY your Elohim is beraḵah you,
25 then you shall give it in silver, and shall take the
silver in your hand and go to the place which hWhY
your Elohim chooses.
11

486

DEḆARIM

“And you shall use the silver for whatever your
being desires: for cattle or sheep, for wine or strong
drink, for whatever your being desires. And you shall
eat there before hWhY your Elohim, and you shall
rejoice, you and your household.
27 “And do not forsake the Lĕwite who is within your
gates, for he has no part nor inheritance with you.
28 “At the end of every third year you bring out all the
tithe of your increase of that year and store it up within
your gates.
29 “And the Lĕwite, because he has no portion nor
inheritance with you, and the sojourner and the
fatherless and the widow who are within your gates,
shall come and eat and be satisfied, so that hWhY
your Elohim baraḵ you in all the work of your hand
which you do.
26

15 “At the end of every seven years you make a
release of debts.
2 “And this is the word of the release: Every creditor
is to release what he has loaned to his neighbour, he
does not require it of his neighbour or his brother,
because it is called the release of hWhY.
3 “Of a foreigner you could require it, but your hand
is to release whatever is owed by your brother.
4 “Only, there should be no poor among you. For
hWhY greatly baraḵ you in the land which hWhY your
Elohim is giving you to possess as an inheritance,
5 only if you diligently obey the voice of hWhY your
Elohim, to guard to do all these Commands which I
am commanding you today.
6 “For hWhY your Elohim shall baraḵ you as He
promised you. And you shall lend to many nations,
but you shall not borrow. And you shall rule over
many nations, but they do not rule over you.
487

DEUTERONOMY

“When there is a poor man with you, one of your
brothers, within any of the gates in your land which
hWhY your Elohim is giving you, do not harden your
heart nor shut your hand from your poor brother,
8 for you shall certainly open your hand to him and
certainly lend him enough for his need, whatever he
needs.
9 “Be on guard lest there be a thought of Beliya’al in
your heart, saying, ‘The seventh year, the year of
release, is near,’ and your eye is evil against your
poor brother and you give him naught. And he shall
cry out to hWhY against you, and it shall be a sin in
you.
10 “You shall certainly give to him, and your heart
should not be grieved when you give to him, because
for this reason hWhY your Elohim baraḵ you in all your
works and in all to which you put your hand.
11 “Because the poor one does not cease from the
land, therefore I am commanding you, saying, ‘You
shall certainly open your hand to your brother, to your
poor and to your needy one, in your land.’
12 “When your brother is sold to you, an Iḇri man or
an Iḇri woman, and shall serve you six years, then let
him go free from you in the seventh year.
13 “And when you send him away free from you, let
him not go away empty-handed.
14 “You shall richly supply him from your flock, and
from your threshing-floor, and from your winepress.
With that which hWhY has baraḵ you with, give to him.
15 “And you shall remember that you were a slave in
the land of Mitsrayim, and hWhY your Elohim
redeemed you. Therefore I am commanding you this
Word today.
7

488

DEḆARIM

“And it shall be, when he says to you, ‘I do not go
away from you,’ because he loves you and your
house, because it is good for him with you,
17 then you shall take an awl and thrust it through his
ear to the door, and he shall be your servant forever.
Do the same to your female servant.
18 “Let it not be hard in your eyes when you send him
away free from you, for he has been worth a double
hired servant in serving you six years. And hWhY your
Elohim shall baraḵ you in all that you do.
19 “Qadosh to hWhY your Elohim all the first-born
males that come from your herd and your flock. Do no
work with the first-born of your herd, nor shear the
first-born of your flock.
20 “You and your household are to eat it before hWhY
your Elohim year by year in the place which hWhY
chooses.
21 “But when there is any defect in it, lame or blind,
or has any evil defect, do not slaughter it to hWhY your
Elohim.
22 “Eat it within your gates - the unclean and the
clean alike - as the gazelle, and as the deer.
23 “Only, do not eat its blood, pour it on the ground
like water.
16

16 “Guard the month of Aḇiḇ, and perform the Pesaḥ
to hWhY your Elohim, for in the month of Aḇiḇ hWhY
your Elohim brought you out of Mitsrayim by night.
2 “And you shall slaughter the Pesaḥ to hWhY your
Elohim, from the flock and the herd, in the place
where hWhY chooses to put His Name.
3 “Eat no leavened bread with it. For seven days you
eat unleavened bread with it, bread of affliction,
because you came out of the land of Mitsrayim in
haste - so that you remember the day in which you
489

DEUTERONOMY

came out of the land of Mitsrayim, all the days of your
life.
4 “And no leaven should be seen with you in all your
border for seven days, neither should the meat which
you slaughter in the evening on the first day stay all
night until morning.
5 “You are not allowed to slaughter the Pesaḥ within
any of your gates which hWhY your Elohim gives you,
6 but at the place where hWhY your Elohim chooses
to make His Name dwell, there you slaughter the
Pesaḥ in the evening, at the going down of the sun,
at the Appointed Time you came out of Mitsrayim.
7 “And you shall roast and eat it in the place which
hWhY your Elohim chooses, and in the morning you
shall turn and go to your tents.
8 “Six days you eat unleavened bread, and on the
seventh day there is a closing Festival to hWhY your
Elohim - you do no work.
9 “Count seven weeks for yourself. Begin to count
seven weeks from the time you begin to put the sickle
to the grain.
10 “And you shall perform the Festival of Shaḇuoth to
hWhY your Elohim, according to the voluntary offering
from your hand, which you give as hWhY your Elohim
baraḵ you.
11 “And you shall rejoice before hWhY your Elohim,
you and your son and your daughter, and your male
servant and your female servant, and the Lĕwite who
is within your gates, and the stranger and the
fatherless and the widow who is in your midst, at the
place where hWhY your Elohim chooses to make His
Name dwell.
12 “And you shall remember that you were a slave in
Mitsrayim, and you shall guard and do these Laws.
490

DEḆARIM

“Perform the Festival of Sukkoth for seven days
after the ingathering from your threshing-floor and
from your winepress,
14 and you shall rejoice in your Festival, you and your
son and your daughter, and your male servant and
your female servant, and the Lĕwite, and the stranger
and the fatherless and the widow who are within your
gates.
15 “For seven days you shall celebrate a Festival to
hWhY your Elohim in the place which hWhY chooses,
because hWhY your Elohim baraḵ you in all your
increase and in all the work of your hands, and you
shall be only rejoicing!
16 “Three times a year all your males appear before
hWhY your Elohim in the place which He chooses: at
the Festival of Matstsoth, and at the Festival of
Shaḇuoth, and at the Festival of Sukkoth. And none
should appear before hWhY empty-handed,
17 each one with the gift of his hand, according to the
beraḵah of hWhY your Elohim which He has given
you.
18 “Appoint judges and officers within all your gates,
which hWhY your Elohim is giving you, according to
your tribes. And they shall judge the people with
righteous right-ruling.
19 “Do not distort right-ruling. Do not show partiality,
nor take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise
and twists the words of the righteous.
20 “Follow righteousness, righteousness so that you
live and inherit the land which hWhY your Elohim is
giving you.
21 “Do not plant for yourself any tree as an Ashĕrah
near the altar of hWhY your Elohim that you make for
yourself.
13

491

DEUTERONOMY

“And do not put up a pillar, which hWhY your
Elohim hates.

22

17 “Do not slaughter to hWhY your Elohim a bull or
sheep which has any blemish, any evil matter, for that
is an abomination to hWhY your Elohim.
2 “When there is found in your midst, in any of your
cities which hWhY your Elohim is giving you, a man or
a woman who does what is evil in the eyes of HWHY
your Elohim, in transgressing His Covenant,
3 and has gone and served other mighty ones and
bowed down to them, or to the sun or to the moon or
to any of the host of the shamayim, which I have not
commanded,
4 and it has been made known to you and you have
heard, and have searched diligently. Then see, if true:
the matter is confirmed that such an abomination has
been done in Yisra’ĕl,
5 then you shall bring out to your gates that man or
woman who has done this evil matter, and you shall
stone to death that man or woman with stones.
6 “At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he
that is to die be put to death. He is not put to death by
the mouth of one witness.
7 “The hand of the witnesses shall be first against
him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people
last. So you shall purge the evil from your midst.
8 “When any matter arises which is too hard for you
to judge, between blood and blood, between plea and
plea, or between stroke and stroke - matters of strife
within your gates - then you shall rise and go up to
the place which hWhY your Elohim chooses,
9 and shall come to the kohenim, the Lĕwites, and
to the judge who is in those days, and shall inquire.
492

DEḆARIM

And they shall declare to you the word of RightRuling,
10 and you shall do according to the word which they
declare to you from that place which hWhY chooses.
And you shall guard to do according to all that they
instruct you.
11 “Do according to the Torah in which they teach
you, according to the Right-Ruling which they say to
you. You do not turn to the right or to the left from the
word which they declare to you.
12 “And the man who acts arrogantly, so as not to
listen to the kohĕn who stands to serve there before
hWhY your Elohim, or to the judge, that man shall die.
So you shall purge the evil from Yisra’ĕl.
13 “And let all the people hear and revere, and no
longer do arrogantly.
14 “When you come to the land which hWhY your
Elohim is giving you, and shall possess it and shall
dwell in it, and you shall say, ‘Let me appoint a
sovereign over me like all the gentiles that are around
me,’
15 you shall certainly appoint sovereign over you
whom hWhY your Elohim shall choose. Appoint a
sovereign over you from among your brothers, you
are not allowed to appoint a foreigner over you, who
is not your brother.
16 “Only, he is not to increase horses for himself, nor
cause the people to return to Mitsrayim to increase
horses, for HWHY has said to you, ‘Do not return that
way again.’
17 “And he is not to increase wives for himself, lest
his heart turn away, nor is he to greatly increase silver
and gold for himself.
18 “And it shall be, when he sits on the throne of his
reign, that he shall write for himself a copy of this
493

DEUTERONOMY

Torah in a book, from the one before the kohenim, the
Lĕwites.
19 “And it shall be with him, and he shall read it all the
days of his life, so that he learns to revere hWhY his
Elohim and guard all the Words of this Torah and
these Laws, to do them,
20 so that his heart is not lifted up above his brothers,
and so as not to turn aside from the Command, right
or left, so that he prolongs his days in his reign, he
and his children, in the midst of Yisra’ĕl.

18 “The kohenim, the Lĕwites, all the tribe of Lĕwi,
have no part nor inheritance with Yisra’ĕl. They are to
eat the offerings of hWhY made by fire, and His
inheritance.
2 “But among his brothers, no inheritance. hWhY is
his inheritance, as He has spoken to him.
3 “And this is the kohĕn’s right from the people, from
those who bring an offering, whether it is bull or
sheep: they shall give to the kohĕn the shoulder, and
the two cheeks, and the stomach;
4 the first-fruits of your grain and your new wine and
your oil, and the first of the fleece of your sheep, you
give to him.
5 “For hWhY your Elohim has chosen him out of all
your tribes to stand to serve in the Name of hWhY, him
and his sons forever.
6 “And when the Lĕwite comes from one of your
gates, from where he has sojourned among all
Yisra’ĕl, and shall come with all the desire of his being
to the place hWhY which chooses,
7 then he shall serve in the Name of hWhY his
Elohim, like all his brothers the Lĕwites, who are
standing there before hWhY.
494

DEḆARIM

“They are to have portion for portion to eat,
besides what comes from the sale of his inheritance.
9 “When you come into the land which hWhY your
Elohim is giving you, do not learn to do according to
the abominations of those gentiles.
10 “Let no one be found among you who makes his
son or his daughter pass through the fire, or one who
practises divination, or a user of magic, or one who
interprets omens or a sorcerer,
11 or one who conjures spells, or a medium, or a
spiritist, or one who calls up the dead.
12 “For whoever does these are an abomination to
hWhY, and because of these abominations hWhY your
Elohim drives them out from before you.
13 “Be perfect before hWhY your Elohim.
14 for these nations whom you are dispossessing
listen to those using magic and to diviners. But as for
you, hWhY your Elohim has not appointed such for
you.
15 “hWhY your Elohim shall raise up for you a Naḇi
like me from your midst, from your brothers. Listen to
Him,
16 according to all you asked of hWhY your Elohim in
Ḥorĕḇ in the day of the assembly, saying, ‘Let me not
hear again the voice of hWhY my Elohim, nor let me
see this great fire any more, lest I die.’
17 “And hWhY said to me, ‘What they have spoken is
good.
18 ‘I shall raise up for them a Naḇi like you out of the
midst of their brothers. And I shall put My Words in
His mouth, and He shall speak to them all that I
command Him.
19 ‘And it shall be, the man who does not listen to My
Words which He speaks in My Name, I require it of
him.
8

495

DEUTERONOMY

‘But the naḇi who presumes to speak a word in
My Name, which I have not commanded him to
speak, or who speaks in the name of other mighty
ones, even that naḇi shall die.’
21 “And when you say in your heart, ‘How do we
know the word which hWhY has not spoken?’ 22 when the naḇi speaks in the Name of hWhY and
the word is not, or comes not, that is the word which
hWhY has not spoken. The naḇi has spoken it
presumptuously. Do not be afraid of him.
20

19 “When hWhY your Elohim cuts off the nations
whose land hWhY your Elohim is giving you, and you
dispossess them and dwell in their cities and in their
houses,
2 separate three cities for yourself in the midst of
your land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you to
possess.
3 “Prepare a way for yourself, and divide into three
parts the border of your land which hWhY your Elohim
is giving you to inherit, that anyone who killed
someone shall flee there.
4 “And this is the matter of the one who killed
someone who flees there and live: He who smites his
neighbour unintentionally, not having hated him in
time past,
5 even he who goes to the forest with his neighbour
to cut timber, and his hand swings a stroke with the
axe to cut down the tree, and the head slips from the
handle and strikes his neighbour so that he dies - let
him flee to one of these cities and live,
6 lest the revenger of blood, while his displeasure is
hot, pursue the one who killed someone and overtake
him, because the way is long, and shall smite him,
496

DEḆARIM

though he was not worthy of death, since he had not
hated him before.
7 “Therefore I am commanding you, saying,
‘Separate three cities for yourself.’
8 “And if hWhY your Elohim enlarges your border, as
He swore to your fathers, and has given you the land
which He promised to give to your fathers 9 when you guard all this Command to do it, which I
am commanding you today, to love hWhY your Elohim
and to walk in His Ways all the days - then you shall
add three more cities for yourself besides these three,
10 so that innocent blood is not shed in the midst of
your land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you as an
inheritance, or blood-guilt shall be upon you.
11 “But when anyone hates his neighbour, and shall
lie in wait for him and rise against him and smite the
life from him so that he dies, then he shall flee to one
of these cities,
12 and the elders of his city shall send and bring him
from there, and give him into the hand of the revenger
of blood, and he shall die.
13 “Your eye shall not pardon him, but you shall
purge the blood of the innocent from Yisra’ĕl, so that
it might be well with you.
14 “Do not remove your neighbour’s boundary, which
those in the past have bound, in your inheritance
which you inherit in the land that hWhY your Elohim is
giving you to possess.
15 “One witness does not rise up against a man
concerning any wickedness or any sin that he
commits. At the mouth of two witnesses or at the
mouth of three witnesses a matter is established.
16 “When a malicious witness rises up against any
man to accuse him of turning aside,
497

DEUTERONOMY

then both men who have the dispute shall stand
before hWhY, before the kohenim and the judges who
serve in those days.
18 “And the judges shall diligently search and see if
the witness is a false witness, who has falsely
accused his brother,
19 then you shall do to him as he thought to have
done to his brother. Thus you shall purge the evil from
your midst.
20 “And let the rest hear and revere, and never again
do this evil matter in your midst.
21 “And let your eye not pardon, life for life, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
17

20 “When you go out to battle against your enemies,
and shall see horses and chariots and people more
numerous than you, do not be afraid of them, for hWhY
your Elohim, who brought you up from the land of
Mitsrayim, is with you.
2 “And it shall be, when you draw near to the battle,
that the kohĕn shall come and speak to the people,
3 and shall say to them, ‘Hear, O Yisra’ĕl: You are
drawing near today to battle with your enemies. Do
not let your heart faint, do not fear, or tremble, or be
afraid before them,
4 for hWhY your Elohim is He who goes with you, to
fight for you against your enemies, to save you.’
5 “And the officers shall speak to the people, saying,
‘Who is the man who has built a new house and has
not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house,
lest he die in the battle and another man dedicate it.
6 ‘And who is the man who has planted a vineyard
and has not begun to use it? Let him also go and
return to his house, lest he die in the battle and
another man should begin to use it.
498

DEḆARIM

‘And who is the man who is engaged to a woman
and has not taken her? Let him go and return to his
house, lest he die in the battle and another man take
her.’
8 “And the officers shall speak further to the people,
and say, ‘Who is the man who is afraid and tender of
heart? Let him go and return to his house, lest the
heart of his brothers faint like his heart.’
9 “And it shall be, when the officers have finished
speaking to the people, that they shall appoint
commanders of the divisions to lead the people.
10 “When you draw near to a city to fight against it,
then you shall make a call for peace to it.
11 “And it shall be that if it accepts your call for peace,
and shall open to you, then all the people found in it
are to be your compulsory labour, and serve you.
12 “But if it does not make peace with you, and shall
fight against you, then you shall besiege it,
13 and hWhY your Elohim shall give it into your hands,
and you shall smite every male in it with the edge of
the sword.
14 “Only the women, and the little ones, and the
livestock, and all that is in the city, all its spoil, you
take as plunder for yourself. And you shall eat the
enemies’ plunder which hWhY your Elohim gives you.
15 “Do so to all the cities which are very far from you,
which are not of the cities of these nations.
16 “Only, of the cities of these peoples which hWhY
your Elohim gives you as an inheritance, you do not
keep alive any that breathe,
17 but you shall certainly put them under the ban: the
Ḥittite and the Amorite and the Kena’anite and the
Perizzite and the Ḥiwwite and the Yeḇusite, as hWhY
your Elohim has commanded you,
7

499

DEUTERONOMY

lest they teach you to do according to all their
abominations which they have done for their mighty
ones, and you sin against hWhY your Elohim.
19 “When you besiege a city for a long time by
fighting against it to take it, you do not destroy its trees
by wielding an axe against them. If you do eat of
them, do not cut them down. For is the tree of the field
a man to be besieged by you?
20 “Only the trees which you know are not trees for
food you do destroy and cut down, to build siegeworks against the city that is fighting against you, until
it falls.
18

21 “When anyone is found slain, lying in the field in
the land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you to
possess, and it is not known who smote him,
2 then your elders and your judges shall go out, and
they shall measure the distance from the slain man to
the cities round about.
3 “And it shall be that the elders of the city nearest
to the slain man shall take a heifer which has not been
worked and which has not pulled with a yoke,
4 and the elders of that city shall bring the heifer
down to a wadi with flowing water, which is neither
ploughed nor sown, and they shall break the heifer’s
neck there in the wadi.
5 “And the kohenim, the sons of Lĕwi, shall come
near, for hWhY your Elohim has chosen them to serve
Him and to baraḵ in the Name of hWhY, and by their
command every strife and every stroke.
6 “And let all the elders of that city nearest to the
slain man wash their hands over the heifer whose
neck was broken in the wadi.
7 “And they shall answer and say, ‘Our hands have
not shed this blood, nor have our eyes seen it.
500

DEḆARIM

‘O hWhY, forgive Your people Yisra’ĕl, whom You
have redeemed, and do not allow innocent blood in
the midst of Your people Yisra’ĕl.’ And the blood-guilt
shall be pardoned to them.
9 “Thus you purge the guilt of innocent blood from
your midst when you do what is right in the eyes of
hWhY.
10 “When you go out to fight against your enemies,
and hWhY your Elohim shall give them into your hand,
and you shall take them captive,
11 and shall see among the captives a woman lovely
of form, and shall delight in her and take her for your
wife,
12 then you shall bring her home to your house, and
she shall shave her head and trim her nails,
13 and put aside the mantle of her captivity, and shall
dwell in your house, and mourn her father and her
mother a month of days. And after that you shall go in
to her and be her husband, and she shall be your wife.
14 “And it shall be, if you are not pleased with her,
then you shall let her go at her desire, but you do not
sell her at all for silver. Do not treat her harshly, since
you have humbled her.
15 “When a man has two wives, one loved and the
other unloved, and they have borne him children, both
the loved and the unloved, and the first-born son is of
her who is unloved,
16 then it shall be, on the day he makes his sons to
inherit his possessions, he is not allowed to treat the
son of the beloved wife as first-born in the face of the
son of the unloved, who is the first-born.
17 “But he is to acknowledge the son of the unloved
wife as the first-born by giving him a double portion of
all that he has, for he is the beginning of his strength
- the right of the first-born is his.
8

501

DEUTERONOMY

“When a man has a wayward and rebellious son
who is not listening to the voice of his father or the
voice of his mother, and who, when they have
disciplined him, does not listen to them,
19 then his father and his mother shall take hold of
him and bring him out to the elders of his city, to the
gate of his city,
20 and shall say to the elders of his city, ‘This son of
ours is wayward and rebellious. He is not listening to
our voice, he is a glutton and a drunkard.’
21 “Then all the men of his city shall stone him to
death with stones. Thus you shall purge the evil from
your midst. And let all Yisra’ĕl hear, and revere.
22 “And when a man has committed a sin worthy of
death, then he shall be put to death and you shall
hang him on a tree.
23 “Let his body not remain overnight on the tree, for
you shall certainly bury him the same day - for he who
is hanged is accursed of Elohim - so that you do not
defile the land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you
as an inheritance.
18

22 “When you see your brother’s ox or his sheep
going astray, you shall not hide yourself from them.
Return them to your brother without fail.
2 “And if your brother is not near you, or if you do
not know him, then you shall bring it to your own
house, and it shall be with you until your brother
seeks it, then you shall return it to him.
3 “And so you do with his donkey, and so you do
with his garment, and so you do with whatever your
brother loses, which he has lost and you have found.
You are not allowed to hide yourself.

502

DEḆARIM

“When you see your brother’s donkey or his ox fall
down on the way, you shall not hide yourself from
them. Help him raise them without fail.
5 “A woman does not wear that which pertains to a
man, nor does a man put on a woman’s garment, for
whoever does this is an abomination to hWhY your
Elohim.
6 “When you come upon a bird’s nest along the way,
in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs,
with the mother sitting on the young or on the eggs,
do not take the mother with the young 7 let the mother go without fail, and take the young
for yourself, so that it might be well with you, and that
you have prolonged days.
8 “When you build a new house, then you shall
make a parapet for your roof, so that you do not bring
blood-guilt on your house when one falls from it.
9 “Do not sow your vineyard with different kinds of
seed, lest the yield of the seed which you have sown
and the fruit of your vineyard be defiled.
10 “Do not plough with an ox and a donkey together.
11 “Do not put on a garment of different kinds, of wool
and linen together.
12 “Make tassels on the four corners of the garment
with which you cover yourself.
13 “When any man takes a wife, and shall go in to
her, and shall hate her,
14 and shall make abusive charges against her and
bring an evil name on her and say, ‘I took this woman,
and when I came to her I did not find her a maiden,’
15 then the father and mother of the young woman
shall take and bring out the proof of the girl’s
maidenhood to the elders of the city at the gate.
16 “And the girl’s father shall say to the elders, ‘I gave
my daughter to this man as wife, and he hates her.
4

503

DEUTERONOMY

‘And see, he has made abusive charges against
her, saying, “I did not find your daughter a maiden,”
and yet these are the proofs of my daughter’s
maidenhood.’ And they shall spread the garment
before the elders of the city.
18 “And the elders of that city shall take that man and
punish him,
19 and fine him one hundred pieces of silver and give
them to the father of the young woman, because he
has brought an evil name on a maiden of Yisra’ĕl. And
she is to be his wife, he is not allowed to put her away
all his days.
20 “But if the matter is true, that the girl was not found
a maiden,
21 then they shall bring out the girl to the door of her
father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone her
to death with stones, because she has done
wickedness in Yisra’ĕl, to whore in her father’s house.
Thus you shall purge the evil from your midst.
22 “When a man is found lying with a woman married
to a husband, then both of them shall die, both the
man that lay with the woman, and the woman. Thus
you shall purge the evil from Yisra’ĕl.
23 “When a girl who is a maiden is engaged to a
husband, and a man finds her in the city and lies with
her,
24 then you shall bring them both out to the gate of
that city, and shall stone them to death with stones,
the girl because she did not cry out in the city, and the
man because he has humbled his neighbour’s wife.
Thus you shall purge the evil from your midst.
25 “But if a man finds the girl who is engaged in the
field, and the man seizes her and lies with her, then
only the man who lay with her shall die.
17

504

DEḆARIM

“But you shall do no matter to the girl. The girl has
no sin worthy of death - for the matter is like a man
who rises against his neighbour and kills him 27 for he found her in the field, and she cried out the
engaged girl, but without anyone to save her.
28 “When a man finds a girl who is a maiden who is
not engaged, and he seizes her and lies with her, and
they are found out,
29 then the man who lay with her shall give to the
girl’s father fifty pieces of silver, and she is to be his
wife because he has humbled her. He is not allowed
to put her away all his days.
30 “A man does not take his father’s wife, nor uncover
his father’s skirt.
26

23 “One of wounded, mutilated or genitalia cut off,
does not enter the assembly of hWhY.
2 “One of incestuous birth does not enter the
assembly of hWhY, even a tenth generation of his
does not enter the assembly of hWhY.
3 “An Ammonite or Mo’aḇite does not enter the
assembly of hWhY, even a tenth generation of them
does not ever enter the assembly of hWhY,
4 because they did not meet you with bread and
water on the way when you came out of Mitsrayim,
and because they hired against you Bil’am son of
Be’or from Pethor of Aram Naharayim, to curse you.
5 “But hWhY your Elohim refused to listen to Bil’am,
and hWhY your Elohim turned the curse into a
beraḵah for you, because hWhY your Elohim loves
you.
6 “Do not seek their peace nor their good, all your
days, forever.

505

DEUTERONOMY

“Do not loathe an Eḏomite, for he is your brother.
Do not loathe a Mitsrite, because you were a stranger
in his land.
8 “The children of the third generation born to them
do enter the assembly of hWhY.
9 “When the army goes out against your enemies,
then you shall guard yourself from every evil matter.
10 “When there is any man among you who is not
clean because of an emission in the night, then he
shall go outside the camp. Let him not come into the
midst of the camp.
11 “And it shall be, toward evening, that he bathes
with water. And when the sun goes let him come into
the midst of the camp.
12 “And you shall have a place outside the camp,
where you shall go out,
13 and you shall have a sharp implement among your
equipment, and when you sit down outside, you shall
dig with it and turn and cover your excrement.
14 “For hWhY your Elohim walks in the midst of your
camp, to deliver you and give your enemies over to
you. Therefore your camp shall be qodesh, so that He
does not see unclean matter among you, and shall
turn away from you.
15 “You do not hand over to his master the slave who
has escaped from his master to you.
16 “Let him dwell with you in your midst, in the place
which he chooses within one of your gates, where it
is pleasing to him. Do not oppress him.
17 “None of the daughters of Yisra’ĕl is to be a cult
prostitute, nor any of the sons of Yisra’ĕl be a cult
prostitute.
18 “Do not bring the hire of a whore or the pay of a
dog to the House of hWhY your Elohim for any vowed
7

506

DEḆARIM

offering, for both of these are an abomination to HWHY
your Elohim.
19 “Do not lend at interest to your brother, interest of
silver, interest of food, or interest of whatever is lent
at interest.
20 “To a foreigner you lend at interest, but to your
brother you do not lend at interest, so that hWhY your
Elohim might baraḵ you in all that you put your hand
to in the land which you are entering to possess.
21 “When you make a vow to hWhY your Elohim, do
not delay to pay it, for hWhY your Elohim is certainly
requiring it of you, and it shall be sin in you.
22 “But when you abstain from vowing, it is not sin in
you.
23 “That which has gone from your lips you shall
guard and do, for you voluntarily vowed to hWhY your
Elohim what you have promised with your mouth.
24 “When you come into your neighbour’s vineyard,
you shall eat to the satisfaction of your desire, but do
not put any in a receptacle of yours.
25 “When you come into your neighbour’s standing
grain, you shall pluck the heads with your hand, but
do not use a sickle on your neighbour’s standing
grain.

24 “When a man takes a wife and shall marry her,
then it shall be, if she finds no favour in his eyes
because he has found a matter of shamefulness in her,
and he shall write her a certificate of divorce, and put
it in her hand, and send her out of his house,
2 and if she left his house and went and became
another man’s wife,
3 and the latter husband shall hate her and write her
a certificate of divorce, and put it in her hand, and
507

DEUTERONOMY

send her out of his house, or when the latter husband
dies who took her to be his wife,
4 then her former husband who sent her away is not
allowed to take her back to be his wife after she has
been defiled, for that would be an abomination before
hWhY. And do not bring sin on the land which hWhY
your Elohim is giving you as an inheritance.
5 “When a man has taken a new wife, let him not go
out into the army nor let any matter be imposed upon
him. He shall be exempt one year for the sake of his
home, to rejoice with his wife whom he has taken.
6 “No one takes in pledge the lower or the upper
millstone, for he would be taking a life in pledge.
7 “When a man is found kidnapping any of his
brothers of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and treats him
harshly or sells him, then that kidnapper shall die.
Thus you shall purge the evil from your midst.
8 “Take heed, in an outbreak of leprosy, to diligently
guard and do according to all that the kohenim, the
Lĕwites, teach you. As I have commanded them, so
you shall guard to do.
9 “Remember what hWhY your Elohim did to Miryam
on the way when you came out of Mitsrayim.
10 “When you lend your brother a loan, do not go into
his house to get his pledge.
11 “Stand outside, and let the man to whom you lend
bring the pledge out to you.
12 “And if the man is poor, do not sleep with his
pledge.
13 “By all means return the pledge to him at sundown,
and he shall sleep in his own garment, and shall
baraḵ you. And it shall be righteousness to you before
hWhY your Elohim.

508

DEḆARIM

“Do not oppress a hired servant who is poor and
needy, of your brothers or of the strangers who is in
your land within your gates.
15 “Give him his wages on the same day, and do not
let the sun go down on it, for he is poor and lifts up his
being to it, so that he does not cry out against you to
hWhY, and it shall be sin in you.
16 “Fathers are not put to death for their children, and
children are not put to death for their fathers, each is
to die for his own sin.
17 “Do not twist the right-ruling of a stranger or the
fatherless, nor take the garment of a widow.
18 “But you shall remember that you were a slave in
Mitsrayim, and that hWhY your Elohim redeemed you
from there. Therefore I am commanding you to do this
Word.
19 “When you reap your harvest in your field, and
have forgotten a sheaf in the field, do not go back to
get it. Let it be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow, so that hWhY your Elohim might baraḵ
you in all the work of your hands.
20 “When you beat your olive trees, do not examine
the branch behind you. Let it be for the stranger, for
the fatherless, and for the widow.
21 “When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, do
not glean behind you. Let it be for the stranger, for the
fatherless, and for the widow.
22 “And you shall remember that you were a slave in
the land of Mitsrayim. Therefore I am commanding
you to do this Word.
14

25 “When there is a dispute between men, then they
shall come unto judgment, and they shall be judged,
and the righteous declared righteous and the wicked
declared wicked.
509

DEUTERONOMY

“And it shall be, if the wicked is to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down and be beaten
in his presence with the number of blows according
to his wickedness.
3 “Forty blows he gives him but no more, lest he
beat him with many more blows than these, and your
brother be degraded before your eyes.
4 “Do not muzzle an ox while it is threshing.
5 “When brothers dwell together, and one of them
has died, and has no son, the widow of the dead man
shall not become a stranger’s outside. Her husband’s
brother goes in to her, and shall take her as his wife,
and perform the duty of a husband’s brother to her.
6 “And it shall be that the first-born son which she
bears rises up for the name of his dead brother, so
that his name is not blotted out of Yisra’ĕl.
7 “But if the man does not desire to take his brother’s
wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the gate to
the elders, and say, ‘My husband’s brother refuses to
raise up a name to his brother in Yisra’ĕl, he does not
agree to perform the duty of my husband’s brother.’
8 “The elders of his city shall then call him and speak
to him, and he shall stand and say, ‘I have no desire
to take her,’
9 then his brother’s wife shall come to him in the
presence of the elders, and remove his sandal from
his foot, and shall spit in his face, and answer and
say, ‘Thus it is done to the man who does not build up
his brother’s house.’
10 “And in Yisra’ĕl his name shall be called, ‘The
house of him who had his sandal removed.’
11 “When men fight together, a man with another,
and the wife of one shall draw near to rescue her
husband from the hand of the one attacking him, and
shall put out her hand and seize him by the genitals,
2

510

DEḆARIM

then you shall cut off her hand - your eye does not
pardon.
13 “You shall not have in your bag differing weights,
a heavy and a light.
14 “You shall not have in your house differing
measures, a large and a small.
15 “You shall have a perfect and right weight, a
perfect and right measure, so that they prolong your
days on the land which hWhY your Elohim is giving
you.
16 “For all who do these, and all who do
unrighteously, are an abomination to hWhY your
Elohim.
17 “Remember what Amalĕq did to you on the way as
you were coming out of Mitsrayim,
18 how he met you on the way and attacked your
back, all the feeble ones in your rear, when you were
tired and weary. And he did not revere Elohim.
19 “Therefore it shall be, when hWhY your Elohim has
given you rest from your enemies all around, in the
land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you to possess
as an inheritance, that you blot out the remembrance
of Amalĕq from under the shamayim. Do not forget!
12

26 “And it shall be, when you come into the land
which hWhY your Elohim is giving you as an
inheritance, and you possess it and dwell in it,
2 that you shall take some of the first of all the fruits
of the land which you bring from your land that hWhY
your Elohim is giving you, and shall put it in a basket
and go to the place where hWhY your Elohim chooses
to make His Name dwell there.
3 “And you shall come to the one who is kohĕn in
those days, and say to him, ‘I shall declare today to
511

DEUTERONOMY

hWhY your Elohim that I have come to the land which
hWhY swore to our fathers to give us.’
4 “And the kohĕn shall take the basket from your
hand and place it before the altar of hWhY your
Elohim.
5 “And you shall answer and say before hWhY your
Elohim, ‘My father was a perishing Aramean, and he
went down to Mitsrayim and sojourned there with few
men. And there he became a nation, great, mighty,
and numerous.
6 ‘But the Mitsrites did evil to us, and afflicted us,
and imposed hard labour on us.
7 ‘Then we cried out to hWhY Elohim of our fathers,
and hWhY heard our voice and saw our affliction and
our toil and our oppression.
8 ‘And hWhY brought us out of Mitsrayim with a
strong hand and with an outstretched arm, with great
reverence and with signs and wonders.
9 ‘And He brought us to this place and has given us
this land, “a land flowing with milk and honey.”
10 ‘And now, see, I have brought the first-fruits of the
land which You, O hWhY, have given me.’ Then you
shall place it before hWhY your Elohim, and bow down
before hWhY your Elohim,
11 and shall rejoice in all the good which hWhY your
Elohim has given to you and your house, you and the
Lĕwite and the stranger who is among you.
12 “When you have completed tithing all the tithe of
your increase in the third year, which is the year of
tithing, and have given it to the Lĕwite, to the stranger,
to the fatherless, and to the widow, and they have
eaten within your gates and have been satisfied,
13 then you shall say before hWhY your Elohim, ‘I
have put away the qodesh portion from my house,
and also have given it to the Lĕwite, and to the
512

DEḆARIM

stranger, and to the fatherless, and to the widow,
according to all Your Command which You have
commanded me. I have not transgressed Your
Commands, nor have I forgotten.
14 ‘I have not eaten any of it when in mourning, nor
have I removed any of it for any unclean use, nor
given any of it for the dead. I have obeyed the voice
of hWhY my Elohim, I have done according to all that
You have commanded me.
15 ‘Look from Your qodesh dwelling place, from the
shamayim, and baraḵ Your people Yisra’ĕl and the
land which You have given us, as You swore to our
fathers, “a land flowing with milk and honey.” ’
16 “Today hWhY your Elohim is commanding you to
do these Laws and Right-Rulings. And you shall
guard and do them with all your heart and with all your
being.
17 “You have today caused hWhY to proclaim to be
your Elohim, and to walk in His Ways and guard His
Laws, and His Commands, and His Right-Rulings,
and to obey His voice.
18 “And hWhY has caused you to proclaim today to
be His people, a treasured possession, as He has
spoken to you, and to guard all His Commands,
19 so as to make you high above all nations which He
has made, for a praise, and for a name, and for
esteem, and for you to be a qodesh people to hWhY
your Elohim, as He has spoken.”

27 And Mosheh, with the elders of Yisra’ĕl,
commanded the people, saying, “Guard all the
Commands which I am commanding you today.
2 “And it shall be, on the day when you pass over
the Yardĕn to the land which hWhY your Elohim is
513

DEUTERONOMY

giving you, that you shall put up for yourselves large
stones, and plaster them with plaster,
3 and write on them all the Words of this Torah,
when you have passed over, so that you go into the
land which hWhY your Elohim is giving you, ‘a land
flowing with milk and honey,’ as hWhY Elohim of your
fathers has spoken to you.
4 “And it shall be, when you have passed over the
Yardĕn, that on Mount Ĕyḇal you put up these stones,
which I command you today, and you shall plaster
them with plaster,
5 and build an altar to hWhY your Elohim there, an
altar of stones - do not use an iron tool on them.
6 “Build the altar of hWhY your Elohim with complete
stones, and you shall offer burnt offerings on it to
hWhY your Elohim,
7 and shall offer peace offerings, and eat there, and
rejoice before hWhY your Elohim.
8 “And you shall write all the Words of this Torah on
the stones - plainly and well.”
9 And Mosheh and the kohenim, the Lĕwites, spoke
to all Yisra’ĕl, saying, “Be silent and hear, O Yisra’ĕl:
This day you have become the people of hWhY your
Elohim,
10 and you shall obey the voice of hWhY your Elohim,
and do His Commands and His Laws which I
command you today.”
11 And Mosheh commanded people on that day,
saying,
12 “These are to stand on Mount Gerizim to baraḵ the
people, when you have passed over the Yardĕn:
Shim’on, and Lĕwi, and Yahuḏah, and Yissasḵar, and
Yosĕph, and Binyamin.

514

DEḆARIM

“And these are to stand on Mount Ĕyḇal to curse:
Re’uḇĕn, Gaḏ, and Ashĕr, and Zeḇulun, Dan, and
Naphtali.
14 “And the Lĕwites shall speak with a loud voice and
say to all the men of Yisra’ĕl:
15 ‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved or
moulded image, an abomination to hWhY, the work of
the hands of the craftsman, and puts it up in secret.’
And all the people shall answer and say, ‘Amĕn!’
16 ‘Cursed is he who makes light of his father or his
mother.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
17 ‘Cursed is he who moves his neighbour’s
boundary.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
18 ‘Cursed is he who misleads the blind in the way.’
And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
19 ‘Cursed is he who twists the right ruling of the
stranger, the fatherless, and widow.’ And all the
people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
20 ‘Cursed is he who lies with his father’s wife,
because he has uncovered his father’s bed.’ And all
the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
21 ‘Cursed is he who lies with any beast.’ And all the
people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
22 ‘Cursed is he who lies with his sister, the daughter
of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ And all the
people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
23 ‘Cursed is he who lies with his mother-in-law.’ And
all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
24 ‘Cursed is he who smites his neighbour secretly.’
And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
25 ‘Cursed is he who takes a bribe to slay an innocent
being.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
26 ‘Cursed is he who does not establish the Words of
this Torah.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amĕn!’
13

515

DEUTERONOMY

28 “And it shall be, if you diligently obey the voice of
hWhY your Elohim, to guard to do all His Commands
which I command you today, that hWhY your Elohim
shall make you high above all nations of the earth.
2 “And all these bireḵoth shall come upon you and
overtake you, if you obey the voice of hWhY your
Elohim:
3 “Baruḵ are you in the city, and baruḵ are you in the
field.
4 “Baruḵ is the fruit of your body, and the fruit of your
ground and the fruit of your livestock - the increase of
your cattle and the offspring of your flocks.
5 “Baruḵ is your basket and your kneading bowl.
6 “Baruḵ are you when you come in, and baruḵ are
you when you go out.
7 “hWhY causes your enemies who rise against you
to be smitten before your face - they come out against
you one way and flee before you seven ways.
8 “hWhY commands the beraḵah on you in your
storehouses and in all to which you put your hand,
and shall baraḵ you in the land which hWhY your
Elohim is giving you.
9 “hWhY establishes you as a qodesh people to
Himself, as He has sworn to you, if you guard the
Commands of hWhY your Elohim and walk in His
Ways.
10 “And all peoples of the earth shall see that the
Name of hWhY is called upon you, and they shall be
afraid of you.
11 “And hWhY shall make you to have plenty of what
is good, in the fruit of your body, in the fruit of your
livestock, and in the fruit of your ground, in the land of
which hWhY swore to your fathers to give you.
516

DEḆARIM

“hWhY opens to you His good treasure, the
shamayim, to give the rain to your land in its season,
and to baraḵ all the work of your hand. And you shall
lend to many nations, but you do not borrow.
13 “And hWhY shall make you the head and not the
tail. And you shall be only on top, and not be beneath,
if you obey the Commands of hWhY your Elohim,
which I command you today, to guard and do.
14 “And do not turn aside from any of the Words
which I am commanding you today, right or left, to go
after other mighty ones to serve them.
15 “And it shall be, if you do not obey the voice of
hWhY your Elohim, to guard to do all His Commands
and His Laws which I command you today, that all
these curses shall come upon you and overtake you:
16 “Cursed are you in the city, and cursed are you in
the field.
17 “Cursed is your basket and your kneading bowl.
18 “Cursed is the fruit of your body and the fruit of
your land, the increase of your cattle and the offspring
of your flocks.
19 “Cursed are you when you come in, and cursed
are you when you go out.
20 “hWhY sends on you the curse, the confusion, and
the rebuke in all that you put your hand to do, until
you are destroyed and until you perish quickly,
because of the evil of your doings by which you have
forsaken Me.
21 “hWhY makes the plague cling to you until He has
consumed you from the land which you are going to
possess.
22 “hWhY smites you with wasting disease, and with
inflammation, and with burning, and with extreme
heat, and with the sword, and with blight, and with
mildew. And they shall pursue you until you perish.
12

517

DEUTERONOMY

“And your shamayim which are over your head
shall be bronze, and the earth which is under you iron.
24 “hWhY makes the rain of your land powder and
dust; from the shamayim it comes down on you until
you are destroyed.
25 “hWhY causes you to be defeated before your
enemies - you go out one way against them and flee
seven ways before them. And you shall become a
horror to all the reigns of the earth.
26 “And your carcasses shall be food for all the birds
of the shamayim and the beasts of the earth, with no
one to frighten them away.
27 “hWhY shall smite you with the boils of Mitsrayim,
with tumours, with the scab, and with the itch, from
which you are unable to be healed.
28 “hWhY shall smite you with madness and
blindness and bewilderment of heart.
29 “And you shall be groping at noon, as a blind man
gropes in darkness, and not prosper in your ways.
And you shall be only oppressed and plundered all
the days, with no one to save you.
30 “You become engaged to a wife, but another man
lies with her. You build a house, but do not dwell in it.
You plant a vineyard, but do not use its fruit.
31 “Your ox is slaughtered before your eyes, but you
do not eat of it. Your donkey is violently taken from
before you, and it is not given back to you. Your sheep
are given to your enemies, with no one to save them.
32 “Your sons and your daughters are given to
another people, and your eyes look and fail for them
all day long, and your hand powerless.
33 “A people whom you have not known eat the fruit
of your land and all your labours. And you shall be
only oppressed and crushed all the days.
23

518

DEḆARIM

“And you shall be maddened because of the sight
which your eyes see.
35 “hWhY smites you in the knees and on the legs with
evil boils of which you are unable to be healed, and
from the sole of your foot to the top of your head.
36 “hWhY brings you and the sovereign whom you
appoint over you to a nation which neither you nor
your fathers have known, and there you shall serve
other mighty ones, wood and stone.
37 “Thus you shall become an astonishment, a
proverb, and a mockery among all the peoples to
which hWhY drives you.
38 “You take much seed out into the field but gather
little in, for the locust consumes it.
39 “You plant vineyards, and shall labour, but you
neither drink of the wine nor gather, for the worm eats
it.
40 “You have olive trees in all your border, but do not
anoint with oil, for your olives drop off.
41 “You bring forth sons and daughters, but they are
not with you, for they go into captivity.
42 “Locusts possess all your trees and the fruit of
your ground.
43 “The sojourner who is among you rises higher and
higher above you, but you come down lower and
lower.
44 “He lends to you, but you do not lend to him. He is
the head, and you are the tail.
45 “And all these curses shall come upon you, and
they shall pursue and overtake you, until you are
destroyed, because you did not obey the voice of
hWhY your Elohim, to guard His Commands and His
Laws which He commanded you.
46 “And they shall be upon you for a sign and for a
wonder, and on your seed, forever,
34

519

DEUTERONOMY

because you did not serve hWhY your Elohim with
joy and gladness of heart for all the plenty.
48 “You shall serve your enemies whom hWhY sends
against you, in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in need of all. And he shall put a yoke
of iron on your neck until he has destroyed you.
49 “hWhY brings a nation against you from afar, from
the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flies, a
nation whose language you shall not understand,
50 a fierce-looking nation, which shows no regard for
the elderly nor show favour to the young,
51 and they shall eat the fruit of your livestock and the
fruit of your land, until you are destroyed. They leave
you no grain, nor new wine, nor oil, nor the increase
of your cattle or the offspring of your flocks, until they
have destroyed you.
52 “And they shall besiege you at all your gates till
your high and fenced walls, in which you are trusting,
come down in all your land. And they shall besiege
you at all your gates in all your land which hWhY your
Elohim has given you.
53 “And you shall eat the fruit of your own body, the
flesh of your sons and your daughters whom hWhY
your Elohim has given you, in the siege and distress
in which your enemies distress you.
54 “The man among you who is tender, and who is
very delicate, his eye is evil against his brother,
against the wife of his bosom, and against the rest of
his children whom he leaves behind,
55 against giving any of them the flesh of his children
that he eats, because it is all that has been left to him
in the siege and distress with which your enemy
distresses you in all your gates.
56 “The tender and the delicate woman among you,
who have not tried to put the sole of her foot on the
47

520

DEḆARIM

ground because of her delicateness and tenderness,
her eye is evil against the husband of her bosom, and
against her son, and against her daughter,
57 and against her seed which comes out from
between her legs, and her children whom she bears,
for she eats them in secret for lack of all, in the siege
and distress with which your enemy distresses you in
all your gates.
58 “If you do not guard to do all the Words of this
Torah that are written in this Book, to revere this
esteemed and awesome Name, hWhY your Elohim,
59 then hWhY shall bring upon you and your
descendants extraordinary plagues, great and lasting
plagues, and grievous and lasting sicknesses.
60 “And He shall bring back on you all the diseases
of Mitsrayim, of which you were afraid, and they shall
cling to you,
61 also every sickness and every plague, which is not
written in the Book of this Torah, hWhY brings upon
you until you are destroyed.
62 “And you shall be left with few men, although you
had become as numerous as the stars of the
shamayim, because you did not obey the voice of
hWhY your Elohim.
63 “And it shall be, that as hWhY rejoiced over you to
do you good and increase you, so hWhY rejoices over
you to destroy you and lay you waste. And you shall
be plucked from off the land which you go to possess.
64 “And hWhY shall scatter you among all peoples,
from one end of the earth to the other, and there you
shall serve other mighty ones, which neither you nor
your fathers have known, wood and stone.
65 “And among those nations you are to find no rest,
nor have a resting place for the sole of your foot. But
521

DEUTERONOMY

there hWhY shall give you a trembling heart, and
failing eyes, and sorrow of being.
66 “And your life shall be hanging in suspense before
you, and you shall fear day and night, and not be
certain of your life.
67 “In the morning you say, ‘Oh, that it were evening!’
And at evening you say, ‘Oh, that it were morning!’
because of the fear of your heart, with which you fear,
and because of the sight which your eyes see.
68 “And hWhY shall bring you back to Mitsrayim in
ships, by a way of which I said to you, ‘You are never
to see it again.’ And there you shall be sold to your
enemies as male and female slaves, but no one to
buy.”

29 These are the words of the Covenant which hWhY
commanded Mosheh to make with the children of
Yisra’ĕl in the land of Mo’aḇ, besides the Covenant
which He made with them in Ḥorĕḇ.
2 And Mosheh called all Yisra’ĕl and said to them,
“You yourselves saw all that hWhY did before your
eyes in the land of Mitsrayim, to Pharaoh and to all
his servants and to all his land.
3 “Your eyes saw the great trials, the signs, and
those great wonders.
4 “But hWhY has not given you a heart to know and
eyes to see and ears to hear, till this day.
5 “And I have led you forty years in the wilderness.
Your garments have not worn out on you, and your
sandals have not worn out on your feet.
6 “You ate no bread and drank no wine nor strong
drink, so that you might know that I am hWhY your
Elohim.

522

DEḆARIM

“And when you came to this place, Siḥon
sovereign of Ḥeshbon and Oḡ sovereign of Bashan
came out against us to battle, and we smote them,
8 and took their land and gave it as an inheritance
to the Re’uḇĕnites, and to the Gaḏites, and to half the
tribe of Menashsheh.
9 “Therefore you shall guard the words of this
Covenant, and do them, so that you prosper in all that
you do.
10 “All of you are standing today before hWhY your
Elohim: your leaders, your tribes, your elders and
your officers, all the men of Yisra’ĕl,
11 your little ones, your wives, and your sojourner
who is in the midst of your camp, from the one who
cuts your wood to the one who draws your water,
12 so that you should enter into Covenant with hWhY
your Elohim, and into His oath, which hWhY your
Elohim makes with you today,
13 in order to establish you today as a people for
Himself, and He Himself be your Elohim, as He has
spoken to you, and as He has sworn to your fathers,
to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ.
14 “And not with you alone I am making this Covenant
and this oath,
15 but with him who stands here with us today before
hWhY our Elohim, as well as with him who is not here
with us today.
16 “For you know how we dwelt in the land of
Mitsrayim and how we passed through the nations
which you passed through,
17 and you saw their abominations and their idols,
wood and stone, silver and gold, which were with
them,
18 lest there should be among you a man or woman
or clan or tribe, whose heart turns away today from
7

523

DEUTERONOMY

hWhY our Elohim, to go and serve the mighty ones of
these nations, lest there should be among you a root
bearing bitterness or wormwood.
19 “And it shall be, when he hears the words of this
curse, that he should baraḵ himself in his heart,
saying, ‘I have peace though I walk in the
stubbornness of my heart,’ in order to add
drunkenness to thirst.
20 “hWhY would not forgive him, but rather, the
displeasure of hWhY and His jealousy shall burn
against that man, and every curse that is written in
this Book shall settle on him, and hWhY shall blot out
his name from under the shamayim.
21 “And HWHY shall separate him for evil, out of all the
tribes of Yisra’ĕl, according to all the curses of the
Covenant that are written in this Book of the Torah.
22 “And the generation to come of your children who
rise up after you, and the foreigner who comes from
a far land, shall say when they see the plagues of that
land and the sicknesses which hWhY has sent into it:
23 ‘All its land is sulphur, salt, and burning; it is not
sown, nor does it bear, nor does any grass grow
there, like the overthrow of Seḏom and Amorah,
Aḏmah and Tseḇoyim, which hWhY overthrew in His
displeasure and His wrath.’
24 “And all nations shall say, ‘Why has hWhY done so
to this land? What does the heat of this great
displeasure mean?’
25 “And it shall be said, ‘Because they have forsaken
the Covenant of hWhY Elohim of their fathers, which
He made with them when He brought them out of the
land of Mitsrayim.
26 ‘And they went and served other mighty ones and
bowed themselves to them, mighty ones that they did
not know and that He had not given to them,
524

DEḆARIM

therefore the displeasure of hWhY burned against
this land, to bring on it every curse that is written in
this Book.
28 ‘And hWhY uprooted them from their land in
displeasure, and in wrath, and in great rage, and cast
them into another land, as it is today.’
29 “The hidden belongs to hWhY our Elohim, but what
is revealed belongs to us and to our children forever,
to do all the Words of this Torah.
27

30 “And it shall be, when all these words come upon
you, the beraḵah and the curse which I have put before
you, and you shall bring them back to your heart
among all the gentiles where hWhY your Elohim drives
you,
2 and shall turn back to hWhY your Elohim and obey
His voice, according to all that I command you today,
with all your heart and with all your being, you and
your children,
3 then hWhY your Elohim shall turn back your
captivity, and shall have compassion on you, and He
shall turn back and gather you from all the peoples
where your Elohim has scattered you.
4 “If any of you are driven out to the farthest parts
under the shamayim, from there hWhY your Elohim
gathers you, and from there He takes you.
5 “And hWhY your Elohim shall bring you to the land
which your fathers possessed, and you shall possess
it. And He shall do good to you, and increase you
more than your fathers.
6 “And hWhY your Elohim shall circumcise your
heart and the heart of your seed, to love hWhY your
Elohim with all your heart and with all your being, so
that you might live,
525

DEUTERONOMY

and hWhY your Elohim shall put all these curses
on your enemies and on those who hate you, who
persecuted you.
8 “And you shall turn back and obey the voice of
hWhY and do all His Commands which I command
you today.
9 “And hWhY your Elohim shall make you have
excess in all the work of your hand, in the fruit of your
body, and in the fruit of your livestock, and in the fruit
of your ground for good. For hWhY turns back to
rejoice over you for good as He rejoiced over your
fathers,
10 if you obey the voice of hWhY your Elohim, to
guard His Commands and His Laws which are written
in this Book of the Torah, if you turn back to hWhY
your Elohim with all your heart and with all your being.
11 “For this Command which I am commanding you
today, it is not too hard for you, nor is it far off.
12 “It is not in the shamayim, to say, ‘Who shall
ascend into the shamayim for us, and bring it to us,
and cause us to hear it, so that we do it?’
13 “Nor is it beyond the sea, to say, ‘Who shall go
over the sea for us, and bring it to us, and cause us
to hear it, so that we do it?’
14 “For the Word is very near you, in your mouth and
in your heart - to do it.
15 “See, I have put before you today ḥai and good,
and death and evil,
16 in that I am commanding you today to love hWhY
your Elohim, to walk in His Ways, and to guard His
Commands, and His Laws, and His Right-Rulings.
And you shall live and increase, and hWhY your
Elohim shall baraḵ you in the land which you go to
possess.
7

526

DEḆARIM

“But if your heart turns away, and you do not obey,
and shall be drawn away, and shall bow down to other
mighty ones and serve them,
18 “I have declared to you today that you shall
certainly perish, you shall not prolong your days in the
land which you are passing over the Yardĕn to enter
and possess.
19 “I have called the shamayim and the earth as
witnesses today against you: I have put before you
ḥai and death, the beraḵah and the curse. Therefore
you shall choose ḥai, so that you live, both you and
your seed,
20 to love hWhY your Elohim, to obey His voice, and
to cling to Him - for He is your ḥai and the length of
your days - to dwell in the land which hWhY swore to
your fathers, to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ,
to give them.”
17

31 And Mosheh went and spoke these words to all
Yisra’ĕl,
2 and he said to them, “I am one hundred and twenty
years old today. I am no longer able to go out and
come in. And hWhY has said to me, ‘You do not pass
over this Yardĕn.’
3 “hWhY your Elohim Himself is passing over before
you. He shall destroy these nations from before you
and you possess them. Yahoshua himself is passing
over before you, as hWhY has spoken.
4 “And hWhY shall do to them as He did to Siḥon and
to Oḡ, the sovereigns of the Amorites and their land,
when He destroyed them.
5 “And hWhY shall give them over to you, and you
shall do to them according to all the Command which
I have commanded you.
527

DEUTERONOMY

“Be strong and courageous, do not fear nor be
afraid of them. For it is hWhY your Elohim who is going
with you. He does not fail you nor forsake you.”
7 And Mosheh called Yahoshua and said to him
before the eyes of all Yisra’ĕl, “Be strong and
courageous, for you are going with this people to the
land which hWhY has sworn to their fathers to give
them, and you are to let them inherit it.
8 “And it is hWhY who is going before you, He
Himself is with you. He does not fail you nor forsake
you. Do not fear nor be discouraged.”
9 And Mosheh wrote this Torah and gave it to the
kohenim, the sons of Lĕwi, who bore the ark of the
Covenant of hWhY, and to all the elders of Yisra’ĕl.
10 And Mosheh commanded them, saying, “At the
end of seven years, at the Appointed Time, the year
of release, at the Festival of Sukkoth,
11 when all Yisra’ĕl comes to appear before hWhY
your Elohim in the place which He chooses, read this
Torah before all Yisra’ĕl in their hearing.
12 “Assemble the people, the men and the women
and the little ones, and your sojourner who is within
your gates, so that they hear, and so that they learn
to revere hWhY your Elohim and guard to do all the
Words of this Torah.
13 “And their children, who have not known it, should
hear and learn to revere hWhY your Elohim as long as
you live in the land you are passing over the Yardĕn
to possess.”
14 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “See, the days have
drawn near for you to die. Call Yahoshua, and present
yourselves in the Tent of Appointment, so that I
command him.” And Mosheh and Yahoshua went and
presented themselves in the Tent of Appointment.
6

528

DEḆARIM

And hWhY appeared at the Tent in a column of a
cloud, and the column of a cloud stood above the
door of the Tent.
16 And hWhY said to Mosheh, “See, you are about to
sleep with your fathers. And this people shall rise and
whore after the mighty ones of the strangers of the
land into the midst of which they shall enter, and
forsake Me and break My Covenant which I have
made with them.
17 “Then My displeasure shall burn against them in
that day, and I shall forsake them and hide My face
from them, and they shall be consumed. And many
evils and distresses shall come upon them, and it
shall be said in that day, ‘Is it not because our Elohim
is not in our midst that these evils have come upon
us?’
18 “And I shall certainly hide My face in that day,
because of all the evil which they have done, for they
shall turn to other mighty ones.
19 “And now write down this song for yourselves, and
teach it to the children of Yisra’ĕl. Put it in their
mouths, so that this song is to Me for a witness
against the children of Yisra’ĕl.
20 “And I shall bring them to the land flowing with milk
and honey, of which I swore to their fathers, and they
shall eat and be satisfied and be fat, then they shall
turn to other mighty ones, and they shall serve them,
and scorn Me and break My Covenant.
21 “And it shall be, when many evils and distresses
come upon them, that this song shall answer before
them as a witness. For it is not to be forgotten in the
mouths of their seed, for I know their thoughts which
they are forming today, even before I bring them to
the land of which I swore to give them.”
15

529

DEUTERONOMY

And Mosheh wrote this song the same day, and
taught it to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
23 And He commanded Yahoshua son of Nun, and
said, “Be strong and courageous, for you are to bring
the children of Yisra’ĕl into the land of which I swore
to them, and I Myself am with you.”
24 And it came to be, when Mosheh had completed
writing the Words of this Torah in a Book, until their
completion,
25 that Mosheh commanded the Lĕwites, who bore
the ark of the Covenant of hWhY, saying,
26 “Take this Book of the Torah, and you shall place
it beside the ark of the Covenant of hWhY your Elohim,
and it shall be there as a witness against you,
27 for I myself know your rebellion and your stiff neck.
See, while I am still alive with you today, you have
been rebellious against hWhY, then how much more
after my death?
28 “Assemble unto me all the elders of your tribes,
and your officers, so that I speak these words in their
hearing and call the shamayim and the earth to
witness against them.
29 “For I know that after my death you shall do very
corruptly and turn aside from the Way which I have
commanded you. And evil shall come to you in the
latter days, because you do what is evil in the eyes of
HWHY, to provoke Him through the work of your
hands.”
30 So Mosheh spoke in the hearing of all the
assembly of Yisra’ĕl the words of this song till their
completion:
22

32 “Give ear, O shamayim, and let me speak;
And hear, O earth,
The words of my mouth.
530

DEḆARIM

“Let my instruction fall as rain,
My speech drop down as dew,
As fine rain on the tender plants,
And as showers on the grass.
3 “For I proclaim the Name of HWhY,
Ascribe greatness to our Elohim.
4 “The Rock! His work is perfect,
For all His Ways are right-ruling,
An Ĕl of truth and without unrighteousness,
Righteous and straight is He.
5 “A twisted and wicked generation has corrupted
itself,
Their blemish, not His children.
6 “Do you do this to hWhY,
O foolish and unwise people?
Is He not your Father, who bought you,
Who created you and established you?
7 “Remember the days of old,
Consider the years of many generations.
Ask your father and let him show you,
Your elders, and let them say to you:
8 “When the Most High gave the nations their
inheritance,
When He separated the sons of Aḏam,
He established the boundaries of the peoples
According to the number of the children of Elohim.
9 “For the portion of hWhY is His people,
Ya’aqoḇ His allotted inheritance.
10 “He found him in a wilderness,
And in a wasted, howling desert.
He encompassed him, He made him understand,
He watched over him as the apple of His eye.
11 “As an eagle stirs up its nest,
Flutters over its young,
2

531

DEUTERONOMY

Spreading out its wings, taking them up,
Bearing them on its wings.
12 “hWhY alone led him,
And there was no strange mighty one with him.
13 “He made him ride in the heights of the earth,
And he ate the fruit of the fields,
And He made him to draw honey from the rock,
And oil from the flinty rock,
14 “Curds from the cattle,
And milk of the flock,
With fatness of lambs,
And rams of the breed of Bashan,
And goats, with the choicest wheat;
And you drank wine, the blood of grapes.
15 “But Yeshurun grew fat and kicked;
You grew fat, you grew thick,
You are covered with fat;
So he forsook Eloah who made him,
And scorned the Rock of his deliverance.
16 “They moved Him to jealousy with the foreign,
With abominations they provoked Him.
17 “They slaughtered to demons - not Eloah Mighty ones they did not know,
New ones who came lately,
Which your fathers did not reverence.
18 “You neglected the Rock who brought you forth,
And forgot the Ĕl who fathered you.
19 “And hWhY saw, and despised,
Because of the provocation of His sons and His
daughters.
20 “And He said, ‘Let Me hide My face from them,
Let Me see what their end is,
For they are a perverse generation,
Children in whom there is no trusting.
532

DEḆARIM

“They made Me jealous by what is not Ĕl.
They provoked Me with their worthlessness.
But I make them jealous by those who are no
people,
I provoke them with a foolish nation.
22 “For a fire was kindled in My wrath
And burns to the bottom of She’ol,
And consumes the earth and its increase,
And lights on fire the foundations of mountains.
23 “I gather evils upon them,
I use up My arrows upon them 24 “Wasted by scarcity of food,
And consumed by heat and bitter destruction,
And the teeth of beasts I send upon them,
With the poison of serpents of the dust.
25 “The sword bereaves from the outside,
And fear from within,
Both young man and maiden,
Nursing child with the man of grey hairs.
26 “I said, ‘I should blow them away,
I should make the remembrance of them
To cease from among men,
27 “If I did not fear the enemy’s taunt,
Lest their adversaries misunderstand,
Lest they say, “Our hand is high,
And hWhY has not done all this.” ’
28 “For they are a nation lost to counsel,
And there is no understanding in them.
29 “If they were wise,
They would understand this,
They would consider their latter end!
30 “How would one chase a thousand,
And two put ten thousand to flight,
Unless their Rock had sold them,
And hWhY had given them up?
21

533

DEUTERONOMY

“For their rock is not like our Rock Even our enemies are judges.
32 “Their vine is of the vine of Seḏom
And of the fields of Amorah;
Their grapes are grapes of gall,
Their clusters are bitter.
33 “Their wine is the poison of serpents,
And the fierce venom of cobras.
34 ‘Is it not stored up with Me,
Sealed up among My treasures?
35 ‘Vengeance is Mine, and repayment,
At the time their foot slips;
For near is the day of their calamity,
And the preparations are hastening to them.’
36 “For hWhY rightly rules His people
And has compassion on His servants,
When He sees that their power is gone,
And there is no one remaining,
Shut up or at large.
37 “And He shall say, ‘Where are their mighty ones,
The rock in whom they sought refuge?
38 ‘Who ate the fat of their slaughterings,
And drank the wine of their drink offering?
Let them arise and help you,
Let it be a hiding-place for you!
39 ‘See now that I, I am He,
And there is no Elohim besides Me.
I put to death and I make alive.
I have wounded, and I heal.
And from My hand no one delivers!
40 ‘For I lift My hand to the shamayim,
And shall say: As I live forever,
41 ‘If I have sharpened My flashing sword,
And My hand takes hold on judgment,
31

534

DEḆARIM

I shall return vengeance to My enemies,
And repay those who hate Me.
42 ‘I make My arrows drunk with blood,
And My sword devours flesh,
With the blood of the slain and the captives,
From the long-haired enemy chiefs.’
43 “O nations, acclaim His people!
For He avenges the blood of His servants,
And returns vengeance to His adversaries,
And shall pardon His land, His people.”
44 Then Mosheh came, with Yahoshua son of Nun,
and spoke all the words of this song in the hearing of
the people.
45 And when Mosheh ended speaking all these
words to all Yisra’ĕl,
46 he said to them, “Lay your heart on all the words
with which I warn you today, so that you command
your children to guard to do all the Words of this
Torah.
47 “For it is not a worthless Word for you, because it
is your ḥai, and by this Word you prolong your days
on the land which you pass over the Yardĕn to
possess.”
48 And hWhY spoke to Mosheh that same day,
saying,
49 “Go up this mountain of the Aḇiram, Mount Neḇo,
which is in the land of Mo’aḇ, which is opposite
Yeriḥo, and look at the land of Kena’an, which I give
to the children of Yisra’ĕl as a possession,
50 and die on the mountain which you ascend, and
be gathered to your people, as Aharon your brother
died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,
51 because you trespassed against Me in the midst
of the children of Yisra’ĕl at the waters of Meriḇah
535

DEUTERONOMY

Qaḏĕsh, in the Wilderness of Tsin, because you did
not qadosh Me in the midst of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
52 “For you are to look at the land before you, but not
enter there, into the land which I am giving to the
children of Yisra’ĕl.”

33 And this is the beraḵah with which Mosheh the
man of Elohim baraḵ the children of Yisra’ĕl before his
death.
2 And he said, “hWhY came from Sinai, and rose
from Sĕ’ir for them. He shone forth from Mount Paran,
and came with ten thousands of qodeshim - at His
right hand a law of fire for them.
3 Indeed, He loves the peoples, all His qodeshim
are in Your hand. And they, they sat down at Your
feet, receiving Your Words.
4 Mosheh commanded us a Torah, an inheritance of
the assembly of Ya’aqoḇ.
5 And He was Sovereign in Yeshurun, when the
heads of the people were gathered, the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl
6 “Let Re’uḇĕn live, and not die, and let his men be
numbered.”
7 And this of Yahuḏah, and he said, “Hear, hWhY,
the voice of Yahuḏah, and bring him to his people. His
hands shall fight for him, and You be a help against
his enemies.”
8 And of Lĕwi he said, “Your Tummim and Your
Urim belong to Your kind one, whom You tried at
Massah, with whom You contended at the waters of
Meriḇah,
9 who said of his father and mother, ‘I have not seen
them.’ And he did not acknowledge his brothers, or
know his own children, for they have guarded Your
Word and watched over Your Covenant.
536

DEḆARIM

“They teach Your Right-Rulings to Ya’aqoḇ, and
Your Torah to Yisra’ĕl. They put incense before You,
and a complete burnt offering on Your altar.
11 “O hWhY baraḵ his strength, and accept the work
of his hands. Strike through the loins of those who rise
against him, and of those who hate him, that they rise
no more.”
12 Of Binyamin he said, “Let the beloved of hWhY
dwell in safety by Him, shielding him all the day, as
he dwells between His shoulders.”
13 And of Yosĕph he said, “Baruḵ of hWhY is his land,
with the choicest from the shamayim, with the dew,
and the deep lying beneath,
14 with the choice fruits of the sun, with the choice
yield of the months,
15 with the finest of the ancient mountains, with the
choicest of the everlasting hills,
16 with the choicest of the earth and all that fills it, and
the good pleasure of Him who dwelt in the bush. Let
it come on the head of Yosĕph, and on the crown of
the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
17 “His splendour is like a first-born bull, and his
horns are like the horns of the wild ox. With them he
pushes the peoples to the ends of the earth. And
they are the ten thousands of Ephrayim, and they are
the thousands of Menashsheh.”
18 And of Zeḇulun he said, “Rejoice. O Zeḇulun, in
your going out, and Yissasḵar in your tents!
19 “They call peoples to the mountain, there they
bring offerings of righteousness, for they draw from
the riches of the seas, and treasures hidden in the
sand.”
20 And of Gaḏ he said. “Baruḵ is he who enlarges
Gaḏ. He dwells as a lion, and shall tear off the arm,
also the crown.
10

537

DEUTERONOMY

“And he chose the best for himself, for there the
portion of the lawgiver was hidden. And he came with
the heads of the people. The righteousness of hWhY
he did, and His Right-Rulings with Yisra’ĕl.”
22 And of Dan he said, “Dan is a lion’s cub, that leaps
from Bashan.”
23 And of Naphtali he said, “O Naphtali, satisfied with
pleasure, and filled with the beraḵah of hWhY,
possess the west and the south.”
24 And of Ashĕr he said, “Ashĕr is most baruḵ of
sons. Let him be accepted by his brothers, and dip his
foot in oil.
25 “Your sandals are iron and bronze, and your
strength as your days.
26 “O Yeshurun, there is no one like Ĕl, riding the
shamayim to help you, and on the clouds, in His
excellency.
27 “The Elohim of old is a refuge, and beneath are
everlasting arms. And He drives out the enemy from
before you and says, ‘Destroy!’
28 ‘Thus Yisra’ĕl dwells in safety, the fountain of
Ya’aqoḇ alone, in a land of grain and new wine. His
shamayim also drop down dew.
29 “Baruḵ are you, O Yisra’ĕl! Who is like you? A
people saved by hWhY, the shield of your help, and
He who is the sword of your excellency! And your
enemies are subdued for you, and you tread down
their high places.”
21

34 And Mosheh went up from the desert plains of
Mo’aḇ to Mount Neḇo, to the top of Pisgah, which is
opposite Yeriḥo. And hWhY showed him all the land of
Gil’aḏ as far as Dan.

538

DEḆARIM

and all Naphtali and the land of Ephrayim and
Menashsheh, all the land of Yahuḏah as far as the
Western Sea,
3 and the Negeḇ, and the plain of the Valley of
Yeriḥo, the city of palm trees, as far as Tso’ar.
4 And hWhY said to him, “This is the land of which I
swore to Aḇraham, to Yitsḥaq, and to Ya’aqoḇ,
saying, ‘To your seed I give it.’ I have let you look at
it with your eyes, but you do not pass over there.”
5 And Mosheh the servant of hWhY died there in the
land of Mo’aḇ, according to the word of hWhY.
6 And He buried him in a valley in the land of Mo’aḇ,
opposite Bĕyth Pe’or, and no one knows his burial
place to this day.
7 And Mosheh was one hundred and twenty years
old when he died. His eyes were not dim nor his
freshness gone.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl wept for Mosheh in the
desert plains of Mo’aḇ thirty days. And the days of
weeping and mourning for Mosheh were completed.
9 And Yahoshua son of Nun was filled with the spirit
of wisdom, for Mosheh had laid his hands on him. And
the children of Yisra’ĕl listened to him, and did as
hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
10 And since then no naḇi has arisen in Yisra’ĕl like
Mosheh, whom hWhY knew face to face,
11 for all the signs and wonders which hWhY sent him
to do in the land of Mitsrayim, before Pharaoh, and
before all his servants, and in all his land,
12 and for all that strong hand and all the great
fearsome deeds which Mosheh did before the eyes of
all Yisra’ĕl.
2

539

JOSHUA

YAHOSHUA
‫[ יהוׁשע‬vWhY

1 And it came to be, after the death of Mosheh the
servant of hWhY, that hWhY spoke to Yahoshua son of
Nun, the assistant of Mosheh, saying,
2 “Mosheh My servant is dead, so now, arise, pass
over this Yardĕn, you and all this people, to the land
which I am giving to them, to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
3 “Every place on which the sole of your foot treads
I have given you, as I spoke to Mosheh.
4 “From the wilderness and this Leḇanon even as
far as the great river, the River Perath, all the land of
the Ḥittites, and to the Great Sea toward the going
down of the sun, is your border.
5 “No man is going to stand before you all the days
of your life. As I was with Mosheh, so I am with you. I
do not fail you nor forsake you.
6 “Be strong and courageous, for you are to let this
people inherit the land which I swore to their fathers
to give them.
7 “Only be strong and very courageous, to guard to
do according to all the Torah which Mosheh My
servant commanded you. Do not turn from it right or
left, so that you act wisely wherever you go.
8 “Do not let this Book of the Torah depart from your
mouth, but you shall meditate on it day and night, so
that you guard to do according to all that is written in
it. For then you shall make your way prosperous, and
act wisely.
9 “Have I not commanded you? Be strong and
courageous. Do not be afraid, nor be discouraged, for
hWhY your Elohim is with you wherever you go.”
540

YAHOSHUA

And Yahoshua commanded the officers of the
people, saying,
11 “Pass through the midst of the camp and
command the people, saying, ‘Prepare food for
yourselves, for within three days you are passing over
this Yardĕn, to go in to possess the land which hWhY
your Elohim is giving you to possess.’ ”
12 And Yahoshua spoke to the Re’uḇĕnites and to
the Gaḏites and to half the tribe of Menashsheh,
saying,
13 “Remember the word which Mosheh, servant of
hWhY, commanded you, saying, ‘hWhY your Elohim is
giving you rest, and He shall give you this land.’
14 “Let your wives, your little ones, and your livestock
stay in the land which Mosheh gave you beyond the
Yardĕn. But you shall pass before your brothers
armed, all your brave fighters, and shall help them,
15 until hWhY has given your brothers rest, as unto
you. So shall they also take possession of the land
which hWhY your Elohim is giving them. Then you
shall return to the land of your possession, and shall
possess that which Mosheh the servant of HWHY gave
you beyond the Yardĕn toward the rising of the sun.”
16 And they answered Yahoshua, saying, “All that
you have commanded us we do, and wherever you
send us we go.
17 “According to all that we obeyed Mosheh, so we
obey you. Only, let hWhY your Elohim be with you, as
He was with Mosheh.
18 “Whoever rebels against your command and does
not obey your words, in all that you command him, is
put to death. Only be strong and courageous.”
10

2 And Yahoshua son of Nun secretly sent out two
men from Shittim to spy, saying, “Go, see the land, and
541

JOSHUA

Yeriḥo.” And they went, and came to the house of a
woman, a whore, and her name was Raḥaḇ, and they
lay down there.
2 But it was reported to the sovereign of Yeriḥo,
saying, “See, men from the children of Yisra’ĕl have
come here tonight to search out the land.”
3 And the sovereign of Yeriḥo sent to Raḥaḇ,
saying, “Bring out the men who have come to you,
who have entered your house, for they have come to
search out all the land.”
4 But the woman had taken the two men and hid
them. So she said, “The men came to me, but I did
not know where they were from.
5 “Then it came to be as the gate was being shut,
when it was dark, that the men went out. I do not know
where the men went. Pursue them quickly, so that
you overtake them.”
6 But she had brought them up to the roof and
hidden them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid
out on the roof.
7 And the men pursued them by the way to the
Yardĕn, to the fords. And they shut the gate
afterwards as soon as the pursuers had gone out.
8 And before they lay down, she came up to them
on the roof,
9 and she said to the men, “I know that hWhY has
given you the land, and that the fear of you has fallen
on us, and that all the inhabitants of the land melt
away because of you.
10 “For we have heard how hWhY dried up the water
of the Sea of Reeds for you when you came out of
Mitsrayim, and what you did to the two sovereigns of
the Amorites who were beyond the Yardĕn, Siḥon
and Oḡ, whom you put under the ban.
542

YAHOSHUA

“And when we heard, our hearts melted, and there
was no spirit left in anyone because of you, for hWhY
your Elohim, He is Elohim in the shamayim above and
on earth beneath.
12 “And now, please swear to me by hWhY, since I
have shown you kindness, that you also show
kindness to my father’s house, and shall give me a
true token,
13 and shall spare my father, and my mother, and my
brothers, and my sisters, and all that they have, and
shall deliver our lives from death.”
14 And the men said to her, “Our lives for yours, if you
do not expose this matter of ours, then it shall be,
when hWhY has given us the land, that we shall treat
you in kindness and truth.”
15 So she let them down by a rope through the
window, for her house was on the city wall and she
dwelt on the wall.
16 And she said to them, “Go to the mountain, lest
the pursuers come upon you. And you shall hide there
three days, until the pursuers have returned, and
afterwards go on your way.”
17 And the men said to her, “We are released from
this oath of yours which you have made us swear,
18 unless, when we come into the land, you bind this
line of scarlet cord in the window through which you
let us down, and unless you bring your father, and
your mother, and your brothers, and all your father’s
household to your own home.
19 “And it shall be that anyone who goes outside the
doors of your house into the street, his blood is on his
own head, and we are innocent. And anyone who is
with you in the house, his blood is on our head if a
hand is laid on him.
11

543

JOSHUA

“And if you expose this matter of ours, then we
shall be released from your oath which you made us
swear.”
21 And she said, “Let it be according to your words.”
And she sent them away, and they went. And she
bound the scarlet cord in the window.
22 So they left and came to the mountain, and stayed
there three days until the pursuers returned. And the
pursuers sought them in all the way, but did not find
them.
23 Then the two men returned and came down from
the mountain, and passed over. And they came to
Yahoshua son of Nun, and related to him all that had
befallen them.
24 And they said to Yahoshua, “Truly hWhY has given
all the land into our hands, and also, all the
inhabitants of the land have melted away before us.”
20

3 And Yahoshua rose early in the morning, and they
departed from Shittim and came to the Yardĕn, he and
all the children of Yisra’ĕl, and stayed there before they
passed over.
2 And it came to be, after three days, that the
officers went into the midst of the camp,
3 and they commanded the people, saying, “When
you see the ark of the Covenant of hWhY your Elohim,
and the kohenim, the Lĕwites, bearing it, then you
shall depart from your place and follow it.
4 “Only, keep a distance between you and it, about
two thousand ammah by measure. Do not come near
it, so that you know which way to go, for you have not
passed over this way before.”
5 And Yahoshua said to the people, “Qadosh
yourselves, for tomorrow hWhY is doing wonders in
your midst.”
544

YAHOSHUA

And Yahoshua spoke to the kohenim, saying,
“Take up the ark of the Covenant and pass over
before the people.” So they took up the ark of the
Covenant and went before the people.
7 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “This day I begin to
make you great before the eyes of all Yisra’ĕl, so that
they know that I am with you as I was with Mosheh.
8 “And you, command the kohenim who bear the ark
of the Covenant, saying, ‘When you come to the edge
of the water of the Yardĕn, stand in the Yardĕn.’ ”
9 And Yahoshua said to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
“Come near, and hear the words of hWhY your
Elohim.”
10 And Yahoshua said, “By this you shall know that
the living Ĕl is in your midst, and that He is certainly
driving out from before you the Kena’anites and the
Ḥittites and the Ḥiwwites and the Perizzites and the
Girgashites and the Amorites and the Yeḇusites:
11 “See, the ark of the Covenant of the Aḏon of all the
earth is passing over before you into the Yardĕn.
12 “And now, take for yourselves twelve men from the
tribes of Yisra’ĕl, one man from every tribe.
13 “And it shall be, as soon as the soles of the feet of
the kohenim who bear the ark of hWhY, the Aḏon of
all the earth, come to rest in the waters of the Yardĕn,
that the waters of the Yardĕn are cut off, the waters
that come down from upstream, and stand as a
heap.”
14 And it came to be, when the people departed from
their tents to pass over the Yardĕn, with the kohenim
bearing the ark of the Covenant before the people,
15 and as those bearing the ark came to the Yardĕn,
and the feet of the kohenim bearing the ark dipped in
the edge of the water - now the Yardĕn overflows all
its banks during all the time of harvest 6

545

JOSHUA

that the waters which came down from upstream
stood still, and rose in a heap very far away at Aḏam,
the city that is beside Tsarethan. And the waters
going down into the Sea of the Araḇah, the Salt Sea,
were completely cut off. And the people passed over
opposite Yeriḥo.
17 And the kohenim bearing the ark of the Covenant
of hWhY stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the
Yardĕn. And all Yisra’ĕl passed over on dry ground,
until all the nation had completely passed over the
Yardĕn.
16

4 And it came to be, when the entire nation had
completely passed over the Yardĕn, that hWhY spoke
to Yahoshua, saying,
2 “Take for yourselves twelve men from the people,
one man from every tribe,
3 and command them, saying, ‘Take for yourselves
twelve stones from here, out of the midst of the
Yardĕn, from the place where the kohenim’s feet
stood firm. And you shall bring them with you and
leave them in the camp in which you spend the night.’
”
4 And Yahoshua called the twelve men whom he
had appointed from the children of Yisra’ĕl, one man
from every tribe,
5 and Yahoshua said to them, “Pass over before the
ark of hWhY your Elohim into the midst of the Yardĕn,
and each one of you take up a stone on his shoulder,
according to the number of the tribes of the children
of Yisra’ĕl,
6 so that this shall be a sign in your midst when your
children ask in time to come, saying, ‘What do these
stones mean to you?’
546

YAHOSHUA

“Then you shall answer them that the waters of the
Yardĕn were cut off before the ark of the Covenant of
hWhY. When it passed over the Yardĕn, the waters of
the Yardĕn were cut off. And these stones shall be for
a remembrance to the children of Yisra’ĕl forever.”
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did so, as Yahoshua
commanded, and took up twelve stones from the
midst of the Yardĕn, as hWhY had spoken to
Yahoshua, according to the number of the tribes of
the children of Yisra’ĕl, and took them over with them
to their camp, and laid them down there.
9 Yahoshua also put up twelve stones in the midst
of the Yardĕn, in the place where the feet of the
kohenim who bore the ark of the Covenant stood. And
they are there to this day.
10 And the kohenim who bore the ark stood in the
midst of the Yardĕn until every matter was finished
that hWhY had commanded Yahoshua to speak to the
people, according to all that Mosheh had commanded
Yahoshua. And the people hastened and passed
over.
11 And it came to be, when all the people had
completely passed over, that the ark of hWhY and the
kohenim passed over in the presence of the people.
12 And the sons of Re’uḇĕn, and the sons of Gaḏ,
and half the tribe of Menashsheh passed over armed
before the children of Yisra’ĕl, as Mosheh had spoken
to them.
13 About forty thousand armed ones of the army
passed over before hWhY for battle, to the desert
plains of Yeriḥo.
14 On that day hWhY made Yahoshua great before
the eyes of all Yisra’ĕl. And they revered him, as they
had revered Mosheh, all the days of his life.
15 And hWhY spoke to Yahoshua, saying,
7

547

JOSHUA

“Command the kohenim who bear the ark of the
Witness, and let them come up from the Yardĕn.”
17 And Yahoshua commanded the kohenim, saying,
“Come up from the Yardĕn.”
18 And it came to be, when the kohenim who bore the
ark of the Covenant of hWhY had come from the midst
of the Yardĕn, and the soles of the kohenim feet
touched the dry land, that the waters of the Yardĕn
returned to their place and flowed over all its banks
as before.
19 And the people came up from the Yardĕn on the
tenth day of the first month, and they camped in Gilgal
on the east border of Yeriḥo.
20 And those twelve stones which they took out of the
Yardĕn, Yahoshua put up in Gilgal.
21 And he said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
“When your children ask their fathers in time to come,
saying, ‘What are these stones?’
22 then you shall let your children know, saying,
‘Yisra’ĕl passed over this Yardĕn on dry land,’
23 for hWhY your Elohim dried up the waters of the
Yardĕn before you until you had passed over, as
hWhY your Elohim did to the Sea of Reeds, which He
dried up before us until we had passed over,
24 so that all the peoples of the earth shall know the
hand of hWhY, that it is strong, so that you shall revere
hWhY your Elohim forever.”
16

5 And it came to be, when all the sovereigns of the
Amorites who were beyond the Yardĕn westward, and
all the sovereigns of the Kena’anites who were by the
sea, heard that hWhY had dried up the waters of the
Yardĕn from before the children of Yisra’ĕl until we had
passed over, that their heart melted. And there was no
548

YAHOSHUA

spirit in them any longer, because of the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
2 At that time hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Make knives
of flint for yourself, and circumcise the sons of Yisra’ĕl
again the second time.”
3 So Yahoshua made knives of flint for himself, and
circumcised the sons of Yisra’ĕl at the Hill of
Foreskins.
4 And this is why Yahoshua circumcised them: All
the people who came out of Mitsrayim who were
males, all the men of battle, had died in the
wilderness on the way, after they had come out of
Mitsrayim.
5 For all the people who came out had been
circumcised, but all the people who were born in the
wilderness on the way as they came out of Mitsrayim
had not been circumcised.
6 For the children of Yisra’ĕl walked forty years in
the wilderness, till all the nation - the men of battle
who came out of Mitsrayim - were consumed,
because they did not obey the voice of hWhY, to
whom hWhY swore not to show them the land which
hWhY had sworn to their fathers that He would give
us, “a land flowing with milk and honey.”
7 And Yahoshua circumcised their sons whom He
raised up in their place; for they were uncircumcised,
because they had not been circumcised on the way.
8 And it came to be, when they had completed
circumcising all the nation, that they stayed in their
places in the camp till they were healed.
9 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Today I have rolled
away the reproach of Mitsrayim from you.” So the
name of the place is called Gilgal to this day.

549

JOSHUA

And the children of Yisra’ĕl camped in Gilgal, and
performed the Pesaḥ on the fourteenth day of the
month at evening on the desert plains of Yeriḥo.
11 And they ate of the stored grain of the land on the
morrow after the Pesaḥ, unleavened bread and
roasted grain on this same day.
12 And the manna ceased on the day after they had
eaten the stored grain of the land. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl no longer had manna, but they ate the food
of the land of Kena’an that year.
13 And it came to be, when Yahoshua was by Yeriḥo,
that he lifted his eyes and looked and saw a Man
standing opposite him with His sword drawn in His
hand. And Yahoshua went to Him and said to Him,
“Are You for us or for our adversaries?”
14 And He said, “No, for I have now come as Captain
of the host of hWhY.” And Yahoshua fell on his face to
the earth and did obeisance, and said to Him, “What
is Aḏoni saying to His servant?”
15 And the Captain of the host of hWhY said to
Yahoshua, “Take your sandal off your foot, for the
place where you stand is qodesh.” And Yahoshua did
so.
10

6 And Yeriḥo was shut up tight because of the
presence of the sons of Yisra’ĕl - none going out, and
none coming in.
2 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “See! I have given
Yeriḥo and its sovereign, mighty brave men, into your
hand.
3 “And you shall go around the city, all the men of
battle going around the city once. Do this for six days.
4 “And let seven kohenim bear seven rams’ horns
before the ark, and on the seventh day go around the
city seven times while the kohenim blow the horns.
550

YAHOSHUA

“And it shall be, when they make a long blast with
the ram’s horn, and when you hear the sound of the
horn, that all the people shout with a great shout. And
the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people
shall go up every man straight before him.”
6 And Yahoshua son of Nun called the kohenim and
said to them, “Take up the ark of the Covenant, and
let seven kohenim bear seven rams’ horns before the
ark of hWhY.”
7 And he said to the people, “Pass over, and go
around the city, and let him who is armed pass over
before the ark of hWhY.”
8 And it came to be, when Yahoshua had spoken to
the people, that the seven kohenim bearing the seven
rams’ horns before hWhY passed over and blew the
horns, and the ark of the Covenant of hWhY went after
them.
9 And the armed men went before the kohenim who
blew the horns, and the rear guard came after the ark,
going on and blowing the horns.
10 But Yahoshua had commanded the people,
saying, “Do not shout or cause your voice to be heard,
nor let any word come out of your mouth, until the day
I say to you, ‘Shout!’ Then you shall shout.”
11 And the ark of hWhY went around the city, going
around once. And they came into the camp and
stayed in the camp.
12 And Yahoshua rose early in the morning, and the
kohenim took up the ark of hWhY.
13 And seven kohenim bearing seven rams’ horns
before the ark of hWhY were walking, going on, and
they blew the horns, and the armed men went before
them. But the rear guard came after the ark of hWhY,
going on, and blowing the horns.
5

551

JOSHUA

And the second day they went around the city
once and returned to the camp. Thus they did six
days.
15 And it came to be on the seventh day that they
rose early, about the dawning of the day, and went
around the city seven times in this way. Only on that
day they went around the city seven times.
16 And it came to be at the seventh time, when the
kohenim blew the horns, that Yahoshua said to the
people, “Shout, for hWhY has given you the city!
17 “And the city shall be put under the ban, it and all
that is in it belongs to hWhY. Only Raḥaḇ the whore is
to live, she and all who are with her in the house,
because she hid the messengers that we sent.
18 “And you, by all means guard yourselves from that
which is under the ban, lest you come under the ban
when you take of that which is under the ban, and
make the camp of Yisra’ĕl a curse, and shall trouble
it.
19 “But all the silver and gold, and vessels of bronze
and iron, are qodesh to hWhY, they go into the
treasury of hWhY.”
20 And the people shouted when the ram’s horns
were blown. And it came to be when the people heard
the sound of the horn, and the people shouted with a
great shout, that the wall fell down flat. And the people
went up into the city, every man straight before him,
and they captured the city.
21 And they put under the ban all that was in the city,
both man and woman, young and old, and ox and
sheep and donkey, with the edge of the sword.
22 And to the two men who had spied out the land
Yahoshua said, “Go into the house of the woman, the
whore, and from there bring out the woman and all
that she has, as you swore to her.”
14

552

YAHOSHUA

And the young men, the spies, went in and brought
out Raḥaḇ, and her father, and her mother, and her
brothers, and all that she had. So they brought out all
her relatives and put them outside the camp of
Yisra’ĕl.
24 And they burned the city and all that was in it with
fire. Only the silver and gold, and the vessels of
bronze and of iron, they put into the treasury of the
House of hWhY.
25 However, Yahoshua kept alive Raḥaḇ the whore,
and her father’s household, and all that she had. And
she dwelt in the midst of Yisra’ĕl to this day, because
she hid the messengers whom Yahoshua sent to spy
out Yeriḥo.
26 And Yahoshua warned them at that time, saying,
“Cursed is the man before hWhY who rises up and
builds this city Yeriḥo - he lays its foundation with his
first-born, and with his youngest he puts up its gates.”
27 And hWhY was with Yahoshua, and a report about
him was in all the land.
23

7 But the children of Yisra’ĕl committed a trespass
regarding that which is under the ban, for Aḵan son of
Karmi, son of Zaḇdi, son of Zeraḥ, of the tribe of
Yahuḏah, took of that which is under the ban. And the
displeasure of hWhY burned against the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
2 Now Yahoshua sent men from Yeriḥo to Ai, which
is beside Bĕyth Awen, on the east side of Bĕyth Ĕl,
and spoke to them, saying, “Go up and spy out the
land.” And the men went up and spied out Ai.
3 And they returned to Yahoshua and said to him,
“Let not all the people go up, but let about two or three
thousand men go up and smite Ai. Do not make all
the people toil up there, for the people of Ai are few.”
553

JOSHUA

And about three thousand men went up there from
the people, but they fled before the men of Ai.
5 And the men of Ai smote about thirty-six men, for
they pursued them from before the gate as far as
Sheḇarim, and smote them on the descent. So the
hearts of the people melted and became like water.
6 And Yahoshua tore his garments, and fell to the
earth on his face before the ark of hWhY until evening,
both he and the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and they put dust
on their heads.
7 And Yahoshua said, “Oh Aḏonai hWhY, why have
You brought this people over the Yardĕn at all, to give
us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? If only
we had been content to stay beyond the Yardĕn!
8 “O hWhY, what do I say when Yisra’ĕl turns its back
before its enemies,
9 and the Kena’anites and all the inhabitants of the
land hear, and shall surround us, and cut off our name
from the earth. What then do You do for Your great
Name?”
10 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Rise up! Why are
you lying on your face?
11 “Yisra’ĕl has sinned, and they have also
transgressed My Covenant which I commanded
them. And they have even taken some of that which
is under the ban, and have both stolen and deceived,
and also put it among their own goods.
12 “And the sons of Yisra’ĕl shall not be able to stand
before their enemies. They are going to turn their
backs before their enemies, for they have become
accursed. I am not with you any more, unless you
destroy that which is under the ban from your midst.
13 “Rise up, qadosh the people, and you shall say,
‘Qadosh yourselves for tomorrow, because thus said
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “That which is under the ban
4

554

YAHOSHUA

is in your midst, O Yisra’ĕl. You are not able to stand
before your enemies until you put away that which is
under the ban out of your midst.”
14 ‘And you shall be brought near in the morning,
according to your tribes. And it shall be, the tribe
which hWhY takes comes according to clans. And the
clan which hWhY takes comes by households. And
the household which hWhY takes comes by men.
15 ‘And it shall be that he who is taken with that which
is under the ban is burned with fire, he and all that he
has, because he has transgressed the Covenant of
hWhY, and because he has committed wickedness in
Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
16 So Yahoshua arose early in the morning and
brought Yisra’ĕl by their tribes, and the tribe of
Yahuḏah was taken, and he brought the clan of
Yahuḏah, and he took the clan of the Zarḥites.
17 And he brought the clan of the Zarḥites by men,
and Zaḇdi was taken.
18 And he brought his household by men, and Aḵan
son of Karmi, son of Zaḇdi, son of Zeraḥ, of the tribe
of Yahuḏah, was taken.
19 Then Yahoshua said to Aḵan, “My son, now give
esteem to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and make
confession to Him. And please declare to me what
you have done, do not hide it from me.”
20 So Aḵan answered Yahoshua and said, “Truly, I
have sinned against hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and this
is what I did:
21 “When I saw among the spoil a lovely garment
from Shin’ar, and two hundred sheqels of silver, and
a wedge of gold weighing fifty sheqels, I coveted them
and took them. And see, they are hidden in the
ground in the midst of my tent, with the silver under
it.”
555

JOSHUA

And Yahoshua sent messengers, and they ran to
the tent. And see, it was hidden in his tent, with the
silver under it.
23 And they took them from the midst of the tent,
brought them to Yahoshua and to all the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and laid them out before hWhY.
24 Then Yahoshua, and all Yisra’ĕl with him, took
Aḵan son of Zeraḥ, and the silver, and the garment,
and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his
daughters, and his oxen, and his donkeys, and his
sheep, and his tent, and all that he had, and they
brought them to the Valley of Aḵor.
25 And Yahoshua said, “Why have you troubled us?
hWhY troubles you today!” Then all Yisra’ĕl stoned
him with stones. And they burned them with fire after
they had stoned them with stones.
26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones,
which remains to this day. Then hWhY turned from the
fierceness of His displeasure. Therefore the name of
that place has been called the Valley of Aḵor to this
day.
22

8 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Do not be afraid, nor
be discouraged. Take all the soldiers with you, and
arise, go up to Ai. See, I have given into your hand the
sovereign of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his
land.
2 “So you shall do to Ai and its sovereign as you did
to Yeriḥo and its sovereign. Only its spoil and
livestock you take as plunder for yourselves. Lay for
yourselves ambush for the city, behind it.”
3 And Yahoshua and all the soldiers rose up, to go
up to Ai. And Yahoshua chose thirty thousand mighty
brave men and sent them away by night,
556

YAHOSHUA

and commanded them, saying, “See, you are
going to lie in ambush against the city, behind the city.
Do not go very far from the city, but all of you shall be
prepared,
5 while I and all the people who are with me
approach the city. And it shall be, when they come out
against us, as formerly, that we shall flee before them,
6 and they shall come out after us till we have drawn
them from the city, as though saying, ‘They are
fleeing before us as formerly.’ And we shall flee
before them,
7 then you shall rise from the ambush and seize the
city. And hWhY your Elohim shall give it into your
hand.
8 “And it shall be, when you capture the city, that you
burn the city with fire. Do according to the word of
hWhY. See, I have commanded you.”
9 And Yahoshua sent them out. And they went to lie
in ambush, and stayed between Bĕyth Ĕl and Ai, on
the west side of Ai. But Yahoshua stayed that night in
the midst of the people.
10 And Yahoshua rose up early in the morning and
inspected the people, and went up, he and the elders
of Yisra’ĕl, before the people to Ai.
11 And all the soldiers who were with him went up
and drew near, and came before the city and camped
on the north side of Ai, with the valley between them
and Ai.
12 And he took about five thousand men and placed
them in ambush between Bĕyth Ĕl and Ai, on the west
side of the city.
13 So they stationed the people, all the army that was
on the north of the city, and its rear guard on the west
of the city, and Yahoshua went that night into the
midst of the valley.
4

557

JOSHUA

And it came to be, when the sovereign of Ai saw
it, that the men of the city hastened and rose up early
and went out against Yisra’ĕl to battle, he and all his
people, at an appointed place before the desert plain.
But he did not know that there was an ambush
against him behind the city.
15 And Yahoshua and all Yisra’ĕl let themselves be
beaten before them, and fled by the way of the
wilderness.
16 And all the people who were in Ai were called
together to pursue them. And they pursued Yahoshua
and were drawn away from the city.
17 So there was not a man left in Ai or Bĕyth Ĕl who
did not go out after Yisra’ĕl, and they left the city open
and pursued Yisra’ĕl.
18 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Stretch out the
spear that is in your hand toward Ai, for I give it into
your hand.” And Yahoshua stretched out the spear
that he had in his hand toward the city,
19 and the ambush rose up quickly from their place,
and they ran at the stretching out of his hand, and
entered the city and took it, and hastened to burn the
city with fire.
20 And the men of Ai looked behind them and saw
the smoke of the city rising to the shamayim. And
there was no power in them to flee this way or that
way, for the people who had fled to the wilderness
turned back on the pursuers.
21 For when Yahoshua and all Yisra’ĕl saw that the
ambush had captured the city and that the smoke of
the city went up, they turned back and smote the men
of Ai.
22 The others also came out of the city against them,
so they were in the midst of Yisra’ĕl, some on this side
14

558

YAHOSHUA

and some on that side. And they smote them until
none were left, and none had escaped.
23 But the sovereign of Ai they caught alive, and
brought him to Yahoshua.
24 And it came to be, when Yisra’ĕl ended slaying all
the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness
where they pursued them, and when they all had
fallen by the edge of the sword until they were
consumed, that all the Yisra’ĕlites returned to Ai and
smote it with the edge of the sword.
25 And it came to be that all who fell that day, both
men and women, were twelve thousand - all men of
Ai.
26 And Yahoshua did not draw back his hand, with
which he stretched out the spear, until he had put all
the inhabitants of Ai under the ban.
27 Only the livestock and the spoil of that city Yisra’ĕl
took as booty for themselves, according to the word
of hWhY which He had commanded Yahoshua.
28 And Yahoshua burned Ai and made it a heap
forever, a ruin to this day.
29 And he hanged the sovereign of Ai on a tree until
evening. And at sunset Yahoshua commanded that
they should take his corpse down from the tree, and
throw it at the entrance of the gate of the city, and
raise over it a great heap of stones, to this day.
30 And Yahoshua built an altar to hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl in Mount Ĕyḇal,
31 as Mosheh the servant of hWhY had commanded
the children of Yisra’ĕl, as it is written in the Book of
the Torah of Mosheh, “an altar of unhewn stones over
which no man has wielded iron.” And they offered on
it burnt offerings to hWhY, and slaughtered peace
offerings.
559

JOSHUA

And there, in the presence of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, he wrote on the stones a copy of the Torah
of Mosheh, which he had written.
33 And all Yisra’ĕl - the sojourner as well as the native
- with their elders and officers and judges, stood on
either side of the ark before the kohenim, the Lĕwites,
who bore the ark of the Covenant of hWhY. Half of
them were in front of Mount Gerizim and half of them
in front of Mount Ĕyḇal, as Mosheh the servant of
hWhY had commanded before, that they should baraḵ
the people of Yisra’ĕl.
34 And afterward he read all the Words of the Torah,
the bireḵoth and the cursings, according to all that is
written in the Book of the Torah.
35 There was not a word of all that Mosheh had
commanded which Yahoshua did not read before all
the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, with the women, and the
little ones, and the sojourners who accompanied
them.
32

9 And it came to be, when all the sovereigns who
were beyond the Yardĕn, in the hills and in the low
country and in all the coasts of the Great Sea toward
Leḇanon - the Ḥittite and the Amorite, the Kena’anite
and the Perizzite, the Ḥiwwite and the Yeḇusite heard,
2 they gathered together to fight with Yahoshua and
Yisra’ĕl with one accord.
3 And the inhabitants of Giḇ’on heard what
Yahoshua had done to Yeriḥo and Ai,
4 and they acted slyly and went and pretended to be
envoys. And they took old sacks on their donkeys, old
wineskins torn and mended,

560

YAHOSHUA

and old and patched sandals on their feet, and old
garments on themselves. And all the bread of their
provision was dry, it was crumbs.
6 And they went to Yahoshua, to the camp at Gilgal,
and said to him and to the men of Yisra’ĕl, “We have
come from a far land, and now, make a covenant with
us.”
7 But the men of Yisra’ĕl said to the Ḥiwwites, “It
could be that you dwell in our midst, so how would we
make a covenant with you?”
8 And they said to Yahoshua, “We are your
servants.” And Yahoshua said to them, “Who are you,
and where do you come from?”
9 So they said to him, “From a land very far off your
servants have come, because of the Name of hWhY
your Elohim. For we have heard the report of Him,
and all that He did in Mitsrayim,
10 and all that He had done to the two sovereigns of
the Amorites who were beyond the Yardĕn, to Siḥon
sovereign of Ḥeshbon, and Oḡ sovereign of Bashan,
who was at Ashtaroth.
11 “So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land
spoke to us, saying, ‘Take food with you for the
journey, and go to meet them, and say to them, “We
are your servants, and now, make a covenant with
us.” ’
12 “This bread of ours we took hot for our provision
from our houses on the day that we left to come to
you. But now, see, it is dry and it is crumby.
13 “And these wineskins which we filled were new,
and see, they are torn. And these our garments and
our sandals have become old because of the very
long journey.”
14 And the men of Yisra’ĕl took some of their food,
but they did not ask the word of hWhY.
5

561

JOSHUA

And Yahoshua made peace with them, and made
a covenant with them to let them live, and the rulers
of the congregation swore to them.
16 And it came to be at the end of three days, after
they had made a covenant with them, that they heard
that they were their neighbours who dwelt near them.
17 And the children of Yisra’ĕl departed and came to
their cities on the third day. Now their cities were
Giḇ’on, and Kephirah, and Be’ĕroth, and Qiryath
Ye’arim.
18 But the children of Yisra’ĕl did not smite them,
because the rulers of the congregation had sworn to
them by hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl. And all the
congregation grumbled against the rulers.
19 But all the rulers said to all the congregation, “We
have sworn to them by hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and
we are unable to touch them now.
20 “Let us do this to them: We shall keep them alive,
lest wrath be upon us because of the oath which we
swore to them.”
21 And the rulers said to them, “Let them live, but let
them be woodcutters and drawers of water for all the
congregation, as the rulers had promised them.”
22 Then Yahoshua called for them, and he spoke to
them, saying, “Why have you deceived us, saying,
‘We are very far from you,’ yet you are dwelling in our
midst?
23 “And now you are cursed, and you shall not cease
from being slaves, and woodcutters and drawers of
water for the House of my Elohim.”
24 And they answered Yahoshua and said, “Your
servants were clearly told that hWhY your Elohim
commanded His servant Mosheh to give you all the
land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
15

562

YAHOSHUA

from before you. So we were very much afraid for our
lives because of you, and have done this deed.
25 “And now, see, we are in your hands. Do with us
as it seems good and right to do to us.”
26 And he did so to them, and delivered them out of
the hand of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and they did not
kill them.
27 And that day Yahoshua made them woodcutters
and drawers of water for the congregation and for the
altar of hWhY, even to this day, at the place that He
should choose.

10 And it came to be when Aḏoni-Tseḏeq sovereign
of Yerushalayim heard that Yahoshua had captured Ai
and had put it under the ban, that he had done to Ai
and its sovereign as he had done to Yeriḥo and its
sovereign, and that the inhabitants of Giḇ’on had made
peace with Yisra’ĕl and were in their midst,
2 that they feared greatly, because Giḇ’on was a
great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it
was greater than Ai, and all its men were mighty.
3 And Aḏoni-Tseḏeq sovereign of Yerushalayim
sent to Hoham sovereign of Ḥeḇron, and to Piram
sovereign of Yarmuth, and to Yaphiya sovereign of
Laḵish, and to Deḇir sovereign of Eḡlon, saying,
4 “Come up to me and help me, and let us smite
Giḇ’on, for it has made peace with Yahoshua and with
the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
5 So the five sovereigns of the Amorites - the
sovereign of Yerushalayim, the sovereign of Ḥeḇron,
the sovereign of Yarmuth, the sovereign of Laḵish,
the sovereign of Eḡlon - gathered together and went
up, they and all their armies, and camped before
Giḇ’on and fought against it.
563

JOSHUA

And the men of Giḇ’on sent to Yahoshua at the
camp at Gilgal, saying, “Do not withdraw your hand
from your servants. Come up to us quickly, and save
us and help us, for all the sovereigns of the Amorites
who dwell in the mountains have assembled against
us.”
7 And Yahoshua went up from Gilgal, he and all the
soldiers with him, and all the mighty brave men.
8 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Do not fear them,
for I have given them into your hand. Not one of them
stands before you.”
9 So then Yahoshua came upon them suddenly,
having gone up all night from Gilgal.
10 And hWhY threw them into confusion before
Yisra’ĕl, and they smote them with a great smiting at
Giḇ’on, and pursued them along the way that goes to
Bĕyth Ḥoron, and smote them as far as Azĕqah and
Maqqĕḏah.
11 And it came to be, as they fled before Yisra’ĕl and
were on the descent of Bĕyth Ḥoron, that hWhY threw
down large hailstones from the shamayim on them as
far as Azĕqah, and they died. There were more who
died from the hailstones than those whom the sons of
Yisra’ĕl had slain with the sword.
12 Then Yahoshua spoke to hWhY in the day when
hWhY gave the Amorites over to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and he said before the eyes of Yisra’ĕl, “Sun,
stand still over Giḇ’on; and moon, in the Valley of
Ayalon.”
13 So the sun stood still, and the moon stopped, till
the nation avenged itself upon their enemies. Is this
not written in the Book of Yashar? Thus the sun
stopped in the midst of the shamayim, and did not
hasten to go down for an entire day.
6

564

YAHOSHUA

And there has been no day like that, before it or
after it, that hWhY listened to the voice of a man,
because hWhY fought for Yisra’ĕl.
15 So Yahoshua returned, and all Yisra’ĕl with him,
to the camp at Gilgal.
16 Now these five sovereigns had fled and hidden
themselves in a cave at Maqqĕḏah.
17 And it was reported to Yahoshua, saying, “The five
sovereigns have been found hidden in the cave at
Maqqĕḏah.”
18 And Yahoshua said, “Roll large stones against the
mouth of the cave, and put men by it to guard them.
19 “And you, do not stand still, but pursue your
enemies. And you shall smite them in the rear. Do not
allow them to enter their cities, for hWhY your Elohim
has given them into your hand.”
20 And it came to be, when Yahoshua and the
children of Yisra’ĕl had ended smiting them with a
very great smiting, till they had finished - but those
who escaped went into walled cities 21 that all the people returned to the camp, to
Yahoshua at Maqqĕḏah, in peace. No one moved his
tongue against any of the sons of Yisra’ĕl.
22 Then Yahoshua said, “Open the mouth of the
cave, and bring out those five sovereigns to me from
the cave.”
23 And they did so, and brought those five sovereigns
to him from the cave: the sovereign of Yerushalayim,
the sovereign of Ḥeḇron, the sovereign of Yarmuth,
the sovereign of Laḵish, the sovereign of Eḡlon.
24 And it came to be, when they brought out those
sovereigns to Yahoshua, that Yahoshua called for all
the men of Yisra’ĕl, and said to the chiefs of the men
of battle who went with him, “Come near, put your feet
14

565

JOSHUA

on the necks of these sovereigns.” And they drew
near and put their feet on their necks.
25 Then Yahoshua said to them, “Do not be afraid nor
be discouraged, be strong and courageous, for this is
what hWhY is going to do to all your enemies whom
you are fighting.”
26 And afterward Yahoshua smote them and killed
them, and hanged them on five trees. And they were
hanging on the trees until evening.
27 And it came to be, at the time of the going down of
the sun, that Yahoshua commanded, and they took
them down from the trees, and threw them into the
cave where they had been hidden, and laid large
stones against the cave’s mouth, to this day.
28 And on that day Yahoshua captured Maqqĕḏah,
and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and he
put its sovereign under the ban - them and all the
people who were in it, he left no survivor. And he did
to the sovereign of Maqqĕḏah as he had done to the
sovereign of Yeriḥo.
29 Then Yahoshua passed over, and all Yisra’ĕl with
him, from Maqqĕḏah to Liḇnah. And they fought
against Liḇnah.
30 And hWhY also gave it and its sovereign into the
hand of Yisra’ĕl. And he smote it and all the people
who were in it with the edge of the sword, he left no
survivor in it. And he did to its sovereign as he had
done to the sovereign of Yeriḥo.
31 Then Yahoshua passed over, and all Yisra’ĕl with
him, from Liḇnah to Laḵish, and encamped against it
and fought against it.
32 And hWhY gave Laḵish into the hand of Yisra’ĕl,
who captured it on the second day, and smote it and
all the people who were in it with the edge of the
sword, according to all that he had done to Liḇnah.
566

YAHOSHUA

Then Horam sovereign of Gezer came up to help
Laḵish. And Yahoshua smote him and his people,
until he left him no survivor.
34 Then Yahoshua passed over, and all Yisra’ĕl with
him, from Laḵish to Eḡlon. And they encamped
against it and fought against it,
35 and captured it on that day and smote it with the
edge of the sword. And all the beings who were in it
he put under the ban that day, according to all that he
had done to Laḵish.
36 Then Yahoshua went up, and all Yisra’ĕl with him,
from Eḡlon to Ḥeḇron, and they fought against it,
37 and captured it and smote it with the edge of the
sword, and its sovereign, and all its cities, and all the
people who were in it. He left no survivor, according
to all that he had done to Eḡlon, but put it and all the
people who were in it under the ban.
38 Then Yahoshua returned, and all Yisra’ĕl with him,
to Deḇir, and fought against it,
39 and captured it and its sovereign and all its cities.
And they smote them with the edge of the sword and
put all the people who were in it under the ban, he left
no survivor. As he had done to Ḥeḇron, so he did to
Deḇir and its sovereign, as he had done also to
Liḇnah and its sovereign.
40 Thus Yahoshua smote all the land: the mountain
country and the Negeḇ and the low country and the
wilderness slopes, and all their sovereigns. He left no
survivor, but put all that breathed under the ban, as
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl had commanded.
41 And Yahoshua smote them from Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa
as far as Azzah, and all the land of Goshen, even as
far as Giḇ’on.
33

567

JOSHUA

And Yahoshua captured all these sovereigns and
their land at one time, because hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl fought for Yisra’ĕl.
43 And Yahoshua returned, and all Yisra’ĕl with him,
to the camp at Gilgal.
42

11 And it came to be, when Yaḇin sovereign of
Ḥatsor heard, that he sent to Yoḇaḇ sovereign of
Maḏon, and to the sovereign of Shimron, and to the
sovereign of Aḵshaph,
2 and to the sovereigns who were from the north, in
the mountains, and in the desert plain south of
Kinneroth, and in the low country, and in the heights
of Dor on the west 3 the Kena’anites in the east and in the west, and
the Amorite, and the Ḥittite, and the Perizzite, and the
Yeḇusite in the mountains, and the Ḥiwwite below
Ḥermon in the land of Mitspah.
4 And they went out, they and all their armies with
them, as many people as numerous as the sand on
the seashore, with very many horses and chariots.
5 And all these sovereigns met together, and they
came and camped together at the waters of Mĕrom
to fight against Yisra’ĕl.
6 And hWhY said to Yahoshua, “Do not be afraid of
their presence, for tomorrow about this time I am
giving all of them over to Yisra’ĕl, slain. Hamstring
their horses and burn their chariots with fire.”
7 And Yahoshua, and all the soldiers with him, came
against them suddenly by the waters of Mĕrom, and
they fell on them.
8 And hWhY gave them into the hand of Yisra’ĕl, and
they smote them and pursued them to Great Tsiḏon,
and to Misrephoth Mayim, and to the Valley of
568

YAHOSHUA

Mitspĕh eastward. And they smote them until no
survivor was left to them.
9 And Yahoshua did to them as hWhY said to him:
he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots
with fire.
10 And Yahoshua turned back at that time and
captured Ḥatsor, and smote its sovereign with the
sword, for Ḥatsor was formerly the head of all those
reigns.
11 And they smote all the people who were in it with
the edge of the sword, putting them under the ban.
He did not leave anyone breathing. Then he burned
Ḥatsor with fire.
12 And Yahoshua captured all the cities of those
sovereigns, and all their sovereigns, and he smote
them with the edge of the sword. He put them under
the ban, as Mosheh the servant of hWhY commanded.
13 However, Yisra’ĕl did not burn any cities that stood
on their mounds, but Yahoshua burned only Ḥatsor.
14 And all the spoil of these cities and the livestock,
the children of Yisra’ĕl took as booty for themselves.
But they smote every man with the edge of the sword
until they had destroyed them, and they did not leave
anyone breathing.
15 As hWhY had commanded Mosheh his servant, so
Mosheh commanded Yahoshua, and so Yahoshua
did. He did not turn aside a word of all that hWhY had
commanded Mosheh.
16 Thus Yahoshua took all this land: the mountain
country, and all the Negeḇ, and all the land of
Goshen, and the low country, and the desert plain,
and the mountains of Yisra’ĕl and its low lands,
17 from Mount Ḥalaq that goes up to Sĕ’ir, and as far
as Ba’al Gaḏ in the Valley of Leḇanon below Mount
569

JOSHUA

Ḥermon. And he captured all their sovereigns, and
smote them and killed them.
18 Yahoshua fought with all those sovereigns for a
long time.
19 There was not a city that made peace with the
children of Yisra’ĕl, except the Ḥiwwites, the
inhabitants of Giḇ’on. All the others they took in battle.
20 For it was of hWhY to harden their hearts, that they
should come against Yisra’ĕl in battle, in order to put
them under the ban, so that they might have no
favour, but that He might annihilate them, as hWhY
had commanded Mosheh.
21 And at that time Yahoshua came and cut off the
Anaqim from the mountains, from Ḥeḇron, from Deḇir,
from Anaḇ, and from all the mountains of Yahuḏah,
and from all the mountains of Yisra’ĕl. Yahoshua put
them with their cities under the ban.
22 There were none of the Anaqim left in the land of
the children of Yisra’ĕl; only in Azzah, in Gath, and in
Ashdoḏ some remained.
23 Thus Yahoshua took the entire land, according to
all that hWhY had said to Mosheh. And Yahoshua
gave it as an inheritance to Yisra’ĕl according to their
divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from
fighting.

12 And these are the sovereigns of the land whom
the children of Yisra’ĕl smote, and whose land they
possessed beyond the Yardĕn towards the sun-rising,
from the wadi Arnon to Mount Ḥermon, and all the
desert plain eastward:
2 Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Ḥeshbon, ruling from Aro’ĕr, which is on the bank of
the wadi Arnon, from the middle of that wadi, and half
570

YAHOSHUA

Gil’aḏ, even as far as the wadi Yabboq, the border of
the children of Ammon,
3 and the desert plain from the Sea of Kinneroth
eastward as far as the Sea of the Araḇah, the Salt
Sea, the way to Bĕyth Yeshimoth, and southward
below the slopes of Pisgah,
4 and the border of Oḡ, sovereign of Bashan, who
was of the remnant of the Repha’ites, who dwelt at
Ashtaroth and at Eḏre’i,
5 and ruled in Mount Ḥermon, and in Salḵah, and in
all Bashan, as far as the border of the Geshurites and
the Ma’aḵathites, and the half of Gil’aḏ as far as the
border of Siḥon sovereign of Ḥeshbon.
6 Mosheh the servant of hWhY and the children of
Yisra’ĕl had smitten them. And Mosheh the servant of
hWhY had given it as a possession to the Re’uḇĕnites,
and to the Gaḏites, and to half the tribe of
Menashsheh.
7 And these are the sovereigns of the land which
Yahoshua and the children of Yisra’ĕl smote beyond
the Yardĕn, on the west, from Ba’al Gaḏ in the Valley
of Leḇanon as far as Mount Ḥalaq that goes up to
Sĕ’ir, which Yahoshua gave to the tribes of Yisra’ĕl as
a possession according to their divisions,
8 in the mountain country, and in the low country,
and in the desert plain, and in the slopes, and in the
wilderness, and in the Negeḇ, the Ḥittites, the
Amorites and the Kena’anites, the Perizzites, the
Ḥiwwites, and the Yeḇusites:
9 the sovereign of Yeriḥo, one; the sovereign of Ai,
which is beside Bĕyth Ĕl, one;
10 the sovereign of Yerushalayim, one; the sovereign
of Ḥeḇron, one;
11 the sovereign of Yarmuth, one; the sovereign of
Laḵish, one;
571

JOSHUA

the sovereign of Eḡlon, one; the sovereign of
Gezer, one;
13 the sovereign of Deḇir, one; the sovereign of
Geḏer, one;
14 the sovereign of Ḥormah, one; the sovereign of
Araḏ, one;
15 the sovereign of Liḇnah, one; the sovereign of
Aḏullam, one;
16 the sovereign of Maqqĕḏah, one; the sovereign of
Bĕyth Ĕl, one;
17 the sovereign of Tappuaḥ, one; the sovereign of
Ḥĕpher, one;
18 the sovereign of Aphĕq, one; the sovereign of
Sharon, one;
19 the sovereign of Maḏon, one; the sovereign of
Ḥatsor, one;
20 the sovereign of Shimron Mĕron, one; the
sovereign of Aḵshaph, one;
21 the sovereign of Ta’anaḵ, one; the sovereign of
Meḡiddo, one;
22 the sovereign of Qeḏesh, one; the sovereign of
Yoqne’am in Karmel, one;
23 the sovereign of Dor in the heights of Dor, one; the
sovereign of the nations of Gilgal, one;
24 the
sovereign of Tirtsah, one. Thirty-one
sovereigns in all.
12

13 And Yahoshua was old, advanced in years. And
hWhY said to him, “You are old, advanced in years, and
still much of the land remains to be possessed.
2 “This is the land that remains: all the districts of the
Pelishtites and all the Geshurites,
3 from Shiḥor which is in front of Mitsrayim, and up
to the border of Eqron northward, are considered as
Kena’anite - the five princes of the Pelishtites, the
572

YAHOSHUA

Azzathites, and the Ashdoḏites, the Eshqelonites, the
Gittites, and the Eqronites; also the Awwites
4 on the south; all the land of the Kena’anites, and
Me’arah that belongs to the Tsiḏonians as far as
Aphĕq, to the border of the Amorites;
5 and the land of the Geḇalites, and all Leḇanon,
toward the sunrise, from Ba’al Gaḏ below Mount
Ḥermon as far as the entrance to Ḥamath;
6 all the inhabitants of the mountains from Leḇanon
as far as Misrephoth Mayim, and all the Tsiḏonians. I
Myself drive them out from before the children of
Yisra’ĕl. Only, divide it by lot to Yisra’ĕl as an
inheritance, as I have commanded you.
7 “And now, divide this land as an inheritance to the
nine tribes and half the tribe of Menashsheh.”
8 With them the other half tribe the Re’uḇĕnites and
the Gaḏites received their inheritance, which Mosheh
had given them, beyond the Yardĕn eastward, as
Mosheh the servant of hWhY had given them:
9 from Aro’ĕr which is on the bank of the wadi Arnon,
and the city that is in the middle of the wadi, and all
the plain of Mĕyḏeḇa as far as Diḇon;
10 and all the cities of Siḥon sovereign of the
Amorites, who reigned in Ḥeshbon, as far as the
border of the children of Ammon;
11 and Gil’aḏ, and the border of the Geshurites, and
of the Ma’aḵathites, and all Mount Ḥermon, and all
Bashan as far as Salḵah;
12 all the reign of Oḡ in Bashan, who reigned in
Ashtaroth and Eḏre’i, who remained of the remnant of
the Repha’ites, for Mosheh had smitten and
dispossessed them.
13 However, the children of Yisra’ĕl did not drive out
the Geshurites nor the Ma’aḵathites, so the
573

JOSHUA

Geshurites and the Ma’aḵathites dwell in the midst of
Yisra’ĕl to this day.
14 Only to the tribe of Lĕwi he gave no inheritance the offerings made by fire to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
were their inheritance, as He said to them.
15 And Mosheh gave to the tribe of the children of
Re’uḇĕn, for their clans:
16 and their border was from Aro’ĕr, which is on the
bank of the wadi Arnon, and the city that is in the
middle of the wadi, and all the plain by Mĕyḏeḇa,
17 Ḥeshbon and all its cities that are in the plain:
Diḇon, and Bamoth Ba’al, and Bĕyth Ba’al Me’on,
18 and Yahtsah, and Qeḏĕmoth, and Mĕpha’ath,
19 and Qiryathayim, and Siḇmah, and Tsereth
Shaḥar on the mountain of the valley,
20 and Bĕyth Pe’or, and the slopes of Pisgah, and
Bĕyth Yeshimoth;
21 and all the cities of the tableland, and all the reign
of Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites, who reigned in
Ḥeshbon, whom Mosheh had smitten with the princes
of Miḏyan: Ewi, and Reqem, and Tsur, and Ḥur, and
Reḇa, princes of Siḥon dwelling in the land.
22 And the sons of Yisra’ĕl killed with the sword
Bil’am son of Be’or, the diviner, among those who
were killed by them.
23 And the border of the children of Re’uḇĕn was the
bank of the Yardĕn. This was the inheritance of the
children of Re’uḇĕn for their clans, the cities and their
villages.
24 And Mosheh gave to the tribe of Gaḏ, to the
children of Gaḏ for their clans:
25 and their border was Ya’zĕr, and all the cities of
Gil’aḏ, and half the land of the children of Ammon as
far as Aro’ĕr, which is before Rabbah,
574

YAHOSHUA

and from Ḥeshbon to Ramath Mitspĕh and
Betonim, and Maḥanayim to the border of Deḇir,
27 and in the valley Bĕyth ha’Ram, and Bĕyth
Nimrah, and Sukkoth, and Tsaphon, the rest of the
reign of Siḥon sovereign of Ḥeshbon, the Yardĕn
being its border, as far as the edge of the Sea of
Kinnereth, beyond the Yardĕn eastward.
28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gaḏ for
their clans, the cities and their villages.
29 And Mosheh gave to half the tribe of Menashsheh,
and it was for half the tribe of the children of
Menashsheh for their clans:
30 and their border was from Maḥanayim, all Bashan,
all the reign of Oḡ sovereign of Bashan, and all the
small towns of Ya’ir which are in Bashan, sixty cities;
31 and the half of Gil’aḏ, and Ashtaroth and Eḏre’i,
cities of the reign of Oḡ in Bashan, were for the
children of Maḵir son of Menashsheh, to the half of
the children of Maḵir for their clans.
32 These Mosheh gave as an inheritance in the
desert plains of Mo’aḇ beyond the Yardĕn, by Yeriḥo
eastward.
33 But to the tribe of Lĕwi Mosheh gave no
inheritance. hWhY, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, He was their
inheritance, as He had said to them.
26

14 Now these the children of Yisra’ĕl inherited in the
land of Kena’an, which El’azar the kohĕn, and
Yahoshua son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of
the tribes of the children of Yisra’ĕl caused them to
inherit.
2 Their inheritance was by lot, as hWhY had
commanded by the hand of Mosheh, for the nine
tribes and the half-tribe.
575

JOSHUA

For Mosheh had given the inheritance of the two
tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Yardĕn, but to the
Lĕwites he gave no inheritance in their midst.
4 For the children of Yosĕph had become two tribes:
Menashsheh and Ephrayim. And they gave no part to
the Lĕwites in the land, except cities to dwell in, with
their open land for their livestock and their
possessions.
5 As hWhY had commanded Mosheh, so the
children of Yisra’ĕl did, and they divided the land.
6 And the children of Yahuḏah came to Yahoshua in
Gilgal, and Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh the Qenizzite
said to him, “You know the word which hWhY said to
Mosheh the man of Elohim concerning you and me in
Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa.
7 “I was forty years old when Mosheh the servant of
hWhY sent me from Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa to spy out the
land, and I brought back word to him as it was in my
heart.
8 “But my brothers who went up with me made the
heart of the people melt, but I followed hWhY my
Elohim completely.
9 “So Mosheh swore on that day, saying, ‘The land
on which your foot has trodden is your inheritance
and your children’s forever, because you have
followed hWhY my Elohim completely.’
10 “And now, see, hWhY has kept me alive, as He
said, these forty-five years since hWhY spoke this
word to Mosheh while Yisra’ĕl walked in the
wilderness. And now, see, I am eighty-five years old
today.
11 “Yet I am still as strong today as I was on the day
that Mosheh sent me. As my strength was then, so
my strength is now, for battle, and for going out and
for coming in.
3

576

YAHOSHUA

“And now, give me this mountain of which hWhY
spoke in that day, for you heard in that day how the
Anaqim were there, and that the cities were great and
walled. If hWhY is with me, then I shall dispossess
them, as hWhY said.”
13 Yahoshua then baraḵ him, and gave Ḥeḇron to
Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh as an inheritance.
14 So Ḥeḇron became the inheritance of Kalĕḇ son
of Yephunneh the Qenizzite to this day, because he
followed hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl completely.
15 Now the name of Ḥeḇron was formerly Qiryath
Arba, the greatest man among the Anaqim. And the
land had rest from fighting.
12

15 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Yahuḏah
for their clans was to the border of Eḏom, the
Wilderness of Tsin southward in the extreme south.
2 And their southern border began at the edge of the
Salt Sea, from the bay that faces southward.
3 And it went out to the southern side of the Ascent
of Aqrabbim, passed over to Tsin, and went up on the
south side of Qaḏĕsh Barnĕa, and passed over to
Ḥetsron, went up to Aḏar, and went around to Qarqa,
4 and passed over to Atsmon, and went out to the
wadi of Mitsrayim, and the border ended at the sea.
This is your southern border.
5 And the east border was the Salt Sea as far as the
end of the Yardĕn. And the border on the northern
quarter began at the bay of the sea at the end of the
Yardĕn.
6 And the border went up to Bĕyth Ḥoḡlah and
passed over north of Bĕyth Araḇah. And the border
went up to the stone of Bohan son of Re’uḇĕn.
7 And the border went up toward Deḇir from the
Valley of Aḵor, and it turned northward toward Gilgal,
which is before the Ascent of Aḏummim, which is
577

JOSHUA

south of the wadi. And the border passed over to the
waters of Ĕyn Shemesh and ended at Ĕyn Roḡĕl.
8 And the border went up by the Valley of Bĕn
Hinnom to the southern slope of the Yeḇusite city, that
is Yerushalayim. And the border went up to the top of
the mountain that lies before the Valley of Hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the Valley of
Repha’im northward.
9 And the border went around from the top of the hill
to the fountain of the water of Nephtowaḥ, and went
up to the cities of Mount Ephron. And the border went
around to Ba’alah, that is Qiryath Ye’arim.
10 And the border turned around from Ba’alah
westward to Mount Sĕ’ir, and passed over to the side
of Mount Ye’arim on the north, that is Kesalon, and
went down to Bĕyth Shemesh, and passed over to
Timnah.
11 And the border went out to the side of Eqron
northward. And the border went around to Shikkeron,
and passed over to Mount Ba’alah, and went out to
Yaḇne’ĕl. And the border ended at the sea.
12 And the west border was the coastline of the Great
Sea. This is the boundary of the children of Yahuḏah
all around for their clans.
13 And to Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh he gave a portion
in the midst of the children of Yahuḏah, according to
the command of hWhY to Yahoshua: Qiryath Arba,
that is Ḥeḇron - Arba was the father of Anaq.
14 And Kalĕḇ drove out the three sons of Anaq from
there: Shĕshai, and Aḥiman, and Talmai, the children
of Anaq.
15 And he went up from there to the inhabitants of
Deḇir, and the name of Deḇir formerly was Qiryath
Sĕpher.
16 And Kalĕḇ said, “He who smites Qiryath Sĕpher
and shall capture it, to him I shall give Aḵsah my
daughter as wife.”
578

YAHOSHUA

And Othni’ĕl son of Qenaz, the brother of Kalĕḇ,
captured it, so he gave him Aḵsah his daughter as
wife.
18 And it came to be, when she came to him, that she
persuaded him to ask her father for a field. And when
she got off from the donkey, Kalĕḇ said to her, “What
is the matter?”
19 And she said, “Give me a beraḵah. Since you have
given me land in the Negeḇ, give me also fountains
of water.” And he gave her the upper fountains and
the lower fountains.
20 This was the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Yahuḏah for their clans:
21 And the cities at the furthest border of the tribe of
the children of Yahuḏah, toward the border of Eḏom
in the Negeḇ, were Qaḇtse’ĕl, and Ĕḏer, and Yaḡur,
22 and Qinah, and Dimonah, and Aḏaḏah,
23 and Qeḏesh, and Ḥatsor, and Yithnan,
24 Ziph, and Telem, and Be’aloth,
25 and Ḥatsor, Ḥaḏattah, and Qeriyoth, Ḥetsron, that
is Ḥatsor,
26 Amam, and Shema, and Molaḏah,
27 and Ḥatsar Gaddah, and Ḥeshmon, and Bĕyth
Pelet,
28 and
Ḥatsar Shu’al, and Be’ĕrsheḇa, and
Bizyothyah,
29 Ba’alah, and lyim, and Etsem,
30 and Eltolaḏ, and Kesil, and Ḥormah,
31 and Tsiqlaḡ, and Maḏmannah, and Sansannah,
32 and Leḇa’oth, and Shilḥim, and Ayin, and
Rimmon. All the cities were twenty-nine, with their
villages.
33 In the low country: Eshta’ol, and Tsor’ah, and
Ashnah,
34 and Zanowaḥ, and Ĕyn Gannim, Tappuaḥ and
Ĕynam,
35 Yarmuth and Aḏullam, Soḵoh and Azĕqah,
17

579

JOSHUA

and Sha’arayim, and Aḏithayim, and Geḏĕrah,
and Geḏĕrothayim - fourteen cities with their villages.
37 Tsenan, and Ḥaḏashah, and Miḡdal Gaḏ,
38 and Dil’an, and Mitspĕh, and Yoqthe’ĕl,
39 Laḵish, and Botsqath, and Eḡlon,
40 and Kabbon, and Laḥmam, and Kithlish,
41 and Geḏĕroth, Bĕyth Daḡon, and Na’amah, and
Maqqĕḏah - sixteen cities with their villages.
42 Liḇnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
43 and Yiphtaḥ, and Ashnah, and Netsiḇ,
44 and Qe’ilah, and Aḵziḇ, and Marĕshah - nine cities
with their villages.
45 Eqron with its towns and its villages,
46 from Eqron to the sea, all that were by the side of
Ashdoḏ, with their villages.
47 Ashdoḏ, its towns and its villages; Azzah, its towns
and its villages; as far as the wadi of Mitsrayim and
the Great Sea with its coastline.
48 And in the mountain country: Shamir, and Yattir,
and Soḵoh,
49 and Dannah, and Qiryath Sannah, that is Deḇir,
50 and Anaḇ, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
51 and Goshen, and Ḥolon, and Giloh - eleven cities
with their villages.
52 Araḇ, and Dumah, and Esh’an,
53 and Yanim, and Bĕyth Tappuaḥ, and Aphĕqah,
54 and Ḥumtah, and Qiryath Arba, that is Ḥeḇron,
and Tsi’or - nine cities with their villages.
55 Ma’on, Karmel, and Ziph, and Yuttah,
56 and Yizre’ĕl, and Yoqḏe’am, and Zanowaḥ,
57 Qayin, Giḇ’ah, and Timnah - ten cities with their
villages.
58 Ḥalḥul, Bĕyth Tsur, and Geḏor,
59 and Ma’arath, and Bĕyth Anoth, and Elteqon - six
cities with their villages.
60 Qiryath Ba’al, that is Qiryath Ye’arim, and Rabbah
- two cities with their villages.
36

580

YAHOSHUA

In the wilderness: Bĕyth Araḇah, Middin, and
Seḵaḵah,
62 and Niḇshan, and the City of Salt, and Ĕyn Geḏi six cities with their villages.
63 As
for the Yeḇusites, the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim, the children of Yahuḏah were unable
to drive them out, so the Yeḇusites have dwelt with
the children of Yahuḏah at Yerushalayim to this day.
61

16 And the lot for the children of Yosĕph went out
from the Yardĕn, by Yeriḥo, to the waters of Yeriḥo on
the east, to the wilderness going up from Yeriḥo
through the mountains to Bĕyth Ĕl,
2 and went out from Bĕyth Ĕl to Luz, and passed
over to the border of the Arkites at Ataroth,
3 and went down westward to the boundary of the
Yaphlĕtites, as far as the boundary of Lower Bĕyth
Ḥoron to Gezer, and it ended at the sea.
4 Thus the children of Yosĕph, Menashsheh and
Ephrayim, inherited.
5 And the border of the children of Ephrayim,
according to their clans, was: The border of their
inheritance on the east side was Ataroth Addar as far
as Upper Bĕyth Ḥoron.
6 And the border went out toward the sea, to
Miḵmethath on the north, then the border went around
eastward to Ta’anath Shiloh, and passed over it on
the east of Yanoḥah,
7 and went down from Yanoḥah to Ataroth and
Na’arah, reached to Yeriḥo, and came out at the
Yardĕn.
8 From Tappuaḥ the border went westward to the
wadi Qanah, and it ended at the sea. This was the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephrayim for
their clans.
9 And the separate cities for the children of
Ephrayim were in the midst of the inheritance of the
581

JOSHUA

children of Menashsheh, all the cities with their
villages.
10 And they did not drive out the Kena’anites who
dwelt in Gezer, so the Kena’anites dwell among the
Ephrayimites to this day and have become
compulsory labour.

17 And the lot for the tribe of Menashsheh, for he
was the first-born of Yosĕph, was: for Maḵir the firstborn of Menashsheh, father of Gil’aḏ, because he was
a man of battle, therefore he had Gil’aḏ and Bashan.
2 And for the rest of the children of Menashsheh for
their clans there was: for the children of Aḇi’ezer, and
for the children of Ḥĕleq, and for the children of
Asri’ĕl, and for the children of Sheḵem, and for the
children of Ḥĕpher, and for the children of Shemiḏa.
These were the male children of Menashsheh son of
Yosĕph according to their clans.
3 But Tselapheḥaḏ son of Ḥĕpher, son of Gil’aḏ, son
of Maḵir, son of Menashsheh, had no sons, but only
daughters. And these were the names of his
daughters: Maḥlah and No’ah, Ḥoḡlah, Milkah and
Tirtsah.
4 And they came near before El’azar the kohĕn,
before Yahoshua son of Nun, and before the rulers,
saying, “hWhY commanded Mosheh to give us an
inheritance among our brothers.” So he gave them an
inheritance among their father’s brothers, according
to the command of hWhY.
5 And ten portions fell to Menashsheh, besides the
land of Gil’aḏ and Bashan, which were beyond the
Yardĕn,
6 because the daughters Menashsheh received an
inheritance among his sons. And the rest of
Menashsheh’s sons had the land of Gil’aḏ.
7 And the border of Menashsheh was from Ashĕr to
Miḵmethath, which faces Sheḵem. And the border
went up to the right to the inhabitants of Ĕyn Tappuaḥ.
582

YAHOSHUA

The land of Tappuaḥ belonged to Menashsheh,
but Tappuaḥ on the border of Menashsheh belonged
to the children of Ephrayim.
9 And the border went down to the wadi Qanah,
southward to the wadi. These cities of Ephrayim were
in the midst of the cities of Menashsheh, but the
border of Menashsheh was north of the wadi, and it
ended at the sea.
10 Southward it was Ephrayim’s, and northward it
was Menashsheh’s, and the sea was its border, and
they reached to Ashĕr on the north and to Yissasḵar
on the east.
11 And in Yissasḵar and in Ashĕr, Menashsheh had
Bĕyth She’an and its towns, and Yiḇle’am and its
towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and
the inhabitants of Ĕyn Dor and its towns, and the
inhabitants of Ta’anaḵ and its towns, and the
inhabitants of Meḡiddo and its towns - three of the
heights.
12 But the children of Menashsheh were unable to
drive out the inhabitants of those cities, for the
Kena’anites desired to dwell in that land.
13 And it came to be, when the children of Yisra’ĕl
were strong, that they put the Kena’anites to
compulsory labour, but did not utterly drive them out.
14 And the children of Yosĕph spoke to Yahoshua,
saying, “Why have you given us but one lot and one
portion to inherit, seeing we are a great people whom
hWhY has baraḵ until now?”
15 And Yahoshua said to them, “If you are a great
people, go up to the forest and clear a place for
yourself there in the land of the Perizzites and the
Repha’ites, since the hill country of Ephrayim is too
narrow for you.”
16 Then the children of Yosĕph said, “The hill country
is not enough for us, and all the Kena’anites who
dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron,
8

583

JOSHUA

both those who are of Bĕyth She’an and its towns and
those who are of the Valley of Yizre’ĕl.”
17 And Yahoshua spoke to the house of Yosĕph, to
Ephrayim and to Menashsheh, saying, “You are a
great people and have great power, you are not to
have one lot,
18 for the hill country shall be yours. For though it is
a forest, you shall cut it down, and its farthest limits
shall be yours. For you are to drive out the
Kena’anites, though they have iron chariots and are
strong.”

18 And all the congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl
assembled at Shiloh, and they let the Tent of
Appointment dwell there. And the land was subdued
before them.
2 And seven tribes were left among the children of
Yisra’ĕl who had not yet shared their inheritance.
3 So Yahoshua said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “Till
when are you going to fail to go in and possess the
land which hWhY Elohim of your fathers has given
you?
4 “Appoint three men from each tribe, and let me
send them out to go through the land and describe it
according to their inheritance, and come back to me.
5 “And they shall divide it into seven portions Yahuḏah stays within their border on the south, and
the house of Yosĕph stays within their border on the
north 6 and you shall describe the land in seven portions,
and shall bring it to me. Then I shall cast lots for you
here before hWhY our Elohim.
7 “But the Lĕwites have no portion among you, for
the kehunnah of hWhY is their inheritance. And Gaḏ,
and Re’uḇĕn, and half the tribe of Menashsheh have
received their inheritance beyond the Yardĕn on the
east, which Mosheh the servant of hWhY gave them.”
584

YAHOSHUA

So the men rose up and went. And Yahoshua
commanded those who went to describe the land,
saying, “Go, walk through the land, and describe it,
and come back to me, and let me cast lots for you
here before hWhY in Shiloh.”
9 So the men went, and passed through the land,
and described it in a book in seven portions by cities.
And they came to Yahoshua at the camp in Shiloh.
10 And Yahoshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before
hWhY, and there Yahoshua divided the land to the
children of Yisra’ĕl according to their portions.
11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Binyamin
came up for their clans, and the border of their lot
came out between the children of Yahuḏah and the
children of Yosĕph.
12 And their border was on the north side from the
Yardĕn, and the border went up to the side of Yeriḥo
on the north, and went up through the mountains
westward, and ended at the Wilderness of Bĕyth
Awen.
13 And the border went over from there toward Luz,
to the side of Luz, that is Bĕyth Ĕl, southward. And
the border went down to Ataroth Aḏar, by the hill that
lies on the south side of Lower Bĕyth Ḥoron.
14 And the border was drawn and went around the
west side to the south, from the hill that faces Bĕyth
Ḥoron southward, and it ended at Qiryath Ba’al, that
is Qiryath Ye’arim, a city of the children of Yahuḏah.
This was the west side.
15 And the south side was from the end of Qiryath
Ye’arim, and the border went out westward, and went
out to the fountain of the waters of Nephtowaḥ.
16 And the border came down to the end of the
mountain that faces the Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, which
is in the Valley of the Repha’im on the north, and went
down to the Valley of Hinnom, to the side of the
Yeḇusite city on the south, and went down to Ĕyn
Roḡĕl.
8

585

JOSHUA

And it was drawn from the north, went out to Ĕyn
Shemesh, and went out toward Geliloth, which is
opposite the Ascent of Aḏummim, and went down to
the stone of Bohan son of Re’uḇĕn,
18 and passed over to the side opposite Araḇah
northward, and went down to Araḇah.
19 And the border passed over to the side of Bĕyth
Ḥoḡlah northward, and the border ended at the north
bay at the Salt Sea, at the south end of the Yardĕn.
This was the southern boundary,
20 and the Yardĕn borders it on the east side. This
was the inheritance of the children of Binyamin,
according to its boundaries all around, for their clans.
21 And the cities for the tribe of the children of
Binyamin, for their clans, were Yeriḥo, and Bĕyth
Ḥoḡlah, and Ĕmeq Qetsits,
22 and Bĕyth Araḇah, Tsemarayim, and Bĕyth Ĕl,
23 and Awwim, and Parah, Ophrah,
24 and Kephar ha’Ammoni, and Ophni, and Gaḇa twelve cities with their villages.
25 Giḇ’on, and Ramah, and Be’ĕroth,
26 and Mitspĕh, and Kephirah, and Motsah,
27 and Reqem, and Yirpe’ĕl, and Taralah,
28 and Tsela, Eleph, and the Yeḇusite, that is
Yerushalayim, Giḇ’ath and Qiryath - fourteen cities
with their villages. This was the inheritance of the
children of Binyamin for their clans.
17

19 And the second lot came out for Shim’on, for the
tribe of the children of Shim’on for their clans. And their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children
of Yahuḏah.
2 And they had in their inheritance Be’ĕrsheḇa, or
Sheḇa, and Molaḏah,
3 and Ḥatsar Shu’al, and Balah, and Etsem,
4 and Eltolaḏ, and Bethul, and Ḥormah,
5 and Tsiqlaḡ, and Bĕyth Markaḇoth, and Ḥatsar
Susah,
586

YAHOSHUA

and Bĕyth Leḇa’oth, and Sharuḥen - thirteen cities
and their villages.
7 Ayin, Rimmon, and Ether, and Ashan - four cities
and their villages;
8 and all the villages that were all around these cities
as far as Ba’alath Be’ĕr, Ramath Neḡeḇ. This was the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Shim’on for
their clans.
9 The inheritance of the children of Shim’on was out
of the portion of the children of Yahuḏah, for the
portion of the children of Yahuḏah was too much for
them. So the children of Shim’on had their inheritance
within their inheritance.
10 And the third lot came up for the children of
Zeḇulun for their clans, and the border of their
inheritance was as far as Sariḏ.
11 And their border went toward the sea, and
Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth, and reached to
the wadi that faced Yoqne’am,
12 and turned back from Sariḏ eastward toward the
sunrise, to the border of Kisloth Taḇor, and went out
toward Daḇerath, and went up to Yaphiya.
13 And from there it passed over eastward, to the
east of Gath Ḥĕpher, toward Eth Qatsin, and went out
to Rimmon, which borders on Nĕ’ah.
14 And the border went around it on the north side of
Ḥannathon, and it ended in the Valley of Yiphthaḥ Ĕl;
15 also Qattath, and Nahalal, and Shimron, and
Yiḏalah, and Bĕyth Leḥem - twelve cities with their
villages.
16 This was the inheritance of the children of Zeḇulun
for their clans, these cities with their villages.
17 The fourth lot came out Yissasḵar, for the children
Yissasḵar, for their clans.
18 And their border was toward Yizre’ĕl, and
Kesulloth, and Shunĕm,
19 and Ḥapharayim, and Shiyon, and Anaḥarath,
20 and Rabbith, and Qishyon, and Eḇets,
6

587

JOSHUA

and Remeth, and Ĕyn Gannim, and Ĕyn Ḥaddah,
and Bĕyth Patstsĕts.
22 And
the border reached to Taḇor, and
Shaḥatsimah, and Bĕyth Shemesh, and their border
ended at the Yardĕn - sixteen cities with their villages.
23 This was the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Yissasḵar for their clans, the cities and their
villages.
24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the
children of Ashĕr for their clans.
25 And their border was Ḥelqath, and Ḥali, and
Beten, and Aḵshaph,
26 and Allammeleḵ, and Amaḏ, and Mish’al. And it
reached to Mount Karmel westward, and to Brook
Shiḥor Liḇnath,
27 and turned toward the sunrise, to Bĕyth Daḡon,
and reached to Zeḇulun and to the Valley of Yiphthaḥ
Ĕl, then northward beyond Bĕyth ha’Ĕmeq and
Ne’i’ĕl, and went out to Kaḇul which was on the left,
28 and Ḥeḇron, and Reḥoḇ, and Ḥammon, and
Qanah, as far as Great Tsiḏon.
29 And the border turned to Ramah and to the strong
city Tsor, and the border turned to Ḥosah, and ended
at the sea, from the coast to Aḵziḇ.
30 And Ummah, and Aphĕq, and Reḥoḇ were
included - twenty-two cities with their villages.
31 This was the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Ashĕr for their clans, these cities with their villages.
32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali,
for the children of Naphtali for their clans.
33 And their border was from Ḥĕleph, from the
terebinth tree in Tsa’anannim, and Aḏami Neqeḇ, and
Yaḇne’ĕl, as far as Laqqum, and it ended at the
Yardĕn.
34 And the border turned westward to Aznoth Taḇor,
and went out from there toward Ḥuqqoq, and reached
to Zeḇulun on the south side and Ashĕr on the west
21

588

YAHOSHUA

side, and ended at Yahuḏah by the Yardĕn toward the
sunrise.
35 And the cities of defence were Tsiddim, Tsĕr, and
Ḥammath, Raqqath, and Kinnereth,
36 and Aḏamah, and Ramah, and Ḥatsor,
37 and Qeḏesh, and Eḏre’i, and Ĕyn Ḥatsor,
38 and Yiron, and Miḡdal Ĕl, Ḥorĕm, and Bĕyth
Anath, and Bĕyth Shemesh - nineteen cities with their
villages.
39 This was the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Naphtali for their clans, the cities with their villages.
40 The seventh lot came out for the tribe of the
children of Dan for their clans.
41 And the border of their inheritance was Tsor’ah,
and Eshta’ol, and Ir Shemesh,
42 and Sha’alabbin, and Ayalon, and Yithlah,
43 and Ĕylon, and Timnathah, and Eqron,
44 and Elteqĕh, and Gibbethon, and Ba’alath,
45 and Yahuḏ, and Benĕy Beraq, and Gath Rimmon,
46 and Mĕy Yarqon, and Raqqon, with the border
before Yapho.
47 And the border of the children of Dan went out
from them. And the children of Dan went up to fight
against Leshem and captured it. And they smote it
with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and
dwelt in it, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of
Dan their father.
48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children
of Dan for their clans, these cities with their villages.
49 And when they had ended dividing the land as an
inheritance according to their borders, the children of
Yisra’ĕl gave an inheritance to Yahoshua son of Nun
in their midst.
50 According to the word of hWhY they gave him the
city which he asked for, Timnath Seraḥ in the
mountains of Ephrayim. And he built the city and
dwelt in it.
589

JOSHUA

These were the inheritances which El’azar the
kohĕn, and Yahoshua son of Nun, and the heads of
the fathers of the tribes of the children of Yisra’ĕl
divided as an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before hWhY,
at the door of the Tent of Appointment. And they
ended dividing the country.

51

20 And hWhY spoke to Yahoshua, saying,
“Speak to the children of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘Appoint
for yourselves cities of refuge, of which I spoke to you
through Mosheh,
3 for the slayer who kills any being accidentally,
unintentionally, to flee there. And they shall be your
refuge from the revenger of blood.
4 ‘And he shall flee to one of those cities, and stand
at the entrance of the gate of the city, and declare his
case in the hearing of the elders of that city. And they
shall take him into the city as one of them, and give
him a place, and he shall dwell among them.
5 ‘And when the revenger of blood pursues him,
they do not give the slayer into his hand, because he
smote his neighbour unintentionally, and did not hate
him beforehand.
6 ‘And he shall dwell in that city until he stands
before the congregation for right-ruling, and until the
death of the one who is kohĕn ha’gadol in those days.
Then let the slayer return and come to his own city
and his own house, to the city from which he fled.’ ”
7 So they qadosh Qeḏesh in Galil, in the mountains
of Naphtali, and Sheḵem in the mountains of
Ephrayim, and Qiryath Arba, that is Ḥeḇron, in the
mountains of Yahuḏah.
8 And beyond the Yardĕn, by Yeriḥo eastward, they
appointed Betser in the wilderness on the plain, from
the tribe of Re’uḇĕn, and Ramoth in Gil’aḏ, from the
tribe of Gaḏ, and Golan in Bashan, from the tribe of
Menashsheh.
2

590

YAHOSHUA

These were the cities appointed for all the children
of Yisra’ĕl and for the stranger who sojourned in their
midst, for anyone accidentally killing any being, to flee
there, and not die by the hand of the revenger of blood
until he stood before the congregation.

9

21 And the heads of the fathers of the Lĕwites came
near to El’azar the kohĕn, to Yahoshua son of Nun,
and to the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
2 And they spoke to them at Shiloh in the land of
Kena’an, saying, “hWhY commanded through Mosheh
to give us cities to dwell in, with their open land for our
livestock.”
3 So the children of Yisra’ĕl gave to the Lĕwites from
their inheritance, at the command of hWhY, these
cities and their open land:
4 And the lot came out for the clans of the
Qehathites. And the children of Aharon the kohĕn,
who were of the Lĕwites, had thirteen cities by lot
from the tribe of Yahuḏah, from the tribe of Shim’on,
and from the tribe of Binyamin.
5 And the rest of the children of Qehath had ten
cities by lot from the clans of the tribe of Ephrayim,
from the tribe of Dan, and from the half-tribe of
Menashsheh.
6 And the children of Gĕreshon had thirteen cities
by lot from the clans of the tribe of Yissasḵar, from the
tribe of Ashĕr, from the tribe of Naphtali, and from the
half-tribe of Menashsheh in Bashan.
7 The children of Merari for their clans had twelve
cities from the tribe of Re’uḇĕn, and from the tribe of
Gaḏ, and from the tribe of Zeḇulun.
8 Thus the children of Yisra’ĕl gave these cities with
their open land by lot to the Lĕwites, as hWhY had
commanded by the hand of Mosheh.

591

JOSHUA

So from the tribe of the children of Yahuḏah and
from the tribe of the children of Shim’on they gave
these cities which are mentioned by name,
10 and they were for the children of Aharon, one of
the clans of the Qehathites, who were of the children
of Lĕwi, for the lot was theirs first.
11 And they gave them Qiryath Arba, the father of
Anaq - that is Ḥeḇron - in the mountains of Yahuḏah,
with the open land surrounding it.
12 And the fields of the city and its villages they gave
to Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh as his possession.
13 But to the children of Aharon the kohĕn they gave
Ḥeḇron with its open land - a city of refuge for the
slayer - and Liḇnah with its open land,
14 and Yattir with its open land, and Eshtemoa with
its open land,
15 and Ḥolon with its open land, and Deḇir with its
open land,
16 and Ayin with its open land, and Yuttah with its
open land, and Bĕyth Shemesh with its open land nine cities from those two tribes.
17 And from the tribe of Binyamin, Giḇ’on with its
open land, Geḇa with its open land,
18 Anathoth with its open land, and Almon with its
open land - four cities.
19 All the cities of the children of Aharon, the
kohenim, were thirteen cities with their open lands.
20 And the clans of the children of Qehath, the
Lĕwites, the rest of the children of Qehath, even they
had the cities of their lot from the tribe of Ephrayim.
21 And they gave them Sheḵem with its open land in
the mountains of Ephrayim as a city of refuge for the
slayer, and Gezer with its open land,
22 and Qiḇtsayim with its open land, and Bĕyth Ḥoron
with its open land - four cities.
23 And from the tribe of Dan, Elteqĕh with its open
land, Gibbethon with its open land,
9

592

YAHOSHUA

Ayalon with its open land, and Gath Rimmon with
its open land - four cities.
25 And from the half-tribe of Menashsheh, Ta’anaḵ
with its open land, and Gath Rimmon with its open
land - two cities.
26 All the ten cities with their open lands were for the
rest of the clans of the children of Qehath.
27 And to the children of Gĕreshon, of the clans of
the Lĕwites, from the other half-tribe of Menashsheh,
they gave Golan in Bashan with its open land as a city
of refuge for the slayer, and Be’eshterah with its open
land - two cities.
28 And from the tribe of Yissasḵar, Qishyon with its
open land, Daḇerath with its open land,
29 Yarmuth with its open land, and Ĕyn Gannim with
its open land - four cities.
30 And from the tribe of Ashĕr, Mish’al with its open
land, Aḇdon with its open land,
31 Ḥelqath with its open land, and Reḥoḇ with its
open land - four cities.
32 And from the tribe of Naphtali, Qeḏesh in Galil with
its open land as a city of refuge for the slayer, and
Ḥammoth Dor with its open land, and Qartan with its
open land - three cities.
33 All the cities of the Gĕreshonites for their clans
were thirteen cities with their open land.
34 And to the clans of the children of Merari, the rest
of the Lĕwites, from the tribe of Zeḇulun, Yoqne’am
with its open land, Qartah with its open land,
35 Dimnah with its open land, Nahalal with its open
land - four cities.
36 And from the tribe of Re’uḇĕn, Betser with its open
land, Yahtsah with its open land,
37 Qeḏĕmoth with its open land, and Mĕpha’ath with
its open land - four cities.
38 And from the tribe of Gaḏ, Ramoth in Gil’aḏ with
its open land as a city of refuge for the slayer, and
Maḥanayim with its open land,
24

593

JOSHUA

Ḥeshbon with its open land, Ya’zĕr with its open
land - four cities in all.
40 All the cities for the children of Merari for their
clans, the rest of the clans of the Lĕwites, were by
their lot twelve cities.
41 All the cities of the Lĕwites within the possession
of the children of Yisra’ĕl were forty-eight cities with
their open lands.
42 Each of these cities had its open land surrounding
it. So it was with all these cities.
43 Thus hWhY gave to Yisra’ĕl all the land of which
He had sworn to give to their fathers, and they took
possession of it, and dwelt in it.
44 And hWhY gave them rest all around, according to
all that He had sworn to their fathers. And not a man
of all their enemies stood against them, hWhY gave all
their enemies into their hand.
45 Not a word failed of any good word which hWhY
had spoken to the house of Yisra’ĕl - all came in.
39

22 Then Yahoshua called for the Re’uḇĕnites, and
the Gaḏites, and half the tribe of Menashsheh,
2 and said to them, “You, you have guarded all that
Mosheh the servant of hWhY commanded you, and
have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you.
3 “You have not left your brothers these many days,
up to this day, but have guarded the Charge, the
Command of hWhY your Elohim.
4 “And now hWhY your Elohim has given rest to your
brothers, as He promised them. So now, return and
go to your tents and to the land of your possession,
which Mosheh the servant of hWhY gave you beyond
the Yardĕn.
5 “Only, diligently guard to do the Command and the
Torah which Mosheh the servant of hWhY
commanded you, to love hWhY your Elohim, and to
walk in all His Ways, and to guard His Commands,
594

YAHOSHUA

and to cling to Him, and to serve Him with all your
heart and with all your being.”
6 And Yahoshua baraḵ them and sent them away,
and they went to their tents.
7 And to half the tribe of Menashsheh Mosheh had
given a possession in Bashan, but to the half of it
Yahoshua gave among their brothers beyond the
Yardĕn, westward. So when Yahoshua sent them
away to their tents, he also baraḵ them,
8 and spoke to them, saying, “Return to your tents
with great riches, and with very much livestock, and
with silver, and with gold, and with bronze, and with
iron, and with countless garments. Divide the spoil of
your enemies with your brothers.”
9 And the children of Re’uḇĕn, and the children of
Gaḏ, and half the tribe of Menashsheh returned, and
left the children of Yisra’ĕl at Shiloh, which is in the
land of Kena’an, to go to the land of Gil’aḏ, to the land
of their possession, which they possessed according
to the command of hWhY by the hand of Mosheh.
10 And they came to the districts of the Yardĕn which
is in the land of Kena’an, and the children of Re’uḇĕn,
and the children of Gaḏ, and half the tribe of
Menashsheh built an altar there by the Yardĕn, a
great conspicuous altar.
11 And the children of Yisra’ĕl heard it saying, “See,
the children of Re’uḇĕn, and the children of Gaḏ, and
half the tribe of Menashsheh have built an altar
opposite the land of Kena’an, in the districts of the
Yardĕn, at the border of the children of Yisra’ĕl.”
12 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl heard, all the
congregation of the children of Yisra’ĕl assembled at
Shiloh to go to fight against them.
13 So the children of Yisra’ĕl sent Pineḥas son of
El’azar the kohĕn to the children of Re’uḇĕn, and to
the children of Gaḏ, and to half the tribe of
Menashsheh, into the land of Gil’aḏ,
595

JOSHUA

and ten rulers with him, one ruler each from the
chief house of every tribe of Yisra’ĕl. And each one
was the head of the house of his father among the
divisions of Yisra’ĕl.
15 And they came to the children of Re’uḇĕn and to
the children of Gaḏ, and to half the tribe of
Menashsheh, to the land of Gil’aḏ, and spoke with
them, saying,
16 “Thus says all the congregation of hWhY, ‘What is
this trespass you have committed against the Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl, to turn away this day from following hWhY,
in that you have built for yourselves an altar, to rebel
against hWhY this day?
17 ‘Is the wickedness of Pe’or not enough for us, from
which we have not been cleansed till this day,
although there was a plague in the congregation of
hWhY,
18 that you turn away today from following hWhY?
And it shall be, if you rebel today against hWhY, that
tomorrow He is wroth with all the congregation of
Yisra’ĕl.
19 ‘And indeed, if the land of your possession is
unclean, then pass over to the land of the possession
of hWhY, where the Mishkan of hWhY dwells, and take
possession among us. But do not rebel against hWhY,
nor rebel against us, by building yourselves an altar
besides the altar of hWhY our Elohim.
20 ‘Did not Aḵan son of Zeraḥ commit a trespass in
that which is under the ban, and wrath fell on all the
congregation of Yisra’ĕl? And he was not the only one
to die in his wickedness.’ ”
21 Then the children of Re’uḇĕn, and the children of
Gaḏ, and half the tribe of Menashsheh answered and
said to the heads of the divisions of Yisra’ĕl,
22 “Ĕl Elohim hWhY, Ĕl Elohim hWhY, He knows, and
let Yisra’ĕl itself know. If this has been in rebellion, or
if in trespass against hWhY, do not save us this day.
14

596

YAHOSHUA

“If we have built ourselves an altar to turn from
following hWhY, or if to offer burnt offerings or grain
offerings on it, or if to make peace offerings on it, let
hWhY Himself require it.
24 “But truly, from reverence, for a reason we did this,
saying, ‘In time to come your sons might speak to our
sons, saying, “What have you to do with hWhY Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl?
25 “For hWhY has made the Yardĕn a border between
you and us, you children of Re’uḇĕn and children of
Gaḏ. You have no portion with hWhY.” So your sons
would make our sons stop revering hWhY.’
26 “So we said, ‘Let us now prepare to build
ourselves an altar, not for burnt offering nor for
slaughtering,
27 but to be a witness between you and us and our
generations after us, to do the service of hWhY before
Him with our burnt offerings, with our slaughterings,
and with our peace offerings, that your sons should
not say to our sons in time to come, “You have no
portion with hWhY.” ’ ”
28 “So we said that it shall be, when they say this to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we shall
say, ‘See the pattern of the altar of hWhY which our
fathers made, though not for burnt offerings nor for
slaughterings, but it is a witness between you and us.’
29 “Far be it from us to rebel against hWhY, and to
turn from following hWhY this day, to build an altar for
burnt offerings, for grain offerings, or for
slaughterings, besides the altar of hWhY our Elohim
which is before His Mishkan.”
30 And Pineḥas the kohĕn and the rulers of the
congregation, and the heads of the thousands of
Yisra’ĕl who were with him, heard the words that the
children of Re’uḇĕn, and the children of Gaḏ, and the
children of Menashsheh spoke, and it was good in
their eyes.
23

597

JOSHUA

And Pineḥas son of El’azar the kohĕn said to the
children of Re’uḇĕn, and to the children of Gaḏ, and
to the children of Menashsheh, “Today we know that
hWhY is in our midst, because you have not
committed against hWhY this trespass. Now you have
delivered the children of Yisra’ĕl out of the hand of
hWhY.”
32 And Pineḥas son of El’azar the kohĕn, and the
rulers, returned from the children of Re’uḇĕn and the
children of Gaḏ, from the land of Gil’aḏ to the land of
Kena’an, to the children of Yisra’ĕl, and brought back
word to them.
33 So the matter was good in the eyes of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and the children of Yisra’ĕl baraḵ Elohim.
And they spoke no more of going against to fight, to
destroy the land where the children of Re’uḇĕn and
Gaḏ dwelt.
34 And the children of Re’uḇĕn and the children of
Gaḏ called the altar, “A witness between us that hWhY
is Elohim.”
31

23 And it came to be, a long time after hWhY had
given rest to Yisra’ĕl from all their enemies round
about, that Yahoshua was old, advanced in years.
2 And Yahoshua called for all Yisra’ĕl, and for their
elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and
for their officers, and said to them, “I am old,
advanced in years.
3 “And you, you have seen all that hWhY your Elohim
has done to all these nations because of you, for
hWhY your Elohim is He who was fighting for you.
4 “See, I have divided to you by lot these nations
that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from
the Yardĕn, with all the nations that I have cut off, as
far as the Great Sea westward.
5 “And hWhY your Elohim thrust them out from
before you, and shall drive them out from before you,
598

YAHOSHUA

and you shall possess their land, as hWhY your
Elohim has promised you.
6 “And you shall be very strong to guard and to do
all that is written in the Book of the Torah of Mosheh,
so as not to turn aside from it right or left,
7 so as not to go in among these nations, these who
remain among you. And make no mention of the
name of their mighty ones, nor swear by, nor serve
them nor bow down to them.
8 “But cling to hWhY your Elohim, as you have done
to this day.
9 “For hWhY has driven out from before you great
and strong nations. As for you, no one has stood
against you to this day.
10 “One man of you put a thousand to flight, for hWhY
your Elohim is He who is fighting for you, as He has
promised you.
11 “And you shall diligently guard yourselves, to love
hWhY your Elohim.
12 “But if you do turn back at all, and cling to the
remnant of these nations, these that remain among
you, and intermarry with them, and go in to them and
they to you,
13 know for certain that hWhY your Elohim shall no
longer drive these nations out from before you. And
they shall be snares and traps to you, and a whip on
your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish
from this good land which hWhY your Elohim has
given you.
14 “And see, this day I am going the way of all the
earth. And you know in all your hearts and in all your
beings that not one word has failed of all the good
words which hWhY your Elohim spoke concerning
you. All of it has come to you, and not one word of
them has failed.
15 “And it shall be, that as every good word has come
upon you which hWhY your Elohim promised you, so
hWhY brings upon you every evil word, until He has
599

JOSHUA

destroyed you from this good land which hWhY your
Elohim has given you,
16 when you transgress the Covenant of hWhY your
Elohim, which He commanded you, and shall go and
serve other mighty ones, and bow down to them. And
the displeasure of hWhY shall burn against you, and
you shall perish quickly from the good land which He
has given you.”

24 And Yahoshua gathered all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl
to Sheḵem and called for the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers.
And they presented themselves before Elohim.
2 And Yahoshua said to all the people, “Thus said
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Long ago your fathers dwelt
beyond the River - Teraḥ, the father of Aḇraham and
the father of Naḥor. And they served other mighty
ones.
3 ‘So I took your father Aḇraham from beyond the
River, and caused him to go through all the land of
Kena’an, and multiplied his offspring and gave him
Yitsḥaq.
4 ‘And to Yitsḥaq I gave Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw. And to
Ĕsaw I gave the mountains of Sĕ’ir to possess, but
Ya’aqoḇ and his children went down to Mitsrayim.
5 ‘Then I sent Mosheh and Aharon, and plagued
Mitsrayim, as I did in their midst. And afterward I
brought you out.
6 ‘And I brought your fathers out of Mitsrayim, and
you came to the sea. And the Mitsrites pursued your
fathers with chariots and horsemen to the Sea of
Reeds.
7 ‘And they cried out to hWhY, and He put thick
darkness between you and the Mitsrites, and brought
the sea upon them and covered them. And your eyes
saw what I did in Mitsrayim. And you dwelt in the
wilderness a long time.
600

YAHOSHUA

‘And I brought you into the land of the Amorites,
who dwelt beyond the Yardĕn, and they fought with
you. But I gave them into your hand, and you
possessed their land, and I destroyed them from
before you.
9 ‘And Balaq son of Tsippor, sovereign of Mo’aḇ,
rose up and fought against Yisra’ĕl, and sent and
called for Bil’am son of Be’or to curse you.
10 ‘But I refused to listen to Bil’am, so he continued
to baraḵ you, and I delivered you out of his hand.
11 ‘And you passed over the Yardĕn and came to
Yeriḥo. And the masters of Yeriḥo, the Amorite, and
the Perizzite, and the Kena’anite, and the Ḥittite, and
the Girgashite, and the Ḥiwwite, and the Yeḇusite
fought against you. But I gave them into your hand.
12 ‘And I sent the hornet before you which drove
them out from before you, also the two sovereigns of
the Amorites, but not with your sword or with your
bow.
13 ‘And I gave you a land for which you did not labour,
and cities which you did not build. And you dwell in
them, you eat of the vineyards and olive trees which
you did not plant.’
14 “And now, revere hWhY, serve Him in perfection
and in truth, and put away the mighty ones which your
fathers served beyond the River and in Mitsrayim,
and serve hWhY!
15 “And if it seems evil in your eyes to serve hWhY,
choose for yourselves this day whom you are going
to serve, whether the mighty ones which your fathers
served that were beyond the River, or the mighty
ones of the Amorites, in whose land you dwell. But I
and my house, we serve hWhY.”
16 And the people answered and said, “Far be it from
us to forsake hWhY, to serve other mighty ones,
17 for hWhY our Elohim is He who has brought us and
our fathers up out of the land of Mitsrayim, from the
house of bondage, who did those great signs before
8

601

JOSHUA

our eyes, and has guarded us in all the way that we
went and among all the people through whom we
passed.
18 “And hWhY drove out from before us all the people,
even the Amorites who dwelt in the land. We too
serve hWhY, for He is our Elohim.”
19 Then Yahoshua said to the people, “You are not
able to serve hWhY, for He is a qodesh Elohim, a
jealous Ĕl is He. He does not bear with your
transgression and with your sins.
20 If you forsake hWhY and shall serve mighty ones
of a stranger, then He shall turn back and do you evil
and consume you, after He has been good to you.”
21 And the people said to Yahoshua, “No, but we will
serve hWhY!”
22 Then Yahoshua said to the people, “You are
witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen
hWhY for yourselves, to serve Him.” And they said,
“Witnesses!”
23 “And now, put away the mighty ones of the
stranger which are in your midst, and incline your
heart to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.”
24 And the people said to Yahoshua, “hWhY our
Elohim we serve, and His voice we obey.”
25 And Yahoshua made a covenant with the people
that day, and laid on them a law and a right-ruling in
Sheḵem.
26 Then Yahoshua wrote these words in the Book of
the Torah of Elohim. And he took a large stone, and
put it up there under the oak that was by the Miqdash
of hWhY.
27 And Yahoshua said to all the people, “See, this
stone is a witness to us, for it has heard all the words
of hWhY which He spoke to us. And it shall be a
witness against you, lest you lie against your Elohim.”
28 Then Yahoshua sent the people away, each to his
own inheritance.
602

YAHOSHUA

And after these events it came to be that
Yahoshua son of Nun, the servant of hWhY, died, one
hundred and ten years old.
30 And they buried him within the border of his
inheritance at Timnath Seraḥ, which is in the
mountains of Ephrayim, on the north side of Mount
Ga’ash.
31 And Yisra’ĕl served hWhY all the days of
Yahoshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived
Yahoshua, who had known all the works of hWhY
which He had done for Yisra’ĕl.
32 And the bones of Yosĕph, which the children of
Yisra’ĕl had brought up out of Mitsrayim, they buried
at Sheḵem, in the plot of ground which Ya’aqoḇ had
bought from the sons of Ḥamor the father of Sheḵem
for one hundred qesitah, and which had become an
inheritance of the children of Yosĕph.
33 And El’azar son of Aharon died, and they buried
him in a hill that belonged to Pineḥas his son, which
was given to him in the hill country of Ephrayim.
29

603

JUDGES

SHOPHETIM
‫ ׁשפטים‬mYjpWv

1 And it came to be, after the death of Yahoshua, that
the children of Yisra’ĕl asked hWhY, saying, “Who of us
should go up first against the Kena’anites to fight
against them?”
2 And hWhY said, “Yahuḏah goes up. See, I have
given the land into his hand.”
3 And Yahuḏah said to Shim’on his brother, “Come
up with me into my allotment, and let us fight against
the Kena’anites. And I myself shall also go with you
into your allotment.” So Shim’on went with him.
4 And Yahuḏah went up, and hWhY gave the
Kena’anites and the Perizzites into their hand. And
they smote ten thousand men at Bezeq.
5 And they found Aḏoni-Ḇezeq in Bezeq, and fought
against him, and smote the Kena’anites and the
Perizzites.
6 But Aḏoni-Ḇezeq fled, and they pursued him and
caught him and cut off his thumbs and big toes.
7 And Aḏoni-Ḇezeq said, “Seventy sovereigns with
their thumbs and big toes cut off used to gather under
my table. As I have done, so Elohim has repaid me.”
And they brought him to Yerushalayim, and he died
there.
8 And the children of Yahuḏah fought against
Yerushalayim and captured it, and smote it with the
edge of the sword and lit the city on fire.
9 And afterward the children Yahuḏah went down to
fight against the Kena’anites who dwelt in the
mountains, in the Negeḇ, and in the low country.
10 And Yahuḏah went against the Kena’anites who
dwelt in Ḥeḇron - now the name of Ḥeḇron was
604

SHOPHETIM

formerly Qiryath Arba - and they smote Shĕshai, and
Aḥiman, and Talmai.
11 And from there they went against the inhabitants
of Deḇir - now the name of Deḇir was formerly Qiryath
Sĕpher.
12 And Kalĕḇ said, “He who smites Qiryath Sĕpher,
and shall capture it, to him I shall give my daughter
Aḵsah as wife.”
13 And Othni’ĕl son of Qenaz, Kalĕḇ’s younger
brother, captured it. And he gave him his daughter
Aḵsah as wife.
14 And it came to be, when she came in, that she
urged him to ask her father for a field. And when she
got off from her donkey, Kalĕḇ said to her, “What is
the matter?”
15 And she said to him, “Give me a beraḵah. Since
you have given me land in the Negeḇ, give me also
springs of water.” So Kalĕḇ gave her the upper
springs and the lower springs.
16 And the children of the Qĕynite, father-in-law of
Mosheh, went up from Ir ha’Tamarim with the children
of Yahuḏah into the Wilderness of Yahuḏah, which is
in the south of Araḏ. And they went and dwelt among
the people.
17 And Yahuḏah went with Shim’on his brother, and
they smote the Kena’anites who inhabited Tsephath,
and put it under the ban. So the name of the city was
called Ḥormah.
18 And Yahuḏah captured Azzah and its border, and
Ashqelon and its border, and Eqron and its border.
19 And hWhY was with Yahuḏah, so they took
possession of the mountains, but they were unable to
drive out the inhabitants of the plain, because they
had chariots of iron.
605

JUDGES

And they gave Ḥeḇron to Kalĕḇ, as Mosheh had
said, and he drove out from there the three sons of
Anaq.
21 However, the children of Binyamin did not drive
out the Yeḇusites who inhabited Yerushalayim, so the
Yeḇusites have dwelt with the children of Binyamin in
Yerushalayim to this day.
22 And the house of Yosĕph also went up against
Bĕyth Ĕl, and hWhY was with them.
23 And the house of Yosĕph sent men to spy out
Bĕyth Ĕl - now the name of the city was formerly Luz.
24 And the watchmen saw a man coming out of the
city, and they said to him, “Please show us the
entrance to the city, and we shall show you kindness.”
25 So he showed them the entrance to the city, and
they smote the city with the edge of the sword. But
the man and all his clan they let go,
26 and the man went to the land of the Ḥittites and
built a city, and called its name Luz, which is its name
to this day.
27 And Menashsheh did not dispossess Bĕyth
She’an and its villages, nor Ta’anaḵ and its villages,
nor the inhabitants of Dor and its villages, nor the
inhabitants of Yiḇle’am and its villages, nor the
inhabitants of Meḡiddo and its villages, for the
Kena’anites desired to dwell in that land.
28 And it came to be, when Yisra’ĕl was strong, that
they put the Kena’anites into compulsory labour, but
did not completely drive them out.
29 Neither did Ephrayim drive out the Kena’anites
who dwelt in Gezer, so the Kena’anites dwelt in their
midst, in Gezer.
30 Neither did Zeḇulun drive out the inhabitants of
Qitron or the inhabitants of Nahalol, so the
20

606

SHOPHETIM

Kena’anites dwelt in their midst, and became
compulsory labour.
31 Neither did Ashĕr drive out the inhabitants of Akko
nor the inhabitants of Tsiḏon, nor of Aḥlaḇ, nor of
Aḵziḇ, nor of Ḥelbah, nor of Aphiq, nor of Reḥoḇ.
32 So the Ashĕrites dwelt in the midst of the
Kena’anites, the inhabitants of the land, because they
did not drive them out.
33 Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of
Bĕyth Shemesh nor the inhabitants of Bĕyth Anath,
but they dwelt among the Kena’anites, the inhabitants
of the land. And the inhabitants of Bĕyth Shemesh
and of Bĕyth Anath became compulsory labour for
them.
34 And the Amorites pressed the children of Dan into
the mountains, for they would not allow them to come
down to the valley,
35 And the Amorites desired to dwell in Mount Ḥeres,
in Ayalon, and in Sha’alḇim. But when the hand of the
house of Yosĕph became stronger, they became
compulsory labour.
36 And the border of the Amorites was from the
Ascent of Aqrabbim, from Sela, and upward.

2 And the Messenger of hWhY came up from Gilgal
to Boḵim, and said, “I led you up from Mitsrayim and
brought you to the land of which I swore to your
fathers, and I said, ‘I do not break My Covenant with
you,
2 and as for you, do not make a covenant with the
inhabitants of this land - break down their altars.’ But
you have not obeyed My voice. What is this you have
done?

607

JUDGES

“Therefore I also said, ‘I am not driving them out
before you, and they shall be adversaries to you, and
their mighty ones shall be a snare to you.’ ”
4 And it came to be, when the Messenger of hWhY
spoke these words to all the children of Yisra’ĕl, that
the people lifted up their voice and wept.
5 So they called the name of that place Boḵim, and
slaughtered there to hWhY.
6 Then Yahoshua dismissed the people, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl went each to his own inheritance
to possess the land.
7 And the people served hWhY all the days of
Yahoshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived
Yahoshua, who had seen all the great works of hWhY
which He had done for Yisra’ĕl.
8 And Yahoshua son of Nun, the servant of hWhY
died, one hundred and ten years old.
9 And they buried him within the border of his
inheritance at Timnath Ḥeres, in the mountains of
Ephrayim, on the north side of Mount Ga’ash.
10 And all that generation were likewise gathered to
their fathers, and another generation arose after them
who did not know hWhY nor the work which He had
done for Yisra’ĕl.
11 Then the children of Yisra’ĕl did evil in the eyes of
hWhY, and served the Ba’als,
12 and forsook hWhY Elohim of their fathers, who had
brought them out of the land of Mitsrayim, and went
after other mighty ones, of the mighty ones of the
people who were all around them, and they bowed
down to them, and provoked hWhY.
13 So they forsook hWhY and served Ba’al and the
Ashtoreths.
14 And the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl. Therefore He gave them into the hands of
3

608

SHOPHETIM

plunderers who despoiled them. And He sold them
into the hands of their enemies all around, and they
were unable to stand before their enemies any longer.
15 Wherever they went out, the hand of hWhY was
against them for evil, as hWhY had spoken, and as
hWhY had sworn to them. And they were distressed greatly.
16 Then hWhY raised up rulers who saved them from
the hand of those who plundered them.
17 However, they did not listen to their rulers either,
but went whoring after other mighty ones, and bowed
down to them. They soon turned aside from the Way
in which their fathers walked, in obeying the
Commands of hWhY - they did not do so.
18 And when hWhY raised up rulers for them, hWhY
was with the ruler and saved them from the hand of
their enemies all the days of the ruler, for hWhY had
compassion on their groaning because of those who
oppressed them and crushed them.
19 And it came to be, when the ruler was dead, that
they would turn back and do more corruptly than their
fathers, to go after other mighty ones, to serve them
and bow down to them. They did not refrain from their
practices and from their stubborn way.
20 And the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl, and He said, “Because this nation has
transgressed My Covenant that I commanded their
fathers, and has not obeyed My voice,
21 I also shall no longer drive out before them any of
the nations which Yahoshua left when he died,
22 in order to try Yisra’ĕl by them, whether they would
guard the Way of hWhY, to walk in them as their
fathers guarded them, or not.”

609

JUDGES

So hWhY left those nations, without driving them
out at once, and did not give them into the hand of
Yahoshua.

23

3 And these are the nations which hWhY left, to try
Yisra’ĕl by them, all those who had not known all the
battles in Kena’an,
2 only that the generations of the children of Yisra’ĕl
might know, to teach them battle, only those who
before did not know them:
3 five princes of the Pelishtites, and all the
Kena’anites, and the Tsiḏonians, and the Ḥiwwites
who dwelt in Mount Leḇanon, from Mount Ba’al
Ḥermon to the entrance of Ḥamath.
4 And they were to try Yisra’ĕl by them, to know
whether they would obey the Commands of hWhY,
which He had commanded their fathers by the hand
of Mosheh.
5 Thus the children of Yisra’ĕl dwelt in the midst of
the Kena’anites, the Ḥittites, and the Amorites, and
the Perizzites, and the Ḥiwwites, and the Yeḇusites,
6 and took their daughters to be their wives, and
gave their daughters to their sons, and they served
their mighty ones.
7 Thus the children of Yisra’ĕl did evil in the eyes of
hWhY, and forgot hWhY their Elohim, and served the
Ba’als and the Ashĕrahs.
8 And the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl, and He sold them into the hand of KushanRish’athayim sovereign of Aram Naharayim. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl served Kushan-Rish’athayim eight
years.
9 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to
hWhY, hWhY raised up a saviour for the children of
610

SHOPHETIM

Yisra’ĕl, who saved them: Othni’ĕl son of Qenaz,
Kalĕḇ’s younger brother.
10 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY came upon him, and he
ruled Yisra’ĕl, and went out to battle, and hWhY gave
into his hand Kushan-Rish’athayim sovereign of
Aram Naharayim. And his hand prevailed over
Kushan-Rish’athayim,
11 and the land had rest for forty years. Then Othni’ĕl
son of Qenaz died,
12 and the children of Yisra’ĕl again did evil in the
eyes of hWhY. And hWhY made Eḡlon sovereign of
Mo’aḇ strong against Yisra’ĕl, because they had done
evil in the eyes of hWhY.
13 And he gathered to himself the children of Ammon
and Amalĕq, and went and smote Yisra’ĕl, and they
took possession of Ir ha’Tamarim.
14 And the children of Yisra’ĕl served Eḡlon
sovereign of Mo’aḇ eighteen years.
15 And when the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to
hWhY, hWhY raised up a saviour for them: Ĕhuḏ son
of Gĕra, a Binyamite, a left-handed man. And by him
the children of Yisra’ĕl sent a present to Eḡlon
sovereign of Mo’aḇ.
16 And Ĕhuḏ made himself a sword, it was doubleedged and an ammah in length, and he girded it
under his long robe on his right thigh.
17 And he brought the present to Eḡlon sovereign of
Mo’aḇ. Now Eḡlon was a very fat man.
18 And it came to be that when he had finished
bringing near the present, he sent away the people
bearing the present.
19 But he himself turned back from the stone images
that were at Gilgal, and said, “I have a secret
message for you, O sovereign.” And he said, “Be
611

JUDGES

silent!” And all those standing beside him went out
from him.
20 And Ĕhuḏ came to him while he was sitting in his
cool roof room. And Ĕhuḏ said, “I have a message
from Elohim for you.” So he arose from his seat.
21 And Ĕhuḏ reached with his left hand, and took the
sword from his right thigh, and thrust it into his
stomach.
22 And the handle went in after the blade, and the fat
closed over the blade, for he did not draw the sword
out of his stomach, and it came out behind.
23 Then Ĕhuḏ went out to the porch and shut the
doors of the upper room behind him and locked them.
24 And when he had gone out, his servants came to
look and saw the doors of the roof room were locked.
So they said, “He is only covering his feet in the cool
roof room.”
25 And they waited until they were ashamed, but saw
he was not opening the doors of the upper room. So
they took the key and opened them and saw their
master, fallen to the ground, dead.
26 But while they were delaying Ĕhuḏ escaped and
had passed beyond the stone images, and escaped
to Se’irah.
27 And it came to be, when he arrived, that he blew
the ram’s horn in the mountains of Ephrayim, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl went down with him from the
mountains, with him leading them.
28 And he said to them, “Follow me, for hWhY has
given your enemies the Mo’aḇites into your hand.”
And they went down after him, and took the fords of
Yardĕn leading to Mo’aḇ, and did not allow anyone to
pass over.

612

SHOPHETIM

And they smote about ten thousand men of Mo’aḇ
at that time, all robust and brave men, and not a man
escaped.
30 And on that day Mo’aḇ was humbled under the
hand of Yisra’ĕl. And the land had rest for eighty
years.
31 And after him was Shamgar son of Anath, and he
smote six hundred men of the Pelishtites with an ox
goad. And he too saved Yisra’ĕl.
29

4 And when Ĕhuḏ was dead, the children of Yisra’ĕl
again did evil in the eyes of hWhY.
2 Therefore hWhY sold them into the hand of Yaḇin
the sovereign of Kena’an, who reigned in Ḥatsor. And
the commander of his army was Sisera, who was
dwelling in Ḥarosheth ha’Goyim.
3 And the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to hWhY,
because he had nine hundred chariots of iron, and for
twenty years he harshly oppressed the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
4 And Deḇorah, a neḇiyah, the wife of Lappiḏoth,
was judging Yisra’ĕl at that time.
5 And she was dwelling under the palm tree of
Deḇorah between Ramah and Bĕyth Ĕl in the
mountains of Ephrayim. And the children of Yisra’ĕl
came up to her for right-ruling.
6 And she sent and called for Baraq son of Aḇino’am
from Qeḏesh in Naphtali, and said to him, “Has not
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl commanded, ‘Go, and you
shall draw towards Mount Taḇor, and shall take with
you ten thousand men of the sons of Naphtali and of
the sons of Zeḇulun,
7 and I shall draw unto you Sisera, the commander
of Yaḇin’s army, with his chariots and his company at
the wadi Qishon, and shall give him into your hand’?”
613

JUDGES

And Baraq said to her, “If you go with me, then I
shall go; but if you do not go with me, I do not go.”
9 And she said, “I shall certainly go with you. Only,
there shall be no esteem for you in the journey you
are taking, for hWhY is going to sell Sisera into the
hand of a woman.” So Deḇorah arose and went with
Baraq to Qeḏesh.
10 And Baraq called Zeḇulun and Naphtali to
Qeḏesh. And he went up - ten thousand men under
his command - and Deḇorah went up with him.
11 And Ḥeḇer the Qĕynite, of the children of Ḥoḇaḇ
the father-in-law of Mosheh, had separated himself
from the Qĕynites and pitched his tent near the
terebinth tree at Tsa’anayim, which is beside Qeḏesh.
12 And they reported to Sisera that Baraq son of
Aḇino’am had gone up to Mount Taḇor.
13 So Sisera called all his chariots, nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people who were with him,
from Ḥarosheth ha’Goyim to the wadi Qishon.
14 And Deḇorah said to Baraq, “Rise up! For this is
the day in which hWhY has given Sisera into your
hand. Has not hWhY gone out before you?” And Baraq
went down from Mount Taḇor with ten thousand men
after him.
15 And hWhY destroyed Sisera and all his chariots
and all his army with the edge of the sword before
Baraq. And Sisera leaped from his chariot and fled
away on foot.
16 But Baraq pursued the chariots and the army as
far as Ḥarosheth ha’Goyim, and all the army of Sisera
fell by the edge of the sword, not one was left.
17 Sisera, meanwhile, had fled on foot to the tent of
Ya’ĕl, the wife of Ḥeḇer the Qĕynite, for there was
peace between Yaḇin sovereign of Ḥatsor and the
house of Ḥeḇer the Qĕynite.
8

614

SHOPHETIM

And Ya’ĕl went out to meet Sisera, and said to
him, “Turn aside, my master, turn aside to me, do not
fear.” So he turned aside with her into the tent, and
she covered him with a blanket.
19 And he said to her, “Please give me a little water
to drink, for I am thirsty.” So she opened a flask of
milk, and gave him a drink, and covered him.
20 And he said to her, “Stand at the door of the tent,
and it shall be if anyone comes and asks you, and
says, ‘Is there a man here?’ you shall say, ‘No.’ ”
21 But Ya’ĕl, Ḥeḇer’s wife, took a tent peg and took a
hammer in her hand, and went softly to him and drove
the peg into the side of his head, and it went down
into the ground - for he was fast asleep and
exhausted - and he died.
22 And see, as Baraq pursued Sisera, Ya’ĕl came out
to meet him, and said to him, “Come, let me show you
the man whom you are seeking.” And when he went
into her tent, there lay Sisera, dead with the peg in the
side of his head.
23 And on that day Elohim humbled Yaḇin sovereign
of Kena’an in the presence of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
24 And the hand of the children of Yisra’ĕl grew
stronger and stronger against Yaḇin sovereign of
Kena’an, until they had cut off Yaḇin sovereign of
Kena’an.
18

5 And on that day Deḇorah and Baraq son of
Aḇino’am sang, saying,
2 “For leaders leading in Yisra’ĕl, for the people
volunteering, baraḵ hWhY!
3 “Hear, O sovereigns! Give ear, O princes! I, I do
sing to hWhY; I sing praise to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.

615

JUDGES

“hWhY, when You went out from Sĕ’ir, when You
stepped from the field of Eḏom, the earth shook and
the shamayim poured, the clouds also poured water.
5 “The mountains flowed at the presence of hWhY,
this Sinai, at the presence of hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
6 “In the days of Shamgar, the son of Anath, in the
days of Ya’ĕl, the highways were deserted, and the
travellers went in crooked ways.
7 “Leadership ceased, it ceased in Yisra’ĕl, until I,
Deḇorah, arose - a mother in Yisra’ĕl arose.
8 “They chose new mighty ones, then fighting was
in the gates! Neither a shield nor spear was seen
among forty thousand in Yisra’ĕl.
9 “My heart is towards the lawgivers of Yisra’ĕl, the
volunteers among the people. Baraḵ hWhY!
10 “You who ride on white donkeys, you who sit on
rich carpets, and you who walk along the way, declare
it!
11 “By the voice of shouters, between the places of
drawing water, there they recount the righteous acts
of hWhY, the righteous acts of His leadership in
Yisra’ĕl; then the people of hWhY shall go down to the
gates.
12 “Wake up, wake up, Deḇorah! Wake up, wake up,
sing a song! Arise, Baraq, and lead your captives
away, O son of Aḇino’am!
13 “Then He made the remnant to rule the nobles;
hWhY came down for me against the mighty ones.
14 “Out of Ephrayim their root is against Amalĕq.
After you, Binyamin, with your peoples, out of Maḵir
lawgivers came down, and out of Zeḇulun those who
handle the scribe’s reed.
15 “And the heads of Yissasḵar were with Deḇorah.
And as Yissasḵar, so was Baraq sent into the valley
4

616

SHOPHETIM

under his command. Among the divisions of Re’uḇĕn
there were great searchings of heart.
16 “Why did you remain among the sheepfolds, to
hear the bleatings of the flocks? The divisions of
Re’uḇĕn have great searchings of heart.
17 “Gil’aḏ remained beyond the Yardĕn, and why did
Dan remain on ships? Ashĕr continued at the
seashore, and remained by its landing places.
18 “Zeḇulun is a people who risked their lives to the
point of death, Naphtali also, on the heights of the
field.
19 “Sovereigns
came, they fought, then the
sovereigns of Kena’an fought in Ta’anaḵ, by the
waters of Meḡiddo; they took no spoils of silver.
20 “From the shamayim they fought; the stars from
their courses fought against Sisera.
21 “The wadi of Qishon swept them away, that ageold wadi, the wadi of Qishon. O my being, you have
trampled in strength!
22 “Then stamped hoofs of horses, with the galloping,
galloping of his steeds.
23 ‘Curse Mĕroz,’ said a messenger of hWhY, ‘curse,
curse its inhabitants, because they did not come to
the help of hWhY, to the help of hWhY among the
mighty.’
24 “Baruḵ above women is Ya’ĕl, the wife of Ḥeḇer
the Qĕynite - above women in tents she is baruḵ.
25 “He asked for water, she gave milk; she brought
out curdled milk in a bowl for nobles.
26 “She stretched her hand to the tent peg, and her
right hand to the workmen’s hammer. Then she
pounded Sisera, she crushed his head, she pierced
and struck through the side of his head.

617

JUDGES

“Between her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay still;
between her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed,
there he fell - destroyed.
28 “Through the window the mother of Sisera looked,
and cried out through the lattice, ‘Why does his
chariot delay to come? Why have the steps of his
chariots tarried?’
29 “The wise ones of her princesses answered her,
indeed, she answered herself,
30 ‘Do they not find and divide the spoil: a girl or two
for each man; a spoil of dyed work for Sisera, a spoil
of dyed work embroidered, dyed work richly
embroidered for the necks of the looter?’
31 “So do all Your enemies perish, O hWhY! But let
those who love Him be like the sun rising in its might!”
And the land had rest forty years.
27

6 And the children of Yisra’ĕl did evil in the eyes of
hWhY, and hWhY gave them into the hand of Miḏyan
for seven years,
2 and the hand of Miḏyan was strong against
Yisra’ĕl. And before the faces of the Miḏyanites the
children of Yisra’ĕl made for themselves the refuges
which are in the mountains, and the caves, and the
strongholds.
3 And it came to be, whenever Yisra’ĕl had sown,
that Miḏyan would come up, and Amalĕq and the
people of the East would come up against them,
4 and encamp against them and destroy the
increase of the land as far as Azzah, and leave no
food in Yisra’ĕl, neither sheep nor ox nor donkey.
5 For they came up with their livestock and their
tents, coming in as numerous as locusts. And they
and their camels were without number. And they
came into the land to destroy it.
618

SHOPHETIM

Thus Yisra’ĕl was brought very low because of
Miḏyan, and the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to hWhY.
7 And it came to be, when the children of Yisra’ĕl
cried out to hWhY because of Miḏyan,
8 that hWhY sent a naḇi to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
who said to them, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘I have brought you up from Mitsrayim and I brought
you out of the house of bondage,
9 and I delivered you out of the hand of the Mitsrites
and out of the hand of all your oppressors, and drove
them out before you and gave you their land.
10 ‘And I said to you, “I am hWhY your Elohim, do not
fear the mighty ones of the Amorites, in whose land
you dwell. And you have not obeyed My voice.” ’ ”
11 And the Messenger of hWhY came and sat under
the terebinth tree which was in Ophrah, which
belonged to Yo’ash the Aḇi’ezerite, while his son
Giḏ’on threshed wheat in the winepress, to hide it
from the eyes of the Miḏyanites.
12 And the Messenger of hWhY appeared to him, and
said to him, “hWhY is with you, you mighty brave one!”
13 And Giḏ’on said to Him, “O my master, if hWhY is
with us, why has all this come upon us? And where
are all His wonders which our fathers related to us,
saying, ‘Did not hWhY bring us up from Mitsrayim?’
But now hWhY has left us and given us into the hands
of Miḏyan.”
14 And hWhY turned to him and said, “Go in this
strength of yours, and you shall save Yisra’ĕl from the
hand of the Miḏyanites. Have I not sent you?”
15 And he said to Him, “O hWhY, with what do I save
Yisra’ĕl? See, my clan is the weakest in Menashsheh,
and I am the least in my father’s house.”
16 And hWhY said to him, “Because I am with you,
you shall smite the Miḏyanites as one man.”
6

619

JUDGES

And he said to Him, “Please, if I have found favour
in Your eyes, then show me a sign that it is You who
are speaking with me.
18 “Please do not move away from here, until I come
to You and bring out my offering and put it before
You.” And He said, “I shall stay until you return.”
19 And Giḏ’on went in, and prepared a young goat,
and unleavened bread from an ĕphah of flour. The
meat he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot.
And he brought them out to Him, under the terebinth
tree, and presented it.
20 And the Messenger of Elohim said to him, “Take
the meat and the unleavened bread and lay them on
this rock, and pour out the broth.” And he did so.
21 And the Messenger of hWhY put forth the end of
the staff that was in His hand, and touched the meat
and the unleavened bread. And fire went up out of the
rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened
bread. And the Messenger of hWhY went from his
sight.
22 And when Giḏ’on saw that He was a Messenger
of hWhY, Giḏ’on said, “Oh Aḏonai hWhY! For I have
seen a Messenger of hWhY face to face.”
23 And hWhY said to him, “Peace be with you! Do not
fear, you do not die.”
24 And Giḏ’on built an altar there to hWhY, and called
it: hWhY Shalom. To this day it is still in Ophrah of the
Aḇi’ezerites.
25 And the same night it came to be that hWhY said
to him, “Take the young bull of your father, and the
second bull of seven years old, and you shall throw
down the altar of Ba’al that your father has, and cut
down the Ashĕrah that is beside it.
26 “And you shall build an altar to hWhY your Elohim
on top of this rock in an orderly way, and shall take
17

620

SHOPHETIM

the second bull and offer a burnt offering with the
wood of the image which you cut down.”
27 And Giḏ’on took ten men from among his servants
and did as hWhY had said to him. And it came to be,
because he feared his father’s household and the
men of the city too much to do it by day, that he did it
by night.
28 And the men of the city arose early in the morning
and saw the altar of Ba’al was broken down, and the
Ashĕrah that was beside it had been cut down, and
the second bull was being offered on the altar which
was built.
29 And they said to each other, “Who has done this
deed?” And when they had inquired and asked, they
said, “Giḏ’on son of Yo’ash has done this deed.”
30 And the men of the city said to Yo’ash, “Bring out
your son, so that he dies, for he has broken down the
altar of Ba’al, and because he has cut down the
Ashĕrah that was beside it.”
31 And Yo’ash said to all who stood against him,
“You, would you plead for Ba’al? You, would you save
him? Let the one who would plead for him be put to
death by morning! If he is a mighty one, let him plead
for himself, because his altar has been broken down!”
32 So that day he called him Yerubba’al, saying, “Let
Ba’al plead against him, because he has broken
down his altar.”
33 Now all Miḏyan and Amalĕq and the people of the
East, were gathered together. And they passed over
and encamped in the Valley of Yizre’ĕl.
34 Then the Ruaḥ of hWhY came upon Giḏ’on, and he
blew the ram’s horn, and the Aḇi’ezerites gathered
behind him.
35 And
he sent messengers throughout all
Menashsheh, who also gathered behind him. And he
621

JUDGES

sent messengers to Ashĕr, and to Zeḇulun, and to
Naphtali. And they came up to meet them.
36 And Giḏ’on said to Elohim, “If You are saving
Yisra’ĕl by my hand as You have said,
37 see, I am placing a fleece of wool on the threshingfloor. If there is dew only on the fleece, and it is dry
on all the ground, then I shall know that You are
saving Yisra’ĕl by my hand, as You have said.”
38 And it was so, and he rose early the next morning
and pressed the fleece, and wrung dew out of the
fleece, to fill a bowl with water.
39 And Giḏ’on said to Elohim, “Do not be displeased
with me, and let me speak only this time: Please let
me try only this time with the fleece, please let it be
dry only on the fleece, and let there be dew on all the
ground.”
40 And Elohim did so that night, and it was dry on the
fleece only, but there was dew on all the ground.

7 And Yerubba’al, that is Giḏ’on, and all the people
who were with him rose up early and encamped by Ĕyn
Ḥaroḏ, so that the camp of Miḏyan was on the north
side of them by the hill of Moreh in the valley.
2 And hWhY said to Giḏ’on, “The people who are
with you are too many for Me to give Miḏyan into their
hands, lest Yisra’ĕl boast against Me, saying, ‘My
own hand has saved me.’
3 “And now, proclaim in the hearing of the people,
saying, ‘Whoever is afraid and trembling, let him turn
back, and leave Mount Gil’aḏ.’ ” And twenty-two
thousand of the people turned back, while ten
thousand remained.
4 And hWhY said to Giḏ’on, “The people are still too
many. Bring them down to the water, and let Me prove
them for you there. And it shall be, that of whom I say
622

SHOPHETIM

to you, ‘This one goes with you,’ let him go with you.
And of whomever I say to you, ‘This one does not go
with you,’ let him not go.”
5 So he brought the people down to the water. And
hWhY said to Giḏ’on, “Everyone who laps the water
with his tongue, as a dog laps, separate him from
everyone who bows down on his knees to drink.”
6 And the number of those who lapped, putting their
hand to their mouth, was three hundred men, and all
the rest of the people bowed down on their knees to
drink water.
7 And hWhY said to Giḏ’on, “By the three hundred
men who lapped I save you, and shall give Miḏyan
into your hand. Let all the other people go, each to his
place.”
8 And the people took food and their ram’s horns in
their hands. And he sent away all the rest of Yisra’ĕl,
each to his tent, but kept those three hundred men.
Now the camp of Miḏyan was below him in the valley.
9 And it came to be, on that night, that hWhY said to
him, “Arise, go down against the camp, for I have
given it into your hand.
10 “But if you are afraid to go down, go down, you and
Purah your servant, to the camp.
11 “And you shall hear what they say, and after that
let your hands be strengthened. And you shall go
down against the camp.” So he went down with Purah
his servant to the edge of the armed men who were
in the camp.
12 And Miḏyan and Amalĕq, and all the people of the
East, were lying in the valley as many as locusts. And
their camels were as numerous as the sand by the
seashore.
13 And Giḏ’on came, and see, a man was relating a
dream to his companion, and said, “See I had a
623

JUDGES

dream, and see, a loaf of barley bread tumbled into
the camp of Miḏyan, and it came to a tent and smote
it so that it fell and overturned, and the tent fell down.”
14 And his companion answered and said, “This is
none else than the sword of Giḏ’on son of Yo’ash, a
man of Yisra’ĕl. Elohim has given Miḏyan and all the
camp into his hand.”
15 And it came to be, when Giḏ’on heard this dream
related, and its interpretation, that he bowed himself
down. And he returned to the camp of Yisra’ĕl, and
said, “Arise, for hWhY has given the camp of Miḏyan
into your hand.”
16 And he divided the three hundred men into three
companies, and he put a ram’s horn into the hands of
all of them, with empty jars, and torches inside the
jars.
17 And he said to them, “Watch me and do likewise.
And see, when I come to the edge of the camp do as
I do.
18 “And I shall blow the ram’s horn, I and all those
with me, then you shall also blow the ram’s horns
round about all the camp, and say, ‘For hWhY and for
Giḏ’on!’ ”
19 And Giḏ’on and the hundred men who were with
him came to the edge of the camp at the beginning of
the middle watch, as they had but newly posted the
watch. And they blew the ram’s horns and broke the
jars that were in their hands.
20 And the three companies blew the ram’s horns
and broke the jars, and held the torches in their left
hands and the ram’s horns in their right hands for
blowing. And they cried, “For hWhY and for Giḏ’on!”
21 And each stood in his place, round about the
camp. And all the army ran and cried out and fled,
624

SHOPHETIM

and the three hundred blew the ram’s horns, and
hWhY put the sword of each one against the other
throughout all the camp. And the army fled to Bĕyth
Shittah, toward Tserĕrah, as far as the border of Aḇĕl
Meḥolah, by Tabbath.
23 And the men of Yisra’ĕl were called from Naphtali,
and from Ashĕr, and from all Menashsheh, and
pursued Miḏyan.
24 Then Giḏ’on sent messengers throughout all the
mountains of Ephrayim, saying, “Come down to meet
Miḏyan, and capture from them the watering places
as far as Bĕyth Barah and the Yardĕn.” So all the men
of Ephrayim were called and captured the watering
places as far as Bĕyth Barah and the Yardĕn.
25 And they captured two princes of Miḏyan, Orĕḇ
and Ze’ĕḇ, and slew Orĕḇ at the rock of Orĕḇ, and
Ze’ĕḇ they slew at the winepress of Ze’ĕḇ while they
pursued Miḏyan. And they brought the heads of Orĕḇ
and Ze’ĕḇ to Giḏ’on beyond the Yardĕn.
22

8 And the men of Ephrayim said to him, “What is this
you have done to us by not calling us when you went
to fight with Miḏyan?” And they contended with him
sharply,
2 and he said to them, “What have I done as
compared with you? Are the gleanings of Ephrayim
not better than the grape harvest of Aḇi’ezer?
3 “Elohim has given into your hands the princes of
Miḏyan, Orĕḇ and Ze’ĕḇ. And what was I able to do
as compared with you?” And when he had said that
their rage toward him subsided.
4 And Giḏ’on and the three hundred men who were
with him came to the Yardĕn, passing over, weary yet
pursuing.
625

JUDGES

And he said to the men of Sukkoth, “Please give
loaves of bread to the people who follow me, for they
are weary, and I am pursuing Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna,
sovereigns of Miḏyan.”
6 But the leaders of Sukkoth said, “Are the hands of
Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna now in your hand, that we
should give bread to your army?”
7 And Giḏ’on said, “Because of this, when hWhY has
given Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna into my hand, I shall tear
your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with
briers!”
8 And he went up from there to Penu’ĕl and spoke
to them in the same way. And the men of Penu’ĕl
answered him as the men of Sukkoth had answered
him.
9 So he spoke also to the men of Penu’ĕl, saying,
“When I come back in peace I shall break down this
tower!”
10 And Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna were at Qarqor, and
their armies with them, about fifteen thousand men,
all who were left of all the army of the people of the
East. Now those who had fallen were one hundred
and twenty thousand men who drew the sword.
11 And Giḏ’on went up by the way of those who dwell
in tents on the east of Noḇaḥ and Yoḡbehah. And he
smote the camp while the camp was at ease.
12 And Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna fled, and he pursued
them, and captured the two sovereigns of Miḏyan,
Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna, and shuddered the entire
army.
13 And Giḏ’on son of Yo’ash returned from battle,
from the Ascent of Ḥeres,
14 and captured a youth of the men of Sukkoth and
questioned him. And he wrote down for him the
5

626

SHOPHETIM

leaders of Sukkoth and its elders, seventy-seven
men.
15 And he came to the men of Sukkoth and said,
“See: Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna, about whom you
taunted me, saying, ‘Are the hands of Zeḇaḥ and
Tsalmunna now in your hand, that we should give
bread to your men who are weary?’ ”
16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of
the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught
the men of Sukkoth a lesson.
17 And he broke down the tower of Penu’ĕl and slew
the men of the city.
18 And he said to Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna, “How were
the men whom you killed at Taḇor?” So they
answered, “They were like you, each one looked like
the son of a sovereign.”
19 And he said, “They were my brothers, the sons of
my mother. As hWhY lives, if you had let them live, I
would not slay you.”
20 And he said to Yether his first-born, “Rise, slay
them!” But the youth would not draw his sword, for he
was afraid, because he was still a youth.
21 Then Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna said, “Rise yourself,
and fall on us. For as a man is, so is his might.” So
Giḏ’on arose and slew Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna, and
took the crescent ornaments which were on their
camels’ necks.
22 So the men of Yisra’ĕl said to Giḏ’on, “Rule over
us, both you and your son, also your son’s son, for
you have saved us from the hand of Miḏyan.”
23 But Giḏ’on said to them, “I do not rule over you,
nor does my son rule over you. hWhY rules over you.”
24 And Giḏ’on said to them, “I have a request to make
of you, that each of you give me the ring from his
627

JUDGES

spoil.” For they had rings of gold, because they were
Yishma’ĕlites.
25 And they said, “We shall certainly give them.” And
they spread out a garment, and each man threw into
it the ring from his spoil.
26 And the weight of the gold rings that he requested
was one thousand seven hundred pieces of gold besides the crescent ornaments, and the pendants,
and purple robes which were on the sovereigns of
Miḏyan, and besides the chains that were around
their camels’ necks.
27 And Giḏ’on made it into a shoulder garment and
put it up in his city, Ophrah. And all Yisra’ĕl went
whoring after it there. And it became a snare to Giḏ’on
and to his house.
28 Thus Miḏyan was humbled before the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and they lifted their heads no more. And the
land had rest for forty years in the days of Giḏ’on.
29 And Yerubba’al son of Yo’ash went and dwelt in
his own house.
30 And Giḏ’on had seventy sons who were his own
offspring, for he had many wives.
31 And his concubine who was in Sheḵem also bore
him a son, and he gave him the name Aḇimeleḵ.
32 And Giḏ’on son of Yo’ash died at a good old age,
and was buried in the tomb of Yo’ash his father, in
Ophrah of the Aḇi’ezerites.
33 And it came to be, when Giḏ’on was dead, that the
children of Yisra’ĕl again went whoring after the
Ba’als, and made Ba’al-Berith their mighty one.
34 Thus the children of Yisra’ĕl did not remember
hWhY their Elohim, who had delivered them from the
hands of all their enemies round about,

628

SHOPHETIM

nor did they show kindness to the house of
Yerubba’al, Giḏ’on, according to all the good which
he did for Yisra’ĕl.

35

9 And Aḇimeleḵ son of Yerubba’al went to Sheḵem,
to his mother’s brothers, and spoke with them and with
all the clan of the house of his mother’s father, saying,
2 “Please speak in the hearing of all the masters of
Sheḵem, ‘Which is better for you, that seventy men,
all the sons of Yerubba’al rule over you, or that one
man rule over you?’ And you shall remember that I
am your own flesh and bone.”
3 And his mother’s brothers spoke all these words
concerning him in the hearing of all the masters of
Sheḵem. And their heart inclined toward Aḇimeleḵ, for
they said, “He is our brother.”
4 And they gave him seventy pieces of silver from
the house of Ba’al-Berith, with which Aḇimeleḵ hired
worthless and reckless men. And they followed him.
5 And he went to his father’s house at Ophrah and
slew his brothers, the seventy sons of Yerubba’al, on
one stone. But Yotham the youngest son of
Yerubba’al was left, because he hid himself.
6 And all the masters of Sheḵem gathered together,
and all of Bĕyth Millo, and they went and made
Aḇimeleḵ sovereign beside the terebinth tree at the
post that was in Sheḵem.
7 And they informed Yotham, and he went and
stood on top of Mount Gerizim, and lifted his voice
and cried out, and said to them, “Hear me, you
masters of Sheḵem, and let Elohim hear you!
8 “The trees went forth to anoint a sovereign over
them. And they said to the olive tree, ‘reign over us!’

629

JUDGES

“And the olive tree said to them, ‘Shall I leave my
oil, with which they esteem mighty ones and men, and
go to sway over trees?’
10 “Then the trees said to the fig tree, ‘Come, reign
over us!’
11 “And the fig tree said to them, ‘Shall I leave my
sweetness and my good fruit, and go to sway over
trees?’
12 “Then the trees said to the vine, ‘Come, reign over
us!’
13 “And the vine said to them, ‘Shall I leave my new
wine, which rejoices mighty ones and men, and go to
sway over trees?’
14 “Then all the trees said to the bramble, ‘Come,
reign over us!’
15 “And the bramble said to the trees, ‘If in truth you
anoint me as sovereign over you, come, take shelter
in my shade. But if not, let fire come out of the
bramble and devour the cedars of Leḇanon!’
16 “And now, if you have acted in truth and integrity
in appointing Aḇimeleḵ to reign, and if you have acted
well with Yerubba’al and his house, and have done to
him as his hands did to you 17 for my father fought for you and risked his life, and
delivered you out of the hand of Miḏyan,
18 but you have risen up against my father’s house
today, and slew his seventy sons on one stone, and
appointed Aḇimeleḵ, the son of his female servant, to
reign over the masters of Sheḵem, because he is your
brother 19 if then you have acted in truth and integrity with
Yerubba’al and with his house this day, then rejoice
in Aḇimeleḵ, and let him also rejoice in you.
20 “But if not, let fire come out from Aḇimeleḵ and
devour the masters of Sheḵem and Bĕyth Millo, and
9

630

SHOPHETIM

let fire come out from the masters of Sheḵem and
from Bĕyth Millo and devour Aḇimeleḵ!”
21 Then Yotham ran away and fled, and he went to
Be’ĕr and dwelt there, for fear of Aḇimeleḵ his brother.
22 And Aḇimeleḵ governed Yisra’ĕl three years,
23 and Elohim sent an evil spirit between Aḇimeleḵ
and the masters of Sheḵem. And the masters of
Sheḵem acted treacherously against Aḇimeleḵ,
24 in order that the violence done to the seventy sons
of Yerubba’al might come, and their blood be laid on
Aḇimeleḵ their brother, who slew them, and on the
masters of Sheḵem, who strengthened his hands to
slay his brothers.
25 And the masters of Sheḵem put men in ambush
against him on the tops of the mountains, and they
robbed all who passed by them along that way. And
it was reported to Aḇimeleḵ.
26 And Ga’al son of Eḇeḏ came with his brothers and
passed over to Sheḵem. And the masters of Sheḵem
put their trust in him,
27 and went out into the fields, and gathered their
vineyards and trod out, and held a feast. And they
went into the house of their mighty one, and ate and
drank, and cursed Aḇimeleḵ.
28 And Ga’al son of Eḇeḏ said, “Who is Aḇimeleḵ,
and who is Sheḵem, that we should serve him? Is he
not the son of Yerubba’al, and is not Zeḇul his officer?
Serve the men of Ḥamor the father of Sheḵem! But
why should we serve him?
29 “If only this people were under my hand! Then I
would remove Aḇimeleḵ.” And he said to Aḇimeleḵ,
“Increase your army and come out!”
30 And when Zeḇul, the governor of the city, heard
the words of Ga’al son of Eḇeḏ, his displeasure
burned.
631

JUDGES

And he sent messengers to Aḇimeleḵ by deceit,
saying, “See, Ga’al son of Eḇeḏ and his brothers have
come to Sheḵem. And see, they are besieging the city
against you.
32 “And now, get up by night, you and the people who
are with you, and lie in wait in the field.
33 “And it shall be, as soon as the sun is up in the
morning, then rise early and rush upon the city. And
see, when he and the people who are with him come
out against you, you shall do to them as your hand
finds to do.”
34 And Aḇimeleḵ and all the people who were with
him rose up by night, and laid in wait against Sheḵem
in four companies.
35 Now Ga’al son of Eḇeḏ went out and stood in the
entrance to the city gate, and Aḇimeleḵ and the
people who were with him rose from lying in wait.
36 And when Ga’al saw the people, he said to Zeḇul,
“See, people are coming down from the tops of the
mountains!” But Zeḇul said to him, “You are seeing
the shadows of the mountains like men.”
37 And Ga’al spoke again and said, “See, people are
coming down from the high part of the land, and
another company is coming from the Diviners’
Terebinth Tree.”
38 And Zeḇul said to him, “Now where is your mouth
with which you said, ‘Who is Aḇimeleḵ, that we should
serve him?’ Are not these the people whom you
despised? I beg you, go out and fight them now.”
39 So Ga’al went out, leading the masters of Sheḵem,
and fought Aḇimeleḵ.
40 And Aḇimeleḵ pursued him, and he fled from him.
And many fell wounded, up to the entrance of the
gate.
31

632

SHOPHETIM

And Aḇimeleḵ stayed at Arumah, and Zeḇul drove
out Ga’al and his brothers, so that they would not
dwell in Sheḵem.
42 And it came to be the next day that the people
went out into the field, and they informed Aḇimeleḵ.
43 And he took his people, and divided them into
three companies, and laid in wait in the field, and
looked and saw the people coming out of the city. And
he rose against them and smote them.
44 And Aḇimeleḵ and the company that was with him
rushed forward and stood at the entrance of the gate
of the city. And the other two companies rushed upon
all who were in the fields and smote them.
45 And Aḇimeleḵ fought against the city all that day,
and captured the city and slew the people who were
in it. And he broke down the city and sowed it with
salt.
46 And all the masters of the tower of Sheḵem had
heard that, and entered the stronghold of the house
of Ĕl Berith.
47 And it was reported to Aḇimeleḵ that all the
masters of the tower of Sheḵem were gathered
together.
48 So Aḇimeleḵ went up to Mount Tsalmon, he and
all the people who were with him. And Aḇimeleḵ took
an axe in his hand and cut down a branch from the
trees, and took it and laid it on his shoulder. Then he
said to the people who were with him, “What you have
seen me do, hurry, do as I have done.”
49 And all the people likewise cut down each one his
own branch and followed Aḇimeleḵ, and put them
against the stronghold, and lit the stronghold on fire
above them, so that all the men of the tower of
Sheḵem died, about a thousand men and women.
41

633

JUDGES

Aḇimeleḵ then went to Thĕḇĕts, and he encamped
against Thĕḇĕts and captured it.
51 However, there was a strong tower in the city, and
all the men and women and all the masters of the city
fled there and shut themselves in, and went up to the
top of the tower.
52 And Aḇimeleḵ came to the tower and fought
against it, and approached the door of the tower to
burn it with fire.
53 But a certain woman dropped an upper millstone
on the head of Aḇimeleḵ, and crushed his skull.
54 He then immediately called the young man, his
armour-bearer, and said to him, “Draw your sword
and kill me, lest men say of me, ‘A woman killed him.’
” And his young man thrust him through, and he died.
55 And when the men of Yisra’ĕl saw that Aḇimeleḵ
was dead, each one went to his own place.
56 Thus did Elohim repay the evil of Aḇimeleḵ, which
he had done to his father to slay his seventy brothers.
57 And all the evil of the men of Sheḵem Elohim
turned back on their own heads, and the curse of
Yotham son of Yerubba’al came on them.
50

10 And after Aḇimeleḵ there arose Tola son of
Pu’ah, son of Doḏo, a man of Yissasḵar, to save
Yisra’ĕl. And he dwelt in Shamir in the mountains of
Ephrayim.
2 And he ruled Yisra’ĕl twenty-three years. Then he
died and was buried in Shamir.
3 And after him arose Ya’ir, a Gil’aḏite, and he ruled
Yisra’ĕl twenty-two years.
4 And he had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys.
And they had thirty towns, which are called Ḥawoth
Ya’ir to this day, which are in the land of Gil’aḏ.
5 And Ya’ir died, and was buried in Qamon.
634

SHOPHETIM

And the children of Yisra’ĕl again did evil in the
eyes of hWhY, and served the Ba’als and the
Ashtoreths, and the mighty ones of Aram, and the
mighty ones of Tsiḏon, and the mighty ones of Mo’aḇ,
and the mighty ones of the children of Ammon, and
the mighty ones of the Pelishtites - and forsook hWhY
and did not serve Him.
7 Therefore the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl. And He sold them into the hands of the
Pelishtites and into the hands of the children of
Ammon.
8 And they crushed and oppressed the children of
Yisra’ĕl that year - for eighteen years - all the children
of Yisra’ĕl who were beyond the Yardĕn in the land of
the Amorites, in Gil’aḏ.
9 And the children of Ammon passed over the
Yardĕn to fight against Yahuḏah, and against
Binyamin, and against the house of Ephrayim, so that
Yisra’ĕl had great distress.
10 And the children of Yisra’ĕl cried out to hWhY,
saying, “We have sinned against You, because we
have both forsaken our Elohim and served the
Ba’als!”
11 And hWhY said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “Was it
not from the Mitsrites and from the Amorites and from
the children of Ammon and from the Pelishtites
12 and the Tsiḏonians and Amalĕq and Ma’on when
they oppressed you, and you cried out to Me, and I
saved you from their hand?
13 “But you, you have forsaken Me and served other
mighty ones. Therefore I do not save you again.
14 “Go and cry out to the mighty ones which you have
chosen, let them save you in your time of distress.”
6

635

JUDGES

And the children of Yisra’ĕl said to hWhY, “We
have sinned! Do to us whatever is good in Your eyes,
only deliver us today, please.”
16 So they put away the foreign mighty ones from
their midst and served hWhY. And His being was
grieved with the trouble of Yisra’ĕl.
17 Then the children of Ammon were called together
and encamped in Gil’aḏ. And the children of Yisra’ĕl
gathered together and encamped in Mitspah.
18 And the people, the heads of Gil’aḏ, said to each
other, “Let the man who is the first to fight against the
children of Ammon be head over all the inhabitants of
Gil’aḏ.”
15

11 And Yiphtaḥ the Gil’aḏite was a mighty brave
one, but he was the son of a whore. And Gil’aḏ brought
forth Yiphtaḥ.
2 And the wife of Gil’aḏ bore sons. And when his
wife’s sons grew up, they drove Yiphtaḥ out, and said
to him, “You shall not have an inheritance in the
house of our father, for you are the son of another
woman.”
3 And Yiphtaḥ fled from his brothers and dwelt in the
land of Toḇ. And worthless men banded together with
Yiphtaḥ and went out with him.
4 And it came to be, some time later, that the
children of Ammon fought against Yisra’ĕl.
5 And it came to be, when the children of Ammon
fought against Yisra’ĕl, that the elders of Gil’aḏ went
to bring Yiphtaḥ out of the land of Toḇ.
6 And they said to Yiphtaḥ, “Come, and you shall be
our commander, and let us fight against the children
of Ammon.”
7 But Yiphtaḥ said to the elders of Gil’aḏ, “Did you
not hate me, and drive me from my father’s house?
636

SHOPHETIM

Why have you come to me now when you are in
trouble?”
8 And the elders of Gil’aḏ said to Yiphtaḥ, “That is
the reason we have turned to you, that you shall go
with us and fight against the children of Ammon, and
be our head over all the inhabitants of Gil’aḏ.”
9 And Yiphtaḥ said to the elders of Gil’aḏ, “If you
take me back home to fight against the children of
Ammon, and hWhY gives them to me, am I to be your
head?”
10 And the elders of Gil’aḏ said to Yiphtaḥ, “hWhY is
witness between us, if we do not do according to your
words.”
11 Then Yiphtaḥ went with the elders of Gil’aḏ, and
the people put him over them, as head and
commander. And Yiphtaḥ spoke all his words before
hWhY in Mitspah.
12 And Yiphtaḥ sent messengers to the sovereign of
the children of Ammon, saying, “What is between you
and me, that you have come to fight against me in my
land?”
13 And the sovereign of the children of Ammon said
to the messengers of Yiphtaḥ, “Because Yisra’ĕl took
my land when they came up out of Mitsrayim, from
the Arnon as far as the Yabboq, and to the Yardĕn.
And now, give back those lands in peace.”
14 But Yiphtaḥ again sent messengers to the
sovereign of the children of Ammon,
15 and said to him, “This is what Yiphtaḥ said,
‘Yisra’ĕl did not take the land of Mo’aḇ, nor the land
of the children of Ammon.
16 ‘For when they came up from Mitsrayim, and
Yisra’ĕl walked through the wilderness as far as the
Sea of Reeds and came to Qaḏĕsh,
637

JUDGES

then Yisra’ĕl sent messengers to the sovereign of
Eḏom, saying, “Please let me pass over, through your
land.” But the sovereign of Eḏom would not listen.
And they also sent to the sovereign of Mo’aḇ, but he
refused, so Yisra’ĕl stayed at Qaḏĕsh.
18 ‘Then they went through the wilderness and
around the land of Eḏom and the land of Mo’aḇ, and
came to the east side of the land of Mo’aḇ, and
encamped beyond Arnon. But they did not enter the
border of Mo’aḇ, for Arnon was the border of Mo’aḇ.
19 ‘And Yisra’ĕl sent messengers to Siḥon sovereign
of the Amorites, sovereign of Ḥeshbon, and Yisra’ĕl
said to him, “Please let us pass over, through your
land into our place.”
20 ‘But Siḥon did not trust Yisra’ĕl to pass over
through his border, and Siḥon gathered all his people
together, and they encamped in Yahats, and fought
against Yisra’ĕl.
21 ‘And hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl gave Siḥon and all
his people into the hand of Yisra’ĕl, and they smote
them. So Yisra’ĕl took possession of all the land of
the Amorites, the inhabitants of that land.
22 ‘Thus they took possession of all the border of the
Amorites, from Arnon to the Yabboq and from the
wilderness to the Yardĕn.
23 ‘And now, hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl has driven out
the Amorites from before His people Yisra’ĕl, should
you then possess it?
24 ‘Whatever Kemosh your mighty one gives you to
possess, do you not possess it? And all that which
hWhY our Elohim takes possession of before us, we
possess.
25 ‘And now are you any better than Balaq son of
Tsippor, sovereign of Mo’aḇ? Did he ever strive
against Yisra’ĕl? Did he ever fight against them?
17

638

SHOPHETIM

‘While Yisra’ĕl dwelt in Ḥeshbon and its villages,
and in Aro’ĕr and its villages, and in all the cities along
the banks of Arnon, for three hundred years, why did
you not recover them within that time?
27 ‘So I have not sinned against you, but you are
doing me evil by fighting against me. Let hWhY the
Judge, judge today between the children of Yisra’ĕl
and the children of Ammon.’ ”
28 But the sovereign of the children of Ammon did not
listen to the words which Yiphtaḥ sent him.
29 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY came upon Yiphtaḥ, and he
passed through Gil’aḏ and Menashsheh, and passed
through Mitspĕh of Gil’aḏ. And from Mitspĕh of Gil’aḏ
he passed on toward the children of Ammon.
30 And Yiphtaḥ made a vow to hWhY, and said, “If
You give the children of Ammon into my hands,
31 then it shall be that whatever comes out of the
doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace
from the children of Ammon, shall belong to hWhY,
and I shall offer it up as a burnt offering.”
32 Yiphtaḥ then passed on toward the children of
Ammon to fight against them, and hWhY gave them
into his hands.
33 And he smote them from Aro’ĕr as far as Minnith,
twenty cities, and to Aḇĕl Keramim, with a very great
smiting. Thus the children of Ammon were humbled
before the children of Yisra’ĕl.
34 And Yiphtaḥ came to his house at Mitspah, and
saw his daughter coming out to meet him with
timbrels and dancing. Now except for her he had
neither son nor daughter.
35 And it came to be, when he saw her, that he tore
his garments, and said, “Oh my daughter! You have
brought me very low, and you are among those who
26

639

JUDGES

trouble me! And I, I have given my word to hWhY, and
I am unable to turn back.”
36 And she said to him, “My father, if you have given
your word to hWhY, do to me according to what has
gone out of your mouth, because hWhY has taken
vengeance for you upon your enemies, the children
of Ammon.”
37 And she said to her father, “Let this be done for
me: let me alone for two months, and let me go and
wander on the mountains and bewail my
maidenhood, my friends and I.”
38 Then he said, “Go.” And he sent her away for two
months. And she went with her friends, and bewailed
her maidenhood on the mountains.
39 And it came to be at the end of two months that
she returned to her father, and he did to her as he had
vowed, and she knew no man. And it became a law
in Yisra’ĕl
40 that the daughters of Yisra’ĕl went every year for
four days to lament the daughter of Yiphtaḥ the
Gil’aḏite.

12 And the men of Ephrayim gathered together, and
passed over toward Tsaphon, and said to Yiphtaḥ,
“Why did you pass over to fight against the children of
Ammon, and did not call us to go with you? We are
going to burn your house over you with fire!”
2 And Yiphtaḥ said to them, “My people and I were
in a great struggle with the children of Ammon. And
when I called you, you did not save me out of their
hands.
3 “And I saw that you would not save me, then I took
my life in my hands and went over against the
children of Ammon. And hWhY gave them into my
640

SHOPHETIM

hand. And why have you come up to me today to fight
against me?”
4 Yiphtaḥ then gathered together all the men of
Gil’aḏ and fought against Ephrayim. And the men of
Gil’aḏ smote Ephrayim, because they had said, “You
Gil’aḏite are fugitives of Ephrayim in the midst of
Ephrayim, in the midst of Menashsheh.”
5 And Gil’aḏ captured the fords of the Yardĕn that
faced Ephrayim. And it came to be, when the fugitives
from Ephrayim said, “Let me pass over,” the men of
Gil’aḏ said to him, “You are an Ephrayimite!” If he
said, “No,”
6 then they would say to him, “Please say,
‘Shibboleth’!” And he would say, “Sibboleth,” for he
was unable to pronounce it right. Then they seized
him and slew him at the fords of the Yardĕn. And at
that time there fell forty-two thousand Ephrayimites.
7 And Yiphtaḥ ruled Yisra’ĕl six years. And Yiphtaḥ
the Gil’aḏite died and was buried in one of the cities
of Gil’aḏ.
8 And after him, Iḇtsan of Bĕyth Leḥem ruled
Yisra’ĕl.
9 And he came to have thirty sons and thirty
daughters - he sent abroad and brought in thirty
daughters for his sons. And he ruled Yisra’ĕl seven
years.
10 And Iḇtsan died and was buried at Bĕyth Leḥem.
11 And after him Ĕylon the Zeḇulunite ruled Yisra’ĕl.
And he ruled Yisra’ĕl ten years.
12 And Ĕlon the Zeḇulunite died and was buried at
Ayalon in the land of Zeḇulun.
13 And after him, Aḇdon son of Hillĕl the Pirathonite
ruled Yisra’ĕl,

641

JUDGES

and he had forty sons and thirty grandsons, who
rode on seventy young donkeys. And he ruled Yisra’ĕl
eight years.
15 And Aḇdon son of Hillĕl the Pirathonite died and
was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephrayim, in the
mountains of the Amalĕqites.
14

13 And again the children of Yisra’ĕl did evil in the
eyes of hWhY, so hWhY gave them into the hand of the
Pelishtites for forty years.
2 And there was a certain man from Tsor’ah, of the
clan of the Danites, whose name was Manowaḥ. And
his wife was barren and had not borne.
3 And a Messenger of hWhY appeared to the woman
and said to her, “See now, you are barren and have
not borne, but you shall conceive, and you shall bear
a son.
4 “And now, please guard, and do not drink wine or
strong drink, and do not eat anything unclean.
5 “For look, you are conceiving and bearing a son.
And let no razor come upon his head, for the youth is
a Nazirite to Elohim from the womb on. And he shall
begin to save Yisra’ĕl out of the hand of the
Pelishtites.”
6 And the woman came and spoke to her husband,
saying, “A Man of Elohim came to me, and His
appearance was like the appearance of a Messenger
of Elohim, very awesome. But I did not ask Him where
He was from, and He did not declare to me His Name.
7 “And He said to me, ‘See, you are conceiving and
bearing a son. And now, drink no wine or strong drink,
nor eat anything unclean, for the youth is a Nazirite to
Elohim from the womb to the day of his death.’ ”
8 And Manowaḥ prayed to hWhY, and said, “O hWhY,
please let the Man of Elohim whom You sent come to
642

SHOPHETIM

us again and teach us what to do for the youth who is
to be born.”
9 And Elohim listened to the voice of Manowaḥ, and
the Messenger of Elohim came to the woman again
as she was sitting in the field, but Manowaḥ her
husband was not with her.
10 And the woman ran hurriedly and informed her
husband, and said to him, “See, He has appeared to
me, the Man who came to me the other day!”
11 And Manowaḥ arose and went after his wife, and
came to the Man, and he said to Him, “Are You the
Man who spoke to this woman?” And He said, “I am.”
12 And Manowaḥ said, “Now let Your words come
true! What is to be the rule for the youth’s life and his
work?”
13 And the Messenger of hWhY said to Manowaḥ,
“Let the woman guard all that I said to her.
14 “Let her not eat anything that comes from the vine,
neither let her drink wine or strong drink, or eat
anything unclean. Let her guard all that which I have
commanded her.”
15 And Manowaḥ said to the Messenger of hWhY,
“Please let us detain You, and prepare a young goat
for You.”
16 And the Messenger of hWhY said to Manowaḥ,
“Though you detain Me, I do not eat your food. But if
you offer a burnt offering, offer it to hWhY.” For
Manowaḥ did not know He was a Messenger of hWhY.
17 Then Manowaḥ said to the Messenger of hWhY,
“What is Your Name? When Your words come true,
then we shall esteem You.”
18 And the Messenger of hWhY said to him, ‘Why do
you ask My Name, since it is wondrous?”
19 And Manowaḥ took the young goat with the grain
offering, and offered it upon the rock to hWhY. And He
643

JUDGES

did wondrously while Manowaḥ and his wife looked
on.
20 And it came to be, as the flame went up toward the
shamayim from the altar, that the Messenger of hWhY
went up in the flame of the altar. And Manowaḥ and
his wife were watching, and they fell on their faces to
the ground.
21 And the Messenger of hWhY did not appear any
more to Manowaḥ and his wife. Then Manowaḥ knew
that He was a Messenger of hWhY.
22 And Manowaḥ said to his wife, “We shall certainly
die, because we have seen Elohim!”
23 But his wife said to him, “If hWhY had been pleased
to put us to death, He would not have accepted a
burnt offering and a grain offering from our hands, nor
would He have shown us all this, nor would He have
let us hear the like of this!”
24 So the woman bore a son and called his name
Shimshon. And the child grew, and hWhY baraḵ him.
25 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY began to move him at
Maḥanĕh Dan, between Tsor’ah and Eshta’ol.

14 And Shimshon went down to Timnah, and saw a
woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Pelishtites.
2 And he went up and informed his father and
mother, saying, “I have seen a woman in Timnah of
the daughters of the Pelishtites. And now, take her for
me for a wife.”
3 But his father and mother said to him, “Is there no
woman among the daughters of your brothers, or
among all my people, that you should take a wife from
the uncircumcised Pelishtites?” And Shimshon said
to his father, “Take her for me, for she is pleasing in
my eyes.”
644

SHOPHETIM

However, his father and mother did not know that
it was of hWhY, that He was seeking an occasion to
move against the Pelishtites. For at that time the
Pelishtites were ruling over Yisra’ĕl.
5 Then Shimshon went down to Timnah with his
father and mother, and came to the vineyards of
Timnah, and see, a young lion came roaring at him.
6 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY came mightily upon him,
and he tore it apart as the tearing apart of a young
goat, with naught in his hand. But he did not make
known to his father or his mother what he had done.
7 And he went down and spoke to the woman, and
she pleased Shimshon well.
8 And when he returned later to take her, he turned
aside to look at the carcass of the lion, and saw a
swarm of bees and honey in the carcass of the lion.
9 And he took some of it in his hands and went
along, eating. And he came to his father and mother,
and gave them, and they ate. But he did not make
known to them that he took the honey out of the
carcass of the lion.
10 So his father went down to the woman. And
Shimshon gave a feast there, for young men used to
do so.
11 And it came to be, when they saw him, that they
brought thirty companions to be with him.
12 And Shimshon said to them, “Please let me put
forth a riddle to you. If you clearly solve and explain it
to me within the seven days of the feast, then I shall
give you thirty linen garments and thirty changes of
garments.
13 “But if you are unable to explain it to me, then you
shall give me thirty linen shirts and thirty changes of
garments.” And they said to him, “Put forth your riddle
and let us hear it.”
4

645

JUDGES

And he said to them, “Out of the eater came forth
food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness.”
And for three days they were unable to explain the
riddle.
15 And it came to be on the seventh day that they
said to Shimshon’s wife, “Entice your husband to
explain the riddle to us, or else we burn you and your
father’s house with fire. Have you invited us in order
to take what is ours? Is it not?”
16 And Shimshon’s wife wept before him, and said,
“You only hate me, and do not love me! You have put
forth a riddle to the sons of my people, but you have
not explained it to me.” And he said to her, “Look, I
have not explained it to my father or my mother, and
should I explain it to you?”
17 And she had wept before him the seven days while
their feast lasted. And it came to be on the seventh
day that he informed her, because she pressed him
so much. She then explained the riddle to the sons of
her people.
18 And the men of the city said to him on the seventh
day before the sun went down, “What is sweeter than
honey? And what is stronger than a lion?” And he said
to them, “If you had not ploughed with my heifer, you
would not have solved my riddle!”
19 Then the Ruaḥ of hWhY came upon him mightily,
and he went down to Ashqelon and smote thirty of
their men, stripped them, and gave the changes of
garments to those who had explained the riddle. And
his displeasure burned, and he went back up to his
father’s house.
20 And Shimshon’s wife was given to his companion,
who had been his friend.
14

646

SHOPHETIM

15 And it came to be, after some time, in the days
of wheat harvest, that Shimshon visited his wife with a
young goat. And he said, “Let me go in to my wife, into
her room.” But her father would not permit him to go in.
2 And her father said, “Indeed, I thought that you
hated her intensely; so I gave her to your companion.
Is not her younger sister better than she? Please,
take her instead.”
3 And Shimshon said to them, “This time I am
blameless regarding the Pelishtites if I do evil to
them!”
4 And Shimshon went and caught three hundred
foxes, and took torches, and turned them tail to tail,
and put a torch between each pair of tails,
5 and lit the torches on fire, and sent them out into
the standing grain of the Pelishtites, and burned up
both the shocks and the standing grain, even the
vineyards and olive trees.
6 And the Pelishtites said, “Who did this?” And they
answered, “Shimshon, the son-in-law of the Timnite,
because he took away his wife and gave her to his
companion.” Then the Pelishtites went up and burned
her and her father with fire.
7 And Shimshon said to them, “Though you do this,
yet I shall take revenge on you, and after that I cease.”
8 And he smote them hip and thigh, a great smiting,
and went down and dwelt in the cleft of the rock of
Ĕytam.
9 The Pelishtites then went up and encamped in
Yahuḏah, and spread out against Leḥi.
10 And the men of Yahuḏah said, “Why have you
come up against us?” And they answered, “We have
come up to bind Shimshon, to do to him as he has
done to us.”
647

JUDGES

Then three thousand men of Yahuḏah went down
to the cleft of the rock of Ĕytam and said to Shimshon,
“Do you not know that the Pelishtites are rulers over
us? Why have you done this to us?” And he said to
them, “As they did to me, so I did to them.”
12 And they said to him, “We have come down to bind
you, to give you into the hand of the Pelishtites.” And
Shimshon said to them, “Swear to me not to fall on
me yourselves.”
13 And they spoke to him, saying, “No, but we are
certainly going to bind you, and shall give you into
their hand but certainly not kill you.” So they bound
him with two new ropes and brought him up from the
rock.
14 When he came to Leḥi, the Pelishtites came
shouting to meet him. And the Ruaḥ of hWhY came
mightily upon him. And the ropes that were on his
arms became like flax that is burned with fire, and his
bonds broke loose from his hands.
15 And he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, and
put out his hand and took it, and smote a thousand
men with it.
16 And Shimshon said, “With the jawbone of a
donkey, one heap, two heaps, with the jawbone of a
donkey I have smitten a thousand men!”
17 And it came to be, when he had ended speaking,
that he threw the jawbone from his hand, and called
that place Ramath Leḥi.
18 And he became very thirsty, and cried out to hWhY
and said, “You have given this great deliverance by
the hand of Your servant. And now, am I to die of thirst
and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?”
19 And Elohim split the hollow place that is in Leḥi,
and water came out, and he drank. And his spirit
11

648

SHOPHETIM

came back, and he revived. So he called its name
Ĕyn ha’Qorĕ, which is in Leḥi to his day.
20 And he ruled Yisra’ĕl twenty years in the days of
the Pelishtites.

16 And Shimshon went to Azzah and saw a woman
there, a whore, and went in to her 2 the Azzathites saying, “Shimshon has come here!”
So they went round and lay in wait for him all night at
the gate of the city, and kept silent all night, saying,
“In the morning, when it is daylight, then we shall kill
him.”
3 Now Shimshon lay until midnight, and rose at
midnight, and took hold of the doors of the gate of the
city and the two gateposts, and pulled them up with
the bar, put them on his shoulders, and took them to
the top of the hill that faces Ḥeḇron.
4 And it came to be afterward that he loved a woman
in the wadi Sorĕq, whose name was Delilah.
5 And the princes of the Pelishtites came up to her
and said to her, “Entice him, and find out where his
great strength lies, and see by what we might
overpower him, then we shall bind him to humble him.
And let us give you, each one of us, eleven hundred
pieces of silver.”
6 And Delilah said to Shimshon, “Please reveal to
me where your great strength lies, and by what you
might be bound, to humble you.”
7 And Shimshon said to her, “If they bind me with
seven fresh cords, not yet dried, then I shall be weak,
and be like any other man.”
8 The princes of the Pelishtites then brought her
seven fresh cords, not yet dried, and she bound him
with them,
649

JUDGES

while those lying in wait stayed with her in the
room. And she said to him, “The Pelishtites are upon
you, Shimshon!” But he broke the cords as a strand
of yarn breaks when it touches fire. So the secret of
his strength remained unknown.
10 And Delilah said to Shimshon, “Look, you have
mocked me and spoken lies to me. Now, please
reveal to me by what you might be bound.”
11 And he said to her, “If they bind me tightly with new
ropes that have never been used, then I shall be
weak, and be like any other man.”
12 And Delilah took new ropes and bound him with
them, and said to him, “The Pelishtites are upon you,
Shimshon!” And those lying in wait were sitting in the
inner room. But he broke them off his arms like a
thread.
13 So Delilah said to Shimshon, “Until now you have
mocked me and spoken lies to me, reveal to me how
you might be bound.” And he said to her, “If you
weave the seven locks of my head with the web.”
14 Then she fastened it with a pin, and said to him,
“The Pelishtites are upon you, Shimshon!” But he
awoke from his sleep, and pulled out the pin of the
loom and the web.
15 Then she said to him, “How do you say, ‘I love
you,’ when your heart is not with me? You have
mocked me these three times, and have not made
known to me where your great strength lies.”
16 And it came to be, when she pressed him daily
with her words and urged him, so that his being was
wearied to death,
17 that he made known to her all his heart, and said
to her, “No razor has ever come upon my head, for I
have been a Nazirite to Elohim from my mother’s
9

650

SHOPHETIM

womb. If I were shaven, then my strength would leave
me, and I would become as weak as any other man.”
18 And Delilah saw that he had made known to her
all his heart, and she sent and called for the princes
of the Pelishtites, saying, “Come up once more, for he
has made known to me all his heart.” So the princes
of the Pelishtites came up to her and brought the
silver in their hand.
19 And she made him sleep on her knees, and called
for a man and shaved off the seven locks of his head.
Thus she began to humble him, and his strength left
him.
20 And she said, “The Pelishtites are upon you,
Shimshon!” And he awoke from his sleep, and said,
“Let me go out as before, at other times, and shake
myself loose!” But he did not know that hWhY had
turned aside from him.
21 So the Pelishtites took him and put out his eyes,
and brought him down to Azzah, and bound him with
bronze shackles. And he became a grinder in the
prison.
22 But the hair of his head began to grow again after
it had been shaven.
23 And the princes of the Pelishtites gathered to offer
a great slaughtering to Daḡon their mighty one, and
to rejoice. And they said, “Our mighty one has given
Shimshon our enemy into our hands!”
24 And the people saw him, and praised their mighty
one, for they said, “Our mighty one has given into our
hands our enemy, the destroyer of our land, who slew
many of us.”
25 And it came to be, when their hearts were glad,
that they said, “Call for Shimshon, and let him
entertain us.” So they called for Shimshon from the
651

JUDGES

prison, and he entertained them. And they made him
stand between the columns.
26 And Shimshon said to the young man who held
him by the hand, “Let me alone and let me feel the
columns which support the house, so that I lean on
them.”
27 And the house was filled with men and women.
And all the princes of the Pelishtites were there. And
about three thousand men and women were on the
roof who watched Shimshon entertaining.
28 And Shimshon called to hWhY, saying, “O Aḏonai
hWhY, remember me, I pray! Strengthen me, I pray,
only this time, O Elohim, and let me avenge myself on
the Pelishtites with vengeance for my two eyes!”
29 And Shimshon took hold of the two middle
columns which supported the house, and he braced
himself against them, one on his right and the other
on his left.
30 And Shimshon said, “Let me die with the
Pelishtites!” And he bowed himself mightily, and the
house fell on the princes and all the people in it. And
the dead that he killed at his death were more than he
had killed in his life.
31 And his brothers and all his father’s household
came down and took him, and brought him up and
buried him between Tsor’ah and Eshta’ol in the tomb
of his father Manowaḥ. And he had ruled Yisra’ĕl
twenty years.

17 And there was a man from the hill country of
Ephrayim, whose name was Miḵahu.
2 And he said to his mother, “The eleven hundred
pieces of silver that were taken from you, and on
which you put a curse, even saying it in my ears.
652

SHOPHETIM

Look, the silver is with me, I took it.” And his mother
said, “Baruḵ of hWhY be my son!”
3 And he gave back the eleven hundred pieces of
silver to his mother, and his mother said, “I had truly
qadosh the silver from my hand to hWhY for my son,
to make a carved image and a moulded image, and
now, I give it back to you.”
4 And he gave the silver back to his mother, and his
mother took two hundred pieces of silver and gave
them to the silversmith, and he made it into a carved
image and a moulded image. And they were in the
house of Miḵahu.
5 Now the man Miḵah had a house of mighty ones,
and made a shoulder garment and house idols. And
he ordained one of his sons, who became his kohĕn.
6 In those days there was no sovereign in Yisra’ĕl everyone did what was right in his own eyes.
7 And there was a young man from Bĕyth Leḥem in
Yahuḏah, of the clan of Yahuḏah. And he was a
Lĕwite, and he was sojourning there.
8 And the man went out of the city of Bĕyth Leḥem
in Yahuḏah to sojourn wherever he could find a place.
And he came to the mountains of Ephrayim, to the
house of Miḵah, as he journeyed.
9 And Miḵah said to him, “Where do you come
from?” And he said to him, “I am a Lĕwite from Bĕyth
Leḥem in Yahuḏah, and I am on my way to find a
place to sojourn.”
10 And Miḵah said to him, “Dwell with me, and be a
father and a kohĕn to me, and I give you ten pieces
of silver per year, and allowance of garments, and
your food.” And the Lĕwite went.
11 So the Lĕwite agreed to dwell with the man. And
the young man became like one of his sons to him.
653

JUDGES

Then Miḵah ordained the Lĕwite, and the young
man became his kohĕn, and he was in the house of
Miḵah.
13 And Miḵah said, “Now I know that hWhY does good
to me, since I have a Lĕwite as kohĕn!
12

18 In those days there was no sovereign in Yisra’ĕl.
And in those days the tribe of the Danites was seeking
an inheritance for itself to dwell in, for until that day all
their inheritance among the tribes of Yisra’ĕl had not
yet fallen to them.
2 And the children of Dan sent five men of their clan,
brave men from Tsor’ah and Eshta’ol, to spy out the
land and search it. And they said to them, “Go, search
the land,” so they went to the mountains of Ephrayim,
to the house of Miḵah, and spent the night there.
3 When they were near the house of Miḵah, they
recognised the voice of the young Lĕwite, and turned
aside and said to him, “Who brought you here? What
are you doing in this place, and what do you have
here?”
4 And he said to them, “Miḵah did such and such for
me. And he hired me, and I have become his kohĕn.”
5 And they said to him, “Please inquire of Elohim,
and we shall know whether the journey on which we
are going is prosperous.”
6 And the kohĕn said to them, “Go in peace. Your
journey on which you go is before hWhY.”
7 Then the five men left and came to Layish, and
saw the people who were in their midst, how they
dwelt safely, according to the ruling of the Tsiḏonians,
at rest and unsuspecting. And no one possessing
authority in the land was reproaching for any matter.
And they were far from the Tsiḏonians, and they had
no word with anyone.
654

SHOPHETIM

And the spies came back to their brothers at
Tsor’ah and Eshta’ol, and their brothers said to them,
“What do you say?”
9 And they said, “Arise, and let us go up against
them. For we have seen the land, and look, it is very
good. And you sit still! Do not hesitate to go to enter
in to possess the land.
10 “When you go, you are to come to an
unsuspecting people, and the land is spacious. For
Elohim has given it into your hands, a place in which
there is no lack of any matter which is on the earth.”
11 And six hundred men of the clan of the Danites
went from there, from Tsor’ah and Eshta’ol, armed for
battle.
12 And they went up and encamped in Qiryath
Ye’arim in Yahuḏah. Therefore they call that place
Maḥanĕh Ḏan to this day. See, it is west of Qiryath
Ye’arim.
13 And they passed over from there to the mountains
of Ephrayim, and came to the house of Miḵah.
14 And the five men who had gone to spy out the land
of Layish answered and said to their brothers, “Do
you know that there are in these houses a shoulder
garment, and house idols, and a carved image, and a
moulded image? And now, you know what to do.”
15 And they turned aside there, and came to the
house of the young Lĕwite man, the house of Miḵah,
and greeted him.
16 And the six hundred men, armed for battle, who
were of the children of Dan, stood by the entrance of
the gate.
17 And the five men who had gone to spy out the
land went up, and entering there, they took the carved
image, and the shoulder garment, and the house
idols, and the moulded image, while the kohĕn stood
8

655

JUDGES

at the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men
who were armed for battle.
18 And these went into Miḵah’s house and took the
idol, and the shoulder garment, and the house idols,
and the moulded image. Then the kohĕn said to them,
“What are you doing?”
19 And they said to him, “Be silent, put your hand
over your mouth, and come with us, and be a father
and a kohĕn to us. Is it better for you to be a kohĕn to
the household of one man, or that you be a kohĕn to
a tribe and a clan in Yisra’ĕl?”
20 And the heart of the kohĕn was glad. And he took
the shoulder garment, and the house idols, and the
carved image, and took his place among the people.
21 And they turned and went, and put the little ones,
and the livestock, and the valuables in front of them.
22 They had gone some distance from the house of
Miḵah, when the men who were in the houses near
Miḵah’s house gathered together and overtook the
children of Dan,
23 and called out to the children of Dan. So they
turned around and said to Miḵah, “What is the matter,
that you have gathered such a company?”
24 And he said, “You have taken away my mighty
ones which I made, and the kohĕn, and you are
leaving. Now what more do I have? What is this you
say to me, ‘What is the matter?’ ”
25 And the children of Dan said to him, “Do not let
your voice be heard among us, lest men, bitter of
being, fall upon you, and you lose your life, with the
lives of your household!”
26 And the children of Dan went their way. And when
Miḵah saw that they were too strong for him, he
turned and went back to his house.
656

SHOPHETIM

Then they took what Miḵah had made, and the
kohĕn who had belonged to him, and went to Layish,
to a people who were at rest and unsuspecting, and
smote them with the edge of the sword and burned
the city with fire.
28 And there was no deliverer, because it was far
from Tsiḏon, and they had no word with anyone. And
it was in the valley that belongs to Bĕyth Reḥoḇ. And
they rebuilt the city and dwelt there.
29 And they called the name of the city Dan, after the
name of Dan their father, who was born to Yisra’ĕl.
But previously the name of the city was Layish.
30 And the children of Dan put up for themselves the
carved image. And Yahonathan son of Gĕreshom,
son of Menashsheh, and his sons were kohenim to
the tribe of Dan until the day the land was taken into
exile.
31 And they put up for themselves the carved image
of Miḵah, which he had made, all the days that the
house of Elohim was in Shiloh.
27

19 And it came to be in those days, when there was
no sovereign in Yisra’ĕl, that there was a certain Lĕwite
sojourning on the further side of the mountains of
Ephrayim. And he took for himself a concubine from
Bĕyth Leḥem in Yahuḏah.
2 And his concubine committed whoring against
him, and went away from him to her father’s house at
Bĕyth Leḥem in Yahuḏah, and was there four months.
3 And her husband arose and went after her, to
speak to her heart and bring her back, having his
servant and a couple of donkeys with him. And she
brought him into her father’s house. And the father of
the young woman saw him, and he was glad to meet
him.
657

JUDGES

And his father-in-law, the young woman’s father,
detained him, and he dwelt with him three days. And
they ate and drank and spent the nights there.
5 And it came to be on the fourth day that they arose
early in the morning. And he prepared to leave, but
the young woman’s father said to his son-in-law,
“Refresh your heart with a piece of bread, and
afterward go your way.”
6 So they sat down, and the two of them ate and
drank together. And the young woman’s father said to
the man, “Please agree to stay all night, and let your
heart be glad.”
7 And when the man arose to go, his father-in-law
urged him. So he spent the night there again.
8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day
to go. But the young woman’s father said, “Please
refresh your heart.” So they delayed until afternoon,
and both of them ate.
9 And the man arose to go, he and his concubine
and his servant. But his father-in-law, the young
woman’s father, said to him, “See, the day is now
drawing toward evening. Please spend the night.
See, the day is coming to an end. Stay here, and let
your heart be glad. And you shall rise early tomorrow
for your journey, and you shall go to your tent.”
10 But the man would not stay that night. And he
arose and left, and came to a place opposite Yeḇus,
that is Yerushalayim. And with him were the two
saddled donkeys, and his concubine with him.
11 They were near Yeḇus, and the day was far spent.
And the servant said to his master, “Come, please,
and let us turn aside into this city of the Yeḇusites and
spend the night in it.”
4

658

SHOPHETIM

And his master said to him, “Let us not turn aside
here into a city of foreigners, who are not of the
children of Yisra’ĕl. But we shall pass over to Giḇ’ah.”
13 And he said to his servant, “Come, let us draw
near to one of these places, and spend the night in
Giḇ’ah or in Ramah.”
14 And they passed over and went their way. And the
sun went down on them near Giḇ’ah, which belongs
to Binyamin,
15 and they turned off there to go in to spend the night
in Giḇ’ah. So he went in, and he sat down in the open
square of the city, for no one would take them into his
house to spend the night.
16 But see, an old man came in from his work in the
field at evening, who also was from the mountains of
Ephrayim. And he was sojourning in Giḇ’ah, whereas
the men of the place were Binyamites.
17 And when he lifted up his eyes, he saw the
traveller in the open square of the city. And the old
man said, “Where are you going, and where do you
come from?”
18 And he said to him, “We are passing over from
Bĕyth Leḥem in Yahuḏah to the other side of the
mountains of Ephrayim. I am from there, and I went
to Bĕyth Leḥem in Yahuḏah, and I am going to the
House of hWhY. But there is no one taking me into his
house,
19 yet there is both straw and fodder for our donkeys,
and bread and wine for myself, and for your female
servant, and for the young man who is with your
servant; there is no lack of any matter.”
20 And the old man said, “Peace be with you!
However, let all your needs be on me, only do not
spend the night in the open square.”
12

659

JUDGES

And he brought him into his house, and gave
fodder to the donkeys. And they washed their feet,
and ate and drank.
22 They were making their hearts glad, and see, men
of the city, sons of Beliya’al, surrounded the house,
beating on the door. And they spoke to the master of
the house, the old man, saying, “Bring out the man
who came to your house, so that we know him!”
23 But the man, the master of the house, went out to
them and said to them, “No, my brothers! I beg you,
do no evil! Since this man has come into my house,
do not do this folly.
24 “Look, here is my maiden daughter and the man’s
concubine. Let me bring them out now, and humble
them, and do with them what is good in your eyes, but
do not do such a foolish matter to this man!”
25 But the men would not listen to him. So the man
took his concubine and brought her out to them. And
they knew her and rolled themselves on her all night
until morning, and let her go when the day began to
break.
26 And as morning appeared the woman came back
and fell down at the door of the man’s house where
her master was, till it was light.
27 And her master rose up in the morning, and
opened the doors of the house and went out to go his
way, and saw his concubine, fallen at the door of the
house with her hands on the threshold.
28 And he said to her, “Rise up and let us go.” But
there was no answer. Then he took her on the
donkey, and the man rose and went to his place,
29 and came into his house and took a knife, then laid
hold of his concubine, and cut her up limb by limb into
twelve pieces, and sent her throughout all the borders
of Yisra’ĕl.
21

660

SHOPHETIM

And it came to be that all who saw it said, “There
has never been, and there has not been seen the like
of this, from the day that the children of Yisra’ĕl came
up from the land of Mitsrayim until this day. Consider
it, take counsel, and speak up!”

30

20 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl came out, from
Dan to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and from the land of Gil’aḏ, and
the congregation assembled as one man before hWhY
at Mitspah.
2 And the leaders of all the people, all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl, presented themselves in the assembly of the
people of Elohim, four hundred thousand foot soldiers
who drew the sword.
3 And the children of Binyamin heard that the
children of Yisra’ĕl had gone up to Mitspah. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl said, “Speak up, how did this evil
come about?”
4 And the man, the Lĕwite, husband of the woman
who was murdered, answered and said, “My
concubine and I went into Giḇ’ah, which belongs to
Binyamin, to spend the night.
5 “And the masters of Giḇ’ah rose against me, and
surrounded the house at night because of me. They
thought to kill me, but instead they humbled my
concubine, and she died.
6 “Then I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces,
and sent her throughout all the land of the inheritance
of Yisra’ĕl, because they committed wickedness and
folly in Yisra’ĕl.
7 “Look, you are all children of Yisra’ĕl, speak and
give your counsel here!”
8 And all the people rose as one man, saying, “Let
not one of us go to his tent, nor any of us turn back to
his house.
661

JUDGES

“And now, this is what we do to Giḇ’ah: go against
it by lot.
10 “And we shall take ten men out of every hundred
throughout all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, and a hundred out
of every thousand, and a thousand out of every ten
thousand, to make food for the people, to prepare for
their going to Giḇ’ah in Binyamin, for all the folly they
did in Yisra’ĕl.”
11 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl were gathered against
the city, knit together as one man.
12 And the tribes of Yisra’ĕl sent men through all the
tribe of Binyamin, saying, “What is this evil that has
come about among you?
13 “And now, give us the men, the sons of Beliya’al
who are in Giḇ’ah, so that we put them to death and
put away evil from Yisra’ĕl!” But the children of
Binyamin would not listen to the voice of their
brothers, the children of Yisra’ĕl.
14 So the children of Binyamin gathered together
from their cities to Giḇ’ah, to go to battle against the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
15 And from their cities at that time the children of
Binyamin registered twenty-six thousand men who
drew the sword, besides the inhabitants of Giḇ’ah,
who registered seven hundred chosen men.
16 Among all this people there were seven hundred
chosen men who were left-handed, each one could
sling a stone at a hair’s breadth and not miss.
17 And besides Binyamin, the men of Yisra’ĕl
registered four hundred thousand men who drew the
sword, all of these were men of battle.
18 And the children of Yisra’ĕl rose and went up to
Bĕyth Ĕl to ask of Elohim, and they said, “Who of us
go up first to battle against the children of Binyamin?”
And hWhY said, “Yahuḏah first.”
9

662

SHOPHETIM

And the children of Yisra’ĕl rose in the morning
and encamped against Giḇ’ah.
20 And the men of Yisra’ĕl went out to battle against
Binyamin, and the men of Yisra’ĕl put themselves in
battle array to fight against them at Giḇ’ah.
21 And the children of Binyamin came out of Giḇ’ah,
and on that day cut down to the ground twenty-two
thousand men of the Yisra’ĕlites.
22 But the people, the men of Yisra’ĕl, strengthened
themselves and again formed the battle line at the
place where they had put themselves, in array on the
first day.
23 And the children of Yisra’ĕl went up and wept
before hWhY until evening, and asked of hWhY saying,
“Should I again draw near for battle against the
children of my brother Binyamin?” And hWhY said,
“Go up against him.”
24 And the children of Yisra’ĕl drew near to the
children of Binyamin on the second day.
25 And Binyamin went out against them from Giḇ’ah
on the second day, and cut down to the ground
eighteen thousand more of the children of Yisra’ĕl all these drew the sword.
26 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl, even all the people,
went up and came to Bĕyth Ĕl and wept, and sat there
before hWhY and fasted that day until evening. And
they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings
before hWhY.
27 And the children of Yisra’ĕl asked of hWhY - the
ark of the Covenant of Elohim was there in those
days,
28 and Pineḥas son of El’azar, son of Aharon, stood
before it in those days - saying, “Should I yet again go
out to battle against the children of my brother
19

663

JUDGES

Binyamin, or should I cease?” And hWhY said, “Go up,
for tomorrow I give them into your hand.”
29 And Yisra’ĕl put ambushers all around Giḇ’ah.
30 And the children of Yisra’ĕl went up against the
children of Binyamin on the third day, and put
themselves in battle array against Giḇ’ah as at the
other times.
31 And the children of Binyamin came out to meet the
people - drawn away from the city. And they began to
smite some of the people, slaying, as at the other
times, in the highways, of which one went up to Bĕyth
Ĕl and the other to Giḇ’ah in the field, about thirty men
of Yisra’ĕl.
32 And the children of Binyamin said, “They are going
to be smitten before us, as previously.” But the
children of Yisra’ĕl said, “Let us flee and draw them
away from the city to the highways.”
33 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl rose from their place
and put themselves in battle array at Ba’al Tamar.
And the ambush of Yisra’ĕl broke forth from their
position at Ma’areh Ḡeḇa.
34 And ten thousand chosen men from all Yisra’ĕl
came against Giḇ’ah, and the battle was fierce. But
they did not know that calamity was close to them.
35 And hWhY smote Binyamin before Yisra’ĕl. And
the children of Yisra’ĕl destroyed twenty-five
thousand one hundred men on that day in Binyamin all these drew the sword.
36 And the children of Binyamin saw that they were
smitten. And the men of Yisra’ĕl had given ground to
the Binyamites, because they trusted in the ambush
that they had put against Giḇ’ah,
37 and the ambush hurried and came against Giḇ’ah,
and the ambush spread out and smote the entire city
with the edge of the sword.
664

SHOPHETIM

And the appointed signal between the men of
Yisra’ĕl and the ambush was that they would make a
great cloud of smoke rise up from the city,
39 then the men of Yisra’ĕl would turn in battle, and
Binyamin began to smite dead about thirty of the men
of Yisra’ĕl. For they said, “They are indeed smitten
before us, as at the first battle.”
40 Then the cloud began to rise from the city in a
column of smoke, and the Binyamites looked behind
them, and saw the entire city going up in smoke to the
shamayim.
41 And when the men of Yisra’ĕl turned back, the
men of Binyamin were troubled, for they saw that
calamity was close to them.
42 And they turned their backs before the men of
Yisra’ĕl toward the way of the wilderness, but the
battle overtook them, while those who had come out
of the cities were destroying them in their midst.
43 They surrounded the Binyamites and pursued
them, and with ease trampled them down as far as
the front of Giḇ’ah toward the east.
44 And there fell of Binyamin eighteen thousand men
- all of these were mighty men.
45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness to
the rock of Rimmon. And they cut down five thousand
of them on the highways, and followed after them up
to Giḏom, and smote two thousand of them.
46 And all who fell of Binyamin that day were twentyfive thousand men who drew the sword, all of these
were mighty men.
47 But six hundred men turned and fled toward the
wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, and they dwelt at
the rock of Rimmon for four months.
48 And the men of Yisra’ĕl turned back against the
children of Binyamin, and smote them with the edge
38

665

JUDGES

of the sword from every city, men and beasts, all who
were found. And they lit fire to all the cities they came
to.

21 And the men of Yisra’ĕl had sworn an oath at
Mitspah, saying, “Not one of us shall give his daughter
to Binyamin as a wife.”
2 So the people came to Bĕyth Ĕl, and sat there until
evening before Elohim, and lifted up their voices and
wept bitterly,
3 and said, “O hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, why has this
come about in Yisra’ĕl, that today there should be one
tribe missing in Yisra’ĕl?”
4 And it came to be on the morrow, that the people
rose early and built an altar there, and brought burnt
offerings and peace offerings.
5 And the children of Yisra’ĕl said, “Who is there
among all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl who did not come up
with the assembly to hWhY?” For they had made a
great oath concerning anyone who had not come up
to hWhY at Mitspah, saying, “He shall certainly be put
to death.”
6 And the children of Yisra’ĕl were sorry for
Binyamin their brother, and said, “One tribe is cut off
from Yisra’ĕl today.
7 “What do we do for wives for those who remain,
seeing we have sworn by hWhY not to give them our
daughters as wives?”
8 And they said, “Which one of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl
did not come up to Mitspah to hWhY?” And see, no
one had come to the camp from Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ to the
assembly.
9 For when the people called a roll, see, not one of
the inhabitants of Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ was there.
666

SHOPHETIM

And the congregation sent out there twelve
thousand of their bravest men, and commanded
them, saying, “Go, and you shall smite the inhabitants
of Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ with the edge of the sword, even the
women and children.
11 “And this is what you do: Put under the ban every
male, and every woman who has known a man by
lying with him.”
12 And they found among the inhabitants of Yaḇĕsh
Gil’aḏ four hundred young maidens who had not
known a man. And they brought them to the camp at
Shiloh, which is in the land of Kena’an.
13 Then all the congregation sent, and spoke to the
children of Binyamin who were at the rock of Rimmon,
and proclaimed peace to them.
14 And Binyamin turned back at that time, and they
gave them the women whom they had saved alive of
the women of Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ. But even so there were
not enough for them.
15 And the people were sorry for Binyamin, because
hWhY had made a breach in the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
16 And the elders of the congregation said, “What do
we do for wives for those who remain, since the
women have been destroyed out of Binyamin?”
17 And they said, “There is an inheritance for the
survivors of Binyamin, and no tribe is destroyed from
Yisra’ĕl.
18 “But we are unable to give them wives from our
daughters, for the children of Yisra’ĕl have sworn an
oath, saying, ‘Cursed be the one who gives a wife to
Binyamin.’ ”
19 So they said, “See, there is a yearly Festival of
hWhY in Shiloh, which is north of Bĕyth Ĕl, on the east
side of the highway that goes up from Bĕyth Ĕl to
Sheḵem, and south of Leḇonah.”
10

667

JUDGES

And they commanded the children of Binyamin,
saying, “Go, lie in wait in the vineyards,
21 and watch. And see, when the daughters of Shiloh
come out to perform their dances, then you shall
come out from the vineyards, and every man catch a
wife for himself from the daughters of Shiloh, and go
to the land of Binyamin.
22 “And it shall be, when their fathers or their brothers
come to us to complain, that we shall say to them,
‘Favour us with them, because we did not take a wife
for any of them in battle, neither have you given them
to them, making yourselves guilty of your oath.’ ”
23 And the children of Binyamin did so, and took
enough wives for their number from those who
danced, whom they caught. Then they went and
returned to their inheritance, and they rebuilt the cities
and dwelt in them.
24 And the children of Yisra’ĕl went from there at that
time, each one to his tribe and clan. And they went
from there, each one to his inheritance.
25 In those days there was no sovereign in Yisra’ĕl everyone did what was right in his own eyes.
20

668

1 SAMUEL

SHEMU’ĔL 1
‫ ׁשמואל א‬A LAWmv

1 And there was a certain man of Ramathayim
Tsophim, of the mountains of Ephrayim, and his name
was Elqanah son of Yeroḥam, son of Elihu, son of
Toḥu, son of Tsuph, an Ephrayimite.
2 And he had two wives, the name of one was
Ḥannah, and the name of the other Peninnah. And
Peninnah had children, but Ḥannah had no children.
3 Now this man went up from his city year by year to
worship and to slaughter to hWhY of hosts in Shiloh.
And the two sons of Ĕli, Ḥophni and Pineḥas, the
kohenim of hWhY, were there.
4 And when the day came for Elqanah to make an
offering, he gave portions to Peninnah his wife and to
all her sons and daughters,
5 but, although he loved Ḥannah, he gave only one
portion to Ḥannah, because hWhY had shut up her
womb.
6 Moreover, her rival also provoked her greatly, to
make her irritable, because hWhY had shut up her
womb.
7 And so he did, year by year. Whenever she went
up to the House of hWhY, she was provoked, so that
she wept and did not eat.
8 And her husband Elqanah said to her, “Ḥannah,
why do you weep? Why do you not eat? And why is
your heart sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”
9 And Ḥannah rose up after eating and drinking in
Shiloh, while Ĕli the kohĕn was sitting on the seat by
the doorpost of the Hĕyḵal of hWhY.
10 And she was bitter in life, and prayed to hWhY and
wept greatly.
669

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And she made a vow and said, “O hWhY of hosts,
if You would indeed look on the affliction of your
female servant and remember me, and not forget
your female servant, but shall give your female
servant a male child, then I shall give him to hWhY all
the days of his life, and let no razor come upon his
head.”
12 And it came to be, as she kept on praying before
hWhY, that Ĕli was watching her mouth.
13 And Ḥannah spoke in her heart, only her lips
moved, but her voice was not heard. So Ĕli thought
she was drunk.
14 Then Ĕli said to her, “How long are you going to
be drunk? Put your wine away from you!”
15 And Ḥannah answered and said, “No, my master,
I am a woman pained in spirit. And I have drunk
neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my
being before hWhY.
16 “Do not take your female servant for a daughter of
Beliya’al, for it is out of my great concern and
provocation that I have spoken until now.”
17 And Ĕli answered and said, “Go in peace, and the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl give you your petition which you
have asked of Him.”
18 And she said, “Let your female servant find favour
in your eyes.” And the woman went her way and ate,
and her face was no more sad.
19 And they rose up early in the morning and
worshipped before hWhY, and returned and came to
their house at Ramah. And Elqanah knew Ḥannah his
wife, and hWhY remembered her.
20 And it came to be at the turn of days, that Ḥannah
conceived and bore a son, and called his name
Shemu’ĕl, “Because I have asked hWhY for him.”
11

670

1 SAMUEL

And the man Elqanah and all his house went up to
offer to hWhY the yearly slaughtering and his vow.
22 But Ḥannah did not go up, for she said to her
husband, “When the child is weaned, then I shall take
him. And he shall appear before hWhY and remain
forever there.”
23 And her husband Elqanah said to her, “Do what is
good in your eyes. Remain until you have weaned
him. Only let hWhY establish His word.” And the
woman remained and nursed her son until she had
weaned him.
24 And when she had weaned him, she took him up
with her, with a three year old bull, and one ĕphah of
flour, and a skin of wine, and brought him to the
House of hWhY in Shiloh. And the child was young.
25 And they slaughtered a bull, and brought the child
to Ĕli.
26 And she said, “O my master! As your being lives,
my master, I am the woman who stood by you here,
praying to hWhY.
27 “I prayed for this youth, and hWhY has granted me
what I asked of Him.
28 “So I have also loaned him to hWhY. All the days
that he lives he shall be loaned to hWhY.” And he
worshipped there before hWhY.
21

2 And Ḥannah prayed and said, “My heart rejoices in
hWhY, my horn has been high in hWhY. My mouth is
opened wide over my enemies, for I have rejoiced in
Your deliverance.
2 “There is no one qodesh like hWhY, for there is no
one besides You, and there is no rock like our Elohim.
3 “Do not multiply words so proudly, proudly; let no
arrogance come from your mouth, for hWhY is an Ĕl
of knowledge, and by Him deeds are weighed.
671

SHEMU’ĔL 1

“Bows of the mighty are broken, and those who
stumble shall be girded with strength.
5 “The satisfied have hired themselves out for
bread, and the hungry have ceased. Even the barren
has borne seven, and she who has many children
pines away.
6 “hWhY puts to death and makes alive, He brings
down to the grave and raises up.
7 “hWhY makes poor and makes rich, He brings low
and lifts up.
8 “He raises the poor from the dust, He lifts the
needy from the dunghill, to sit with princes, and make
them inherit a throne of esteem. For the supports of
the earth belong to hWhY, and He has put the world
upon them.
9 “He guards the feet of His kind ones, but the
wicked are silent in darkness, for man does not
become mighty by power.
10 “Those who oppose hWhY are shattered, from the
shamayim He thunders against them. hWhY judges
the ends of the earth, and gives strength to His
sovereign, and exalts the horn of His anointed.”
11 And Elqanah went to his house at Ramah. But the
youth served hWhY before Ĕli the kohĕn.
12 And the sons of Ĕli were sons of Beliya’al - they
did not know hWhY.
13 And the ruling of the kohenim with the people was
that when any man offered a slaughtering, the
kohĕn’s servant shall come with a three-pronged
flesh-hook in his hand while the meat was cooking,
14 and shall thrust it into the basin, or kettle, or
cauldron, or pot. And the kohĕn would take for himself
all that the flesh-hook brought up. Thus they did in
Shiloh to all the Yisra’ĕlites who came there.
4

672

1 SAMUEL

Also, before they burned the fat, the kohĕn’s
servant would come and say to the man who
slaughtered, “Give meat for roasting to the kohĕn, for
he does not accept cooked meat from you, but raw.”
16 And if the man said to him, “Let the fat be burned
up first, then take as much as your being desires,” he
would then answer him, “No, but give it to me now.
And if not, I shall take it by strength.”
17 And the sin of the young men was very great
before hWhY, for the men despised the offering of
hWhY.
18 But Shemu’ĕl was attending before hWhY - a
youth, wearing a linen shoulder garment.
19 And his mother would make him a little robe, and
bring it to him year by year when she came up with
her husband to offer the yearly slaughtering.
20 And Ĕli baraḵ Elqanah and his wife, and said,
“hWhY give you offspring from this woman for the one
she prayed for and gave to hWhY.” Then they would
go to their own home.
21 And hWhY visited Ḥannah, so that she conceived
and bore three sons and two daughters, while the
young Shemu’ĕl grew before hWhY.
22 And Ĕli was very old, and had heard all that his
sons were doing to all Yisra’ĕl, and how they lay with
the women who were assembling at the door of the
Tent of Appointment.
23 And he said to them, “Why do you do deeds like
these? For I hear of your evil deeds from all the
people.
24 “No, my sons! For it is not a good report that I hear:
making the people of hWhY transgress.
25 “If one man sins against another, Elohim shall
judge him. But if a man sins against hWhY, who shall
pray for him?” But they did not listen to the voice of
15

673

SHEMU’ĔL 1

their father, though it pleased hWhY to put them to
death.
26 And the young Shemu’ĕl was growing in stature,
and was in favour with hWhY and also with men.
27 And a man of Elohim came to Ĕli and said to him,
“Thus said hWhY, ‘Did I not clearly reveal Myself to
the house of your father when they were in Mitsrayim
in Pharaoh’s house,
28 even to choose him out of all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl
to be My kohĕn, to offer upon My altar, to burn
incense, and to wear a shoulder garment before Me?
And did I not give to the house of your father all the
offerings of the children of Yisra’ĕl made by fire?
29 ‘Why do you kick at My slaughtering and My
offering which I have commanded in My Mishkan, and
esteem your sons above Me, to make yourselves fat
with the best of all the offerings of Yisra’ĕl My
people?’
30 “Therefore hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl declares, ‘I
said indeed that your house and the house of your
father would walk before Me forever.’ But now hWhY
declares, ‘Far be it from Me, for those who esteem Me
I esteem, and those who despise Me are accursed.
31 ‘See, the days are coming that I shall cut off your
arm and the arm of your father’s house, so that an old
man shall not be in your house.
32 ‘And you shall see an enemy in My Mishkan,
despite all the good which Elohim does for Yisra’ĕl,
and there shall not be an old man in your house
forever.
33 ‘But any of your men whom I do not cut off from
My altar is to consume your eyes and grieve your life,
and all the increase of your house die as men.

674

1 SAMUEL

‘And this is the sign to you that comes upon your
two sons, upon Ḥophni and Pineḥas: in one day they
are going to die, both of them.
35 ‘And I shall raise up for Myself a trustworthy kohĕn
who does according to what is in My heart and in My
being. And I shall build him a steadfast house, and he
shall walk before My anointed forever.
36 ‘And it shall be that everyone who is left in your
house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of
silver and a cake of bread, and say, “Please, put me
in one of the kehunnah positions to eat a piece of
bread.” ’ ”
34

3 And the young Shemu’ĕl was serving hWhY before
Ĕli. And the word of hWhY was rare in those days - no
vision breaking forth.
2 And it came to be in that day, that Ĕli was lying
down in his place. And his eyes had begun to grow
so dim that he was unable to see,
3 and the lamp of Elohim had not gone out in the
Hĕyḵal of hWhY where the ark of Elohim was, and
Shemu’ĕl was lying down to sleep.
4 And hWhY called Shemu’ĕl, and he answered,
“Here I am!”
5 He then ran to Ĕli and said, “Here I am, for you
called me.” But he said, “I did not call - lie down
again.” So he went and lay down.
6 And hWhY again called, “Shemu’ĕl!” And Shemu’ĕl
arose and went to Ĕli, and said, “Here I am, for you
called me.” But he answered, “My son, I did not call lie down again.”
7 Now Shemu’ĕl did not yet know hWhY, and the
word of hWhY was not yet revealed to him.
8 And hWhY called Shemu’ĕl again the third time,
and he arose and went to Ĕli, and said, “Here I am,
675

SHEMU’ĔL 1

for you called me.” Then Ĕli understood that hWhY
had called the youth.
9 So Ĕli said to Shemu’ĕl, “Go, lie down. And it shall
be, if He calls you, say, ‘Speak, hWhY, for Your
servant hears.’ ” And Shemu’ĕl went and lay down in
his place.
10 And hWhY came and stood and called as at other
times, “Shemu’ĕl! Shemu’ĕl!” And Shemu’ĕl
answered, “Speak, for Your servant hears.”
11 And hWhY said to Shemu’ĕl, “See, I am doing a
matter in Yisra’ĕl at which both ears of everyone who
hears it shall tingle.
12 “In that day I shall confirm against Ĕli all that I have
spoken concerning his house, from beginning to end.
13 “For I have declared to him that I am judging his
house forever for the wickedness which he knows,
because his sons cursed Elohim, and he did not
rebuke them.
14 “And therefore I have sworn to the house of Ĕli that
the wickedness of the house of Ĕli shall never be
atoned for, by slaughtering or grain offering.”
15 And Shemu’ĕl lay down until morning, and opened
the doors of the House of hWhY. And Shemu’ĕl was
afraid to report the vision to Ĕli.
16 Then Ĕli called Shemu’ĕl and said, “Shemu’ĕl, my
son!” And he answered, “Here I am.”
17 And he said, “What is the word that He spoke to
you? Please do not hide it from me. Elohim do so to
you, and more also, if you hide a word from me of all
the words that He spoke to you.”
18 And Shemu’ĕl reported to him all the words, and
hid none from him. And he said, “It is hWhY. Let Him
do what is good in His eyes.”
19 And Shemu’ĕl grew up, and hWhY was with him
and did not let any of his words fall to the ground.
676

1 SAMUEL

And all Yisra’ĕl from Dan to Be’ĕrsheḇa knew that
Shemu’ĕl had been established as a naḇi of hWhY.
21 And hWhY continued to appear in Shiloh, because
hWhY revealed Himself to Shemu’ĕl in Shiloh by the
word of hWhY.
20

4 Thus the word of Shemu’ĕl was to all Yisra’ĕl. And
Yisra’ĕl went out to battle against the Pelishtites, and
encamped beside Eḇen ha’Ĕzer, while the Pelishtites
encamped in Aphĕq.
2 And the Pelishtites put themselves in battle array
against Yisra’ĕl. And when the battle spread, Yisra’ĕl
was smitten by the Pelishtites, who killed about four
thousand men of the army in the field.
3 And when the people came into the camp, the
elders of Yisra’ĕl said, “Why has hWhY smitten us
today before the Pelishtites? Let us bring the ark of
the Covenant of hWhY from Shiloh to us, so that He
comes into our midst and save us from the hand of
our enemies.”
4 And the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought
from there the ark of the Covenant of hWhY of hosts,
dwelling between the keruḇim. And the two sons of
Ĕli, Ḥophni and Pineḥas, were there with the ark of
the Covenant of Elohim.
5 And when the ark of the Covenant of hWhY came
into the camp, all Yisra’ĕl shouted so loudly that the
earth shook.
6 And when the Pelishtites heard the noise of the
shout, they said, “What is the noise of this great shout
in the camp of the Iḇrim?” And when they knew that
the ark of hWhY had come into the camp,
7 the Pelishtites were afraid, for they said, “Elohim
has come into the camp!” And they said, “Woe to us!
For it has never been like this before.
677

SHEMU’ĔL 1

“Woe to us! Who shall deliver us from the hand of
these mighty Elohim? These are the Elohim who
smote the Mitsrites with all the plagues in the
wilderness.
9 “Be strong and be men, you Pelishtites, that you
do not become servants of the Iḇrim, as they have
been to you. Be men, and fight!”
10 And the Pelishtites fought, and Yisra’ĕl was
smitten, and every man fled to his tent. And the
slaughter was very great, and there fell of Yisra’ĕl
thirty thousand foot soldiers.
11 And the ark of Elohim was captured, and the two
sons of Ĕli died, Ḥophni and Pineḥas.
12 And a man of Binyamin ran from the battle line the
same day, and came to Shiloh with his garments torn
and dirt on his head.
13 And he came in and saw Ĕli, sitting on a seat by
the wayside watching, for his heart trembled for the
ark of Elohim. And the man came into the city and
reported it, and all the city cried out.
14 And Ĕli heard the noise of the outcry and said,
“What is the noise of this uproar?” And the man came
hastily and informed Ĕli.
15 Now Ĕli was ninety-eight years old and his eyes
were so dim that he was unable to see.
16 And the man said to Ĕli, “I am he who came from
the battle. And I fled today from the battle line.” And
he said, “What was the matter, my son?”
17 And the messenger answered and said, “Yisra’ĕl
has fled before the Pelishtites, and there has been a
great slaughter among the people. And your two sons
have died, Ḥophni and Pineḥas, and the ark of Elohim
has been captured.”
18 And it came to be, when he made mention of the
ark of Elohim, that Ĕli fell off the seat backward by the
8

678

1 SAMUEL

side of the gate. And his neck was broken and he
died, for the man was old and heavy. And he ruled
Yisra’ĕl forty years.
19 And his daughter-in-law, Pineḥas’ wife, was
pregnant, about to bear. And when she heard the
news that the ark of Elohim was captured, and that
her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she
bowed herself and gave birth, because her pains
came upon her.
20 And about the time of her death the women who
stood by her said to her, “Do not fear, for you have
borne a son.” But she did not answer, nor did she put
her heart to it.
21 And she called the child Iḵaḇoḏ, saying, “The
esteem has departed from Yisra’ĕl!” because the ark
of Elohim was taken and because of her father-in-law
and her husband.
22 And she said, “The esteem has departed from
Yisra’ĕl, for the ark of Elohim was taken.”

5 And the Pelishtites took the ark of Elohim and
brought it from Eḇen ha’Ĕzer to Ashdoḏ,
2 and the Pelishtites took the ark of Elohim and
brought it into the house of Daḡon and put it by
Daḡon.
3 And the Ashdoḏites rose early in the morning and
saw Daḡon fallen on its face to the ground before the
ark of hWhY. So they took Daḡon and put it in its place
again.
4 And they arose early the next morning and saw
Daḡon fallen on its face to the ground before the ark
of hWhY, and the head of Daḡon and both the palms
of its hands cut off, on the threshold, only Daḡon itself
was left of it.
679

SHEMU’ĔL 1

That is why, to this day, the priests of Daḡon and
all who come into Daḡon’s house do not tread on the
threshold of Daḡon in Ashdoḏ.
6 But the hand of hWhY was heavy on the
Ashdoḏites, and He wasted them and smote them
with tumours - Ashdoḏ and its borders.
7 And when the men of Ashdoḏ saw this, they said,
“Let not the ark of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl remain with
us, for His hand has been hard on us, and on Daḡon
our mighty one.”
8 Then they sent and gathered to them all the
princes of the Pelishtites, and said, “What do we do
with the ark of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl?” And they
answered, “Let the ark of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl be
removed to Gath.” And they removed the ark of the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl .
9 And it came to be, after they removed it, that the
hand of hWhY was against the city with a very great
destruction. And He smote the men of the city, from
the least to the greatest, and tumours broke out on
them.
10 They then sent the ark of Elohim to Eqron. And it
came to be, as the ark of Elohim came to Eqron, that
the Eqronites cried out, saying, “They have removed
the ark of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl to us, to kill us and
our people!”
11 And they sent and gathered together all the
princes of the Pelishtites, and said, “Send away the
ark of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and let it return to its own
place, so that it does not kill us and our people.” For
there had come a deadly destruction throughout all
the city - the hand of Elohim was very heavy there.
12 And the men who did not die were smitten with
tumours, and the cry of the city went up to the
shamayim.
5

680

1 SAMUEL

6 And the ark of hWhY was in the field of the
Pelishtites for seven months.
2 And the Pelishtites called for the priests and the
diviners, saying, “What do we do with the ark of
hWhY? Let us know with what we should send it to its
place.”
3 And they said, “If you send away the ark of the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, do not send it empty, but you shall
certainly return it to Him with a guilt offering. Then you
are going to be healed, and it shall be known to you
why His hand does not turn aside from you.”
4 And they said, “What is the guilt offering which we
return to Him?” And they answered, “The number of
the princes of the Pelishtites: five golden tumours and
five golden rats. For the same plague was on all of
you and on your princes.
5 “And you shall make images of your tumours and
images of your rats that ruin the land, and you shall
give esteem to the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl. It could be that
He lifts His hand from you, from your mighty ones,
and from your land.
6 “And why do you harden your hearts as the
Mitsrites and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When
He had severely dealt with them, did they not send
them away, and they went?
7 “And now, take and make a new wagon, and two
milk cows which have never been yoked, and hitch
the cows to the wagon. And take their calves home,
away from them.
8 “And take the ark of hWhY and put it on the wagon.
And put the objects of gold which you are returning to
Him as a guilt offering in a chest by its side, and send
it away, and it shall go.
681

SHEMU’ĔL 1

“And you shall see, if it goes up the way to its own
border, to Bĕyth Shemesh, then He has done us this
great evil. But if not, then we shall know that His hand
has not come against us - an accident it was to us.”
10 And the men did so and took two milk cows and
hitched them to the wagon, and shut up their calves
at home.
11 And they put the ark of hWhY on the wagon, and
the chest with the gold rats and the images of their
tumours.
12 And the cows went straight for the way to Bĕyth
Shemesh, and went along the highway, bellowing as
they went, and did not turn aside, right or left. And the
princes of the Pelishtites went after them to the border
of Bĕyth Shemesh.
13 And Bĕyth Shemesh were reaping their wheat
harvest in the valley. And they lifted their eyes and
saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.
14 And the wagon came into the field of Yahoshua of
Bĕyth Shemesh and stood there, and there was a
great stone. So they split the wood of the wagon and
offered the cows as a burnt offering to hWhY.
15 And the Lĕwites took down the ark of hWhY and
the chest that was with it, in which were the objects of
gold, and put them on the great stone. And the men
of Bĕyth Shemesh slaughtered burnt offerings and
made offerings the same day to hWhY.
16 And when the five princes of the Pelishtites saw it,
they returned to Eqron the same day.
17 And these are the gold tumours which the
Pelishtites returned as a guilt offering to hWhY: one
for Ashdoḏ, one for Azzah, one for Ashqelon, one for
Gath, one for Eqron,
18 and the gold rats, by the number of all the cities of
the Pelishtites belonging to the five princes, both
9

682

1 SAMUEL

walled cities and country villages, even as far as the
great meadow on which they placed the ark of hWhY,
are to this day in the field of Yahoshua of Bĕyth
Shemesh.
19 And He smote among the men of Bĕyth Shemesh,
for they had looked into the ark of hWhY. He smote
among the people seventy men, and the people
mourned because hWhY smote among the people, a
great smiting.
20 And the men of Bĕyth Shemesh said, “Who is able
to stand before this qodesh hWhY Elohim? And to
whom shall He go from us?”
21 And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of
Qiryath Ye’arim, saying, “The Pelishtites have
brought back the ark of hWhY. Come down, take it up
to you.”

7 And the men of Qiryath Ye’arim came and took the
ark of hWhY, and brought it into the house of Aḇinaḏaḇ
on the hill, and qadosh El’azar his son to guard the ark
of HWHY.
2 And it came to be, from the day that the ark
remained in Qiryath Ye’arim, that the time increased,
it came to be twenty years. And all the house of
Yisra’ĕl lamented after hWhY.
3 And Shemu’ĕl spoke to all the house of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “If you return to hWhY with all your hearts, then
put away the foreign mighty ones and Ashtaroth from
among you, and prepare your hearts for hWhY, and
serve Him only, so that He delivers you from the hand
of the Pelishtites.”
4 And the children of Yisra’ĕl put away the Ba’als
and Ashtaroth, and served hWhY only.
5 And Shemu’ĕl said, “Gather all Yisra’ĕl to Mitspah
and let me pray to hWhY for you.”
683

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And they gathered to Mitspah and drew water, and
poured it out before hWhY. And they fasted that day,
and said there, “We have sinned against hWhY.” And
Shemu’ĕl rightly ruled the children of Yisra’ĕl at
Mitspah.
7 And when the Pelishtites heard that the children of
Yisra’ĕl had gathered together at Mitspah, the princes
of the Pelishtites went up against Yisra’ĕl. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl heard of it, and were afraid of the
Pelishtites.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl said to Shemu’ĕl, “Do
not cease to cry out to hWhY our Elohim for us, that
He would save us from the hand of the Pelishtites.”
9 And Shemu’ĕl took a suckling lamb and offered it
as a burnt offering, completely, to hWhY. And
Shemu’ĕl cried out to hWhY for Yisra’ĕl, and hWhY
answered him.
10 And it came to be, as Shemu’ĕl offered up the
burnt offering, the Pelishtites drew near to battle
against Yisra’ĕl. But hWhY thundered with a great
noise on that day on the Pelishtites, and troubled
them, and they were smitten before Yisra’ĕl.
11 And the men of Yisra’ĕl went out from Mitspah and
pursued the Pelishtites, and smote them as below
Bĕyth Kar.
12 And Shemu’ĕl took a stone and put it up between
Mitspah and Shĕn, and called its name Eḇen ha’Ĕzer,
saying, “Thus far hWhY has helped us.”
13 Thus the Pelishtites were humbled, and no longer
came into the border of Yisra’ĕl. And the hand of
hWhY was against the Pelishtites all the days of
Shemu’ĕl.
14 And the cities which the Pelishtites had taken from
Yisra’ĕl were returned to Yisra’ĕl, from Eqron to Gath.
And Yisra’ĕl recovered its border from the hands of
6

684

1 SAMUEL

the Pelishtites. And there was peace between Yisra’ĕl
and the Amorites.
15 And Shemu’ĕl rightly ruled Yisra’ĕl all the days of
his life,
16 and each year he made the rounds of Bĕyth Ĕl,
and Gilgal, and Mitspah, and rightly ruled Yisra’ĕl in
all those places.
17 Then he returned to Ramah, for his home was
there. And there he rightly ruled Yisra’ĕl, and there he
built an altar to hWhY.

8 And it came to be, when Shemu’ĕl was old, that he
made his sons rulers over Yisra’ĕl.
2 And the name of his first-born was Yo’ĕl, and the
name of his second, Aḇiyah, rulers in Be’ĕrsheḇa.
3 But his sons did not walk in his ways, and turned
aside after own gain, and took bribes, and twisted
right-ruling.
4 And all the elders of Yisra’ĕl gathered together
and came to Shemu’ĕl at Ramah,
5 and said to him, “Look, you are old, and your sons
do not walk in your ways. Now appoint for us a
sovereign to rule us like all the nations.”
6 But the word was evil in the eyes of Shemu’ĕl
when they said, “Give us a sovereign to rule us.” So
Shemu’ĕl prayed to HWHY.
7 And hWhY said to Shemu’ĕl, “Listen to the voice of
the people in all that they say to you, for they have
not rejected you, but they have rejected Me from
reigning over them.
8 “According to all the works which they have done
since the day that I brought them up out of Mitsrayim,
even to this day - forsaking Me and serving other
mighty ones - so they are doing to you too.
685

SHEMU’ĔL 1

“And now, listen to their voice, but you shall
certainly warn them, and shall make known to them
the ruling of the sovereign who reigns over them.”
10 And Shemu’ĕl spoke all the words of hWhY to the
people who asked him for a sovereign,
11 and said, “This is the ruling of the sovereign who
reigns over you: He shall take your sons and appoint
them for his own chariots and to be his horsemen,
and they shall run before his chariots,
12 and appoint commanders over his thousands and
commanders over his fifties, or to plough his ground
and reap his harvest, or to make his weapons, and
equipment for his chariots.
13 “And your daughters he is going to take to be
perfumers, and cooks, and bakers.
14 “And the best of your fields, and your vineyards,
and your olive trees he is going to take and give them
to his servants.
15 “And a tenth of your grain and your vintage he is
going to take and give it to his officers and servants.
16 “And your male servants and your female servants
and your best young men and your donkeys he is
going to take and use for his own work.
17 “A tenth of your sheep he is going to take, and you
are to be his servants.
18 “And you shall cry out in that day because of your
sovereign whom you have chosen for yourselves, but
hWhY is not going to answer you in that day.”
19 However, the people refused to listen to the voice
of Shemu’ĕl, and said, “No, but let a sovereign be
over us.
20 Then we shall be, we also, like all the nations, and
our sovereign shall rule us and go out before us and
fight our battles.”
9

686

1 SAMUEL

And Shemu’ĕl heard all the words of the people,
and he repeated them in the hearing of hWhY.
22 And hWhY said to Shemu’ĕl, “Listen to their voice,
and make them a sovereign.” And Shemu’ĕl said to
the men of Yisra’ĕl, “Each of you go to his city.”
21

9 And there was a man of Binyamin whose name was
Qish, son of Aḇi’ĕl, son of Tseror, son of Beḵorath, son
of Aphiyaḥ, a Binyamite, a mighty man of power.
2 And he had a son whose name was Sha’ul, young
and handsome. And there was not a more handsome
man than he among the children of Yisra’ĕl, taller than
any of the people by the shoulders and upwards.
3 And the donkeys of Qish, father of Sha’ul, were
lost. And Qish said to his son Sha’ul, “Please take one
of the servants with you, and arise, go seek the
donkeys.”
4 And he passed through the mountains of
Ephrayim and through the land of Shalishah, but they
did not find them. Then they passed through the land
of Sha’alim, but they were not. Then he passed
through the land of the Binyamites, but they did not
find them.
5 They came to the land of Tsuph, and Sha’ul said
to his servant who was with him, “Come, let us turn
back, lest my father forgets about the donkeys and
become worried about us.”
6 And he said to him, “See, there is in this city a man
of Elohim, and the man is esteemed. All that he says
comes true, without fail. Now, let us go there. It could
be that he shows us the way to go.”
7 And Sha’ul said to his servant, “But look, if we go,
what do we bring the man? For the bread in our bags
is all gone, and there is no present to bring to the man
of Elohim. What do we have?”
687

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And the servant answered Sha’ul again and said,
“Look, I have here at hand one fourth of a sheqel of
silver. And I shall give that to the man of Elohim, and
he shall make known to us our way.”
9 Formerly, in Yisra’ĕl, when a man went to inquire
of Elohim, he spoke thus, “Come, let us go to the
seer,” for the naḇi of today was formerly called a seer.
10 And Sha’ul said to his servant, “Your word is good.
Come, let us go.” And they went to the city where the
man of Elohim was.
11 As they went up the hill to the city, they met some
young women going out to draw water, and said to
them, “Is the seer here?”
12 And they answered them and said, “He is. Look,
ahead of you. Hurry now, for he came to this city
today, for the people have an offering on the high
place today.
13 “As you come into the city, you are going to find
him before he goes up to the high place to eat. For
the people do not eat until he comes, for he baraḵ the
slaughtering, afterward they who are invited eat. And
now, go up, for you should find him about this time.”
14 And they went up to the city. They were coming
into the midst of the city, and saw Shemu’ĕl coming
out toward them to go up to the high place.
15 And hWhY had revealed to Shemu’ĕl in his ear the
day before Sha’ul came, saying,
16 “At this time tomorrow I shall send you a man from
the land of Binyamin, and you shall anoint him leader
over My people Yisra’ĕl, and he shall save My people
from the hand of the Pelishtites. For I have seen My
people, because their cry has come to me.”
17 And when Shemu’ĕl saw Sha’ul, hWhY said to him,
“See, the man of whom I spoke to you. Let this one
govern My people.”
8

688

1 SAMUEL

And Sha’ul drew near to Shemu’ĕl in the gate, and
said, “Please inform me, where is the house of the
seer?”
19 And Shemu’ĕl answered Sha’ul and said, “I am the
seer. Go up before me to the high place, for you shall
eat with me today. And tomorrow I shall let you go
and make known to you all that is in your heart.
20 “As for your donkeys that were lost three days ago,
do not lay your heart on them, for they have been
found. And on whom is all the desire of Yisra’ĕl? Is it
not on you and on all your father’s house?”
21 And Sha’ul answered and said, “Am I not a
Binyamite - of the smallest of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl,
and my clan the least of all the clans of the tribe of
Binyamin? Why then do you speak like this to me?”
22 And Shemu’ĕl took Sha’ul and his servant and
brought them into the hall, and gave to them a place
at the head of those who were invited, and there were
about thirty men.
23 And Shemu’ĕl said to the cook, “Bring the portion
which I gave you, of which I told you to put it aside.”
24 And the cook brought out the thigh with its upper
part and put it before Sha’ul. And Shemu’ĕl said, “See
what was kept back. It was put aside for you. Eat, for
it has been kept for you for this appointed time,
saying, “I have invited the people.” And Sha’ul ate
with Shemu’ĕl on that day.
25 And they came down from the high place into the
city, and Shemu’ĕl spoke with Sha’ul on the roof.
26 And they rose early. And it came to be about the
dawning of the day that Shemu’ĕl called to Sha’ul on
the roof, saying, “Rise, so that I send you on your
way.” And Sha’ul rose, and both of them went outside,
he and Shemu’ĕl.
18

689

SHEMU’ĔL 1

As they were walking toward the edge of the city,
Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “Say to the servant to go on
ahead of us.” And he went on. “But you stand here a
moment, so that I let you hear the word of Elohim.”

27

10 And Shemu’ĕl took a flask of oil and poured it on
his head, and kissed him and said, “Is it not because
hWhY has anointed you leader over His inheritance?
2 “When you leave me today, you shall find two men
by Raḥĕl’s tomb in the border of Binyamin at
Tseltsaḥ, and they shall say to you, ‘The donkeys
which you went to look for have been found. And see,
your father has left the matters of the donkeys and is
worrying about you, saying, “What shall I do for my
son?” ’
3 “And you shall pass on from there, and beyond,
and shall come to the terebinth tree of Taḇor. And
three men going up to Elohim at Bĕyth Ĕl shall find
you there, one bearing three young goats, another
bearing three loaves of bread, and another bearing a
skin of wine.
4 “And they shall greet you and give you two loaves
of bread, which you shall accept from their hand.
5 “After that go to the hill of Elohim where the
Pelishtite watch-post is. And it shall be, when you
have come there to the city, that you shall meet a
group of neḇi’im coming down from the high place
with a stringed instrument, and a tambourine, and a
flute, and a lyre before them, and they naḇa.
6 “And the Ruaḥ of hWhY shall come upon you, and
you shall naḇa with them and be turned into another
man.
7 “And it shall be, when these signs come to you, do
for yourself as your hand finds to do, for Elohim is with
you.
690

1 SAMUEL

“And you shall go down before me to Gilgal. And
see, I am coming down to you to slaughter burnt
offerings and make peace offerings. Wait seven days,
till I come to you, then I shall make known to you what
you should do.”
9 And it came to be, when he had turned his back to
go from Shemu’ĕl, that Elohim gave him another
heart. And all those signs came on that day.
10 And they came there to the hill and saw a group of
neḇi’im, to meet him. And the Ruaḥ of Elohim came
upon him, and he naḇu in their midst.
11 And it came to be, all who knew him formerly
looked and saw that he naḇu among the neḇi’im. So
the people said to each other, “What is this that has
come upon the son of Qish? Is Sha’ul also among the
neḇi’im?”
12 And a man there answered and said, “And who is
their father?” That is why it became a proverb, “Is
Sha’ul also among the neḇi’im?”
13 And when he stopped naḇa, he went to the high
place.
14 And the uncle of Sha’ul asked him and his servant,
“Where did you go?” And he said, “To look for the
donkeys. And when we saw that they were nowhere
to be found, we went to Shemu’ĕl.”
15 And the uncle of Sha’ul said, “Please inform me
what Shemu’ĕl said to you.”
16 And Sha’ul said to his uncle, “He informed us
plainly that the donkeys had been found.” But he did
not disclose to him about the matter of the reign, what
Shemu’ĕl had said.
17 And Shemu’ĕl called the people together to hWhY
at Mitspah,
18 and said to the children of Yisra’ĕl, “Thus said
hWhY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I have brought Yisra’ĕl
8

691

SHEMU’ĔL 1

up out of Mitsrayim, and delivered you from the hand
of the Mitsrites and from the hand of all reigns and
from those who oppressed you.’
19 “And today you have rejected your Elohim, who
Himself saved you out of all your evils and your
distresses. And you have said to Him, ‘No, but
appoint a sovereign over us!’ And now, present
yourselves before hWhY by your tribes and by your
clans.”
20 And Shemu’ĕl brought near all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl, and the tribe of Binyamin was taken.
21 Then he brought near the tribe of Binyamin, by
their clans, and the clan of Matri was taken, and
Sha’ul son of Qish was taken. And when they sought
him, he could not be found.
22 And they asked again of hWhY, “Has the man
come here yet?” And hWhY answered, “See, he has
hidden by the baggage.”
23 And they ran and brought him from there. And he
stood in the midst of the people, and he was taller
than any of the people, from his shoulders and
upwards.
24 And Shemu’ĕl said to all the people, “Do you see
him whom hWhY has chosen, that there is no one like
him among all the people?” And all the people
shouted and said, “Let the sovereign live!”
25 And Shemu’ĕl declared to the people the rulings
of the reign, and wrote it in a book and placed it before
hWhY. And Shemu’ĕl sent all the people away, each
to his house.
26 And Sha’ul went to his house too, to Giḇ’ah. And
with him went brave men whose hearts Elohim had
touched.

692

1 SAMUEL

But the sons of Beliya’al said, “What! Does this
one save us?” And they despised him, and brought
him no presents. But he kept silent.

27

11 And Naḥash the Ammonite came up and camped
against Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ. And all the men of Yaḇĕsh said
to Naḥash, “Make a covenant with us, and we shall
serve you.”
2 Then Naḥash the Ammonite answered them, “For
this I make a covenant with you, that I dig out all your
right eyes, and I shall bring reproach on all Yisra’ĕl.”
3 And the elders of Yaḇĕsh said to him, “Leave us
alone for seven days, so that we send messengers to
all the borders of Yisra’ĕl. And then, if there is no one
to save us, we shall come out to you.”
4 And the messengers came to Giḇ’ah of Sha’ul and
spoke the words in the hearing of the people. And all
the people lifted up their voices and wept.
5 And look, Sha’ul was coming behind the herd from
the field. And Sha’ul said, “Why are the people
weeping?” And they related to him the words of the
men of Yaḇĕsh.
6 And the Ruaḥ of Elohim came upon Sha’ul mightily
as he heard these words, and his displeasure burned
greatly.
7 And he took a yoke of cattle and cut them in
pieces, and sent them throughout all the border of
Yisra’ĕl by the hands of messengers, saying,
“Whoever does not go out with Sha’ul and Shemu’ĕl
to battle, let this be done to his cattle.” And the
reverence of hWhY fell on the people, and they came
out as one man.
8 And he mustered them in Bezeq, and the children
of Yisra’ĕl were three hundred thousand, and the men
of Yahuḏah thirty thousand.
693

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And they said to the messengers who came, “Say
this to the men of Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ, ‘Tomorrow, by the
time the sun is hot, you shall have help.’ ” Then the
messengers came and informed the men of Yaḇĕsh,
and they rejoiced.
10 So the men of Yaḇĕsh said, “Tomorrow we come
out to you, and you shall do to us whatever seems
good to you.”
11 And it came to be, on the next day, that Sha’ul put
the people in three companies. And they came into
the midst of the camp in the morning watch and smote
Ammon until the heat of the day. And it came to be
that those left were scattered, so that no two of them
were left together.
12 And the people said to Shemu’ĕl, “Who said, ‘Shall
Sha’ul reign over us?’ Bring the men, so that we put
them to death.”
13 But Sha’ul said, “No man is put to death this day,
for today hWhY has wrought deliverance in Yisra’ĕl.”
14 And Shemu’ĕl said to the people, “Come, and let
us go to Gilgal and renew the reign there.”
15 And all the people went to Gilgal, and there they
appointed Sha’ul to reign before hWhY in Gilgal, and
there they made slaughterings of peace offerings
before hWhY. And there Sha’ul rejoiced, and all the
men of Yisra’ĕl, very greatly.
9

12 And Shemu’ĕl said to all Yisra’ĕl, “Look, I have
listened to your voice in all that you said to me, and
have appointed a sovereign over you.
2 “And now, look, the sovereign is walking before
you. And I am old and grey, and look, my sons are
with you. And I have walked before you from my youth
to this day.
694

1 SAMUEL

“Look, here I am. Witness against me before hWhY
and before His anointed: Whose ox have I taken, or
whose donkey have I taken, or whom have I
oppressed? Whom have I abused, or from whose
hand have I received any bribe with which to blind my
eyes? - then I restore it to you.”
4 And they said, “You have not oppressed us or
abused us, nor have you taken any from anyone’s
hand.”
5 So he said to them, “hWhY is witness against you,
and His anointed is witness today, that you have
found naught in my hand.” And they answered, “He is
witness.”
6 And Shemu’ĕl said to the people, “It is hWhY who
appointed Mosheh and Aharon, and who brought
your fathers up from the land of Mitsrayim.
7 “And now, stand still, so that I judge you before
hWhY concerning all the righteous acts of hWhY which
He did to you and your fathers:
8 “When Ya’aqoḇ had come to Mitsrayim, and your
fathers cried out to hWhY, then hWhY sent Mosheh
and Aharon, who brought your fathers out of
Mitsrayim and made them dwell in this place.
9 “But they forgot hWhY their Elohim, so He sold
them into the hand of Sisera, commander of the army
of Ḥatsor, and into the hand of the Pelishtites, and
into the hand of the sovereign of Mo’aḇ. And they
fought against them.
10 “And they cried out to hWhY, and said, ‘We have
sinned, because we have forsaken hWhY and served
the Ba’als and the Ashtaroth. And now, deliver us
from the hand of our enemies, and we serve You.’
11 “And hWhY sent Yerubba’al, and Beḏan, and
Yiphtaḥ, and Shemu’ĕl, and delivered you out of the
3

695

SHEMU’ĔL 1

hand of your enemies round about, and you dwelt in
safety.
12 “And when you saw that Naḥash sovereign of the
children of Ammon came against you, you said to me,
‘No, but let a sovereign reign over us,’ when hWhY
your Elohim was your sovereign.
13 “And now, here is the sovereign whom you have
chosen and whom you have asked. And see, hWhY
has appointed a sovereign over you.
14 “If you revere hWhY, and shall serve Him and obey
His voice, and not rebel against the Command of
hWhY, then both you and the sovereign who reigns
over you shall follow hWhY your Elohim.
15 “But if you do not obey the voice of hWhY, and shall
rebel against the Command of hWhY, then the hand
of hWhY shall be against you, as it was against your
fathers.
16 “And now, stand and see this great matter which
hWhY does before your eyes:
17 “Is today not the wheat harvest? Let me call to
hWhY, so that He sends thunder and rain - know then
and see that your evil is great, which you have done
in the eyes of hWhY, in asking for yourselves a
sovereign.”
18 And Shemu’ĕl called to hWhY, and hWhY sent
thunder and rain that day. And all the people greatly
revered hWhY and Shemu’ĕl.
19 And all the people said to Shemu’ĕl, “Pray for your
servants to hWhY your Elohim, that we do not die, for
we have added to all our sins by doing evil in asking
for ourselves a sovereign.”
20 And Shemu’ĕl said to the people, “Do not fear. You
have done all this evil. Only, do not turn aside from
following hWhY. And you shall serve hWhY with all
your heart,
696

1 SAMUEL

and do not turn aside after worthlessness which
does not profit or deliver, for they are worthless.
22 “For hWhY would not cast away His people, for His
great Name’s sake, seeing it has pleased hWhY to
make you His people.
23 “Also, as for me, far be it from me that I should sin
against hWhY in ceasing to pray for you, but I shall
teach you the good and straight Way.
24 “Only revere hWhY, and you shall serve Him in
truth with all your heart, for consider what marvels He
has done for you.
25 “But if you persist in doing evil, both you and your
sovereign are consumed.”
21

13 Sha’ul was . . . years old when he began to reign.
And when he had reigned two years over Yisra’ĕl,
2 Sha’ul chose for himself three thousand men of
Yisra’ĕl. And two thousand were with Sha’ul in
Miḵmash and in the mountains of Bĕyth Ĕl, and a
thousand were with Yahonathan in Giḇ’ah of
Binyamin. And the rest of the people he sent away,
each to his tent.
3 And Yahonathan smote the watch-post of the
Pelishtites that was in Geḇa, and the Pelishtites heard
of it. And Sha’ul blew the ram’s horn throughout all
the land, saying, “Let the Iḇrim hear!”
4 And all Yisra’ĕl heard the news that Sha’ul had
smitten a watch-post of the Pelishtites, and also that
Yisra’ĕl had become a stench to the Pelishtites. And
the people were summoned to Sha’ul at Gilgal.
5 And the Pelishtites gathered to fight Yisra’ĕl, thirty
thousand chariots and six thousand horsemen, and
people as numerous as the sand on the seashore.
And they came up and camped in Miḵmash, east of
Bĕyth Awen.
697

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And the men of Yisra’ĕl saw that they were in
trouble, for the people were distressed, and the
people hid in caves, and in thorny bushes, and in
rocks, and in holes, and in pits.
7 And Iḇrim passed over the Yardĕn to the land of
Gaḏ and Gil’aḏ. But Sha’ul was still in Gilgal, and all
the people followed him, trembling.
8 And he waited for seven days, according to the
appointment with Shemu’ĕl. But Shemu’ĕl did not
come to Gilgal, and the people were scattered from
him.
9 And Sha’ul said, “Bring a burnt offering and peace
offerings here to me.” And he offered the burnt
offering.
10 And it came to be, as he had finished offering the
burnt offering, look, Shemu’ĕl came. And Sha’ul went
out to meet him, to baraḵ him.
11 Then Shemu’ĕl said, “What have you done?” And
Sha’ul said, “Because I saw that the people were
scattered from me, and that you did not come within
the days appointed, and that the Pelishtites gathered
at Miḵmash,
12 so I said, ‘The Pelishtites are going to come down
on me at Gilgal, and I have not appeased the face of
hWhY.’ So I felt compelled, and offered a burnt
offering.”
13 And Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “You have been
foolish. You have not guarded the Command of hWhY
your Elohim, which He commanded you. For now
hWhY would have established your reign over Yisra’ĕl
forever.
14 “But now, your reign is not going to stand. hWhY
shall seek for Himself a man after His own heart, and
hWhY shall command him to be leader over His
6

698

1 SAMUEL

people, because you have not guarded what hWhY
commanded you.”
15 And Shemu’ĕl arose and went up from Gilgal to
Giḇ’ah of Binyamin. And Sha’ul mustered the people
who were present with him, about six hundred men.
16 And Sha’ul, and Yahonathan his son, and the
people who were present with them remained in
Giḇ’ah of Binyamin, while the Pelishtites camped at
Miḵmash.
17 And from the camp of the Pelishtites raiders went
out in three companies. The one company turned to
the way that leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shu’al,
18 and another company turned toward the way of
Bĕyth Ḥoron, and another company turned toward the
way of the border that overlooks the Valley of
Tseḇo’im toward the wilderness.
19 Now no blacksmith could be found in all the land
of Yisra’ĕl, for the Pelishtites said, “Lest the Iḇrim
make swords or spears.”
20 And all Yisra’ĕl went down to the Pelishtites, each
one to sharpen his ploughshare, and his mattock, and
his axe, and his sickle.
21 And the charge was a pim for the ploughshares,
and the mattocks, and the forks, and the axes, and to
appoint the goads.
22 And it came to be, on the day of battle, that there
was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any
of the people who were with Sha’ul and Yahonathan.
But they were found with Sha’ul and Yahonathan his
son.
23 And the outpost of the Pelishtites went out to the
pass of Miḵmash.

14 And it came to be one day that Yahonathan son
of Sha’ul said to the young man who bore his armour,
699

SHEMU’ĔL 1

“Come, and let us go over to the outpost of the
Pelishtites which is on the other side.” But he did not
inform his father.
2 And Sha’ul remained at the outskirts of Giḇ’ah
under a pomegranate tree at Miḡron, and the people
who were with him were about six hundred men.
3 And Aḥiyahu son of Aḥituḇ, Iḵaḇoḏ’s brother, son
of Pineḥas, son of Ĕli, the kohĕn of hWhY in Shiloh,
was wearing a shoulder garment. And the people did
not know that Yahonathan had gone.
4 And between the passes, by which Yahonathan
sought to go over to the outpost of the Pelishtites,
there was an edge of a rock on one side and an edge
of a rock on the other side. And the name, of one was
Botsĕts, and the name of the other Seneh.
5 The one edge was on the north opposite Miḵmash,
and the other on the south opposite Giḇ’ah.
6 And Yahonathan said to the young man who bore
his armour, “Come, and let us go over to the outpost
of these uncircumcised. If so be, hWhY works for us.
For there is no hindrance for hWhY save by many or
by few.”
7 And his armour-bearer said to him, “Do all that is
in your heart, incline yourself. See, I am with you,
according to your heart.”
8 And Yahonathan said, “See, we are passing over
to the men - and show ourselves to them.
9 “If they say this to us, ‘Wait until we come to you,’
then we shall stand still in our place and not go up to
them.
10 “But if they say this, ‘Come up to us,’ then we shall
go up. For hWhY has given them into our hand, and
this is the sign to us.”
11 And both them disclosed themselves to the
outpost of the Pelishtites, and the Pelishtites said, a
700

1 SAMUEL

“See, the Iḇrim are coming out of the holes where
they have hidden.”
12 And the men of the outpost called to Yahonathan
and his armour-bearer, and said, “Come up to us, and
let us teach you a lesson.” Then Yahonathan said to
his armour-bearer, “Come up after me, for hWhY has
given them into the hand of Yisra’ĕl.”
13 And Yahonathan climbed up on his hands and
knees with his armour-bearer after him. And they fell
before Yahonathan, and his armour-bearer was
putting them to death behind him.
14 And that first slaughter which Yahonathan and his
armour-bearer made was about twenty men, in about
half a yoke-furrowed field.
15 And there was trembling in the camp, in the field,
and among all the people. The outpost and the
raiders also trembled, and the ground shook. And it
became a trembling of Elohim.
16 And the watchmen of Sha’ul in Giḇ’ah of Binyamin
looked and saw the crowd melting away, and they
went here and there.
17 And Sha’ul said to the people who were with him,
“Please inspect and see who has gone from us.” So
they inspected and saw that Yahonathan and his
armour-bearer were missing.
18 And Sha’ul said to Aḥiyahu, “Bring the ark of
Elohim here.” For the ark of Elohim was with the
children of Yisra’ĕl on that day.
19 And it came to be, while Sha’ul talked to the
kohĕn, that the noise which was in the camp of the
Pelishtites went on, and became great, so Sha’ul said
to the kohĕn, “Withdraw your hand.”
20 And Sha’ul was called, and all the people who
were with him, and they went to the battle. And see,
701

SHEMU’ĔL 1

every man’s sword was against his neighbour - a very
great confusion.
21 And the Iḇrim who were with the Pelishtites before
that time, who went up with them into the camp,
turned round, they too, to be with Yisra’ĕl, who were
with Sha’ul and Yahonathan.
22 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl who had hidden in the
mountains of Ephrayim, heard that the Pelishtites
fled, and they also pursued them in the battle.
23 Thus hWhY saved Yisra’ĕl that day, and the battle
passed over to Bĕyth Awen.
24 And the men of Yisra’ĕl were distressed that day,
for Sha’ul had placed the people under oath, saying,
“Cursed be the man who eats food until evening, and
I have taken revenge on my enemies.” Therefore
none of the people tasted food.
25 And all the land came into the woods, and there
was honey on the ground.
26 And the people came into the woods and saw the
honey, dripping. But no one put his hand to his mouth,
for the people revered the oath.
27 But Yahonathan had not heard that his father had
taken an oath of the people, and he stretched out the
end of the rod that was in his hand and dipped it in a
honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth. And his
eyes lit up.
28 Then one of the people said, “Your father strictly
took an oath of the people, saying, ‘Cursed be the
man who eats food today.’ ” And the people were
weary.
29 And Yahonathan said, “My father has troubled the
land. Now see how my eyes lit up when I tasted a little
of this honey.
30 “How much better if the people had well eaten
today of the spoil of their enemies which they found!
702

1 SAMUEL

For then, would not the smiting among the Pelishtites
have been greater?”
31 And they smote the Pelishtites that day from
Miḵmash to Ayalon. So the people were very weary,
32 and the people pounced on the spoil, and took
sheep, and cattle, and calves, and slaughtered them
on the ground. And the people ate with the blood.
33 And they told Sha’ul, saying, “Look, the people are
sinning against hWhY by eating with the blood!” And
he said, “You have acted treacherously. Roll a large
stone to me today.”
34 And Sha’ul said, “Disperse among the people, and
say to them, ‘Each one bring his ox near to me, and
each one his sheep, and you shall slaughter them
here, and eat. And do not sin against hWhY by eating
with the blood.’ ” So every one of the people brought
his ox with him that night, and slaughtered it there.
35 And Sha’ul built an altar to hWhY. It was the first
altar he built to hWhY.
36 And Sha’ul said, “Let us go down after the
Pelishtites by night, and plunder them until the
morning light, and not leave a man of them.” And they
said, “Do whatever seems good to you.” But the
kohĕn said, “Let us draw near to Elohim here.”
37 And Sha’ul asked of Elohim, “Should I go down
after the Pelishtites? Do You give them into the hand
of Yisra’ĕl?” But He did not answer him that day.
38 And Sha’ul said, “Come over here, all you chiefs
of the people, and know and see what this sin was
today.
39 “For as hWhY lives, who saves Yisra’ĕl, though it
be in Yahonathan my son, he shall certainly die.” But
not one among all the people answered him.
40 And he said to all Yisra’ĕl, “You be on one side,
and my son Yahonathan and I be on the other side.”
703

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And the people said to Sha’ul, “Do what seems good
to you.”
41 Then Sha’ul said to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “Give
a perfect one.” And Sha’ul and Yahonathan were
taken, but the people escaped.
42 And Sha’ul said, “Cast between my son
Yahonathan and me.” And Yahonathan was taken.
43 Sha’ul then said to Yahonathan, “Explain to me
what you have done.” And Yahonathan explained to
him, and said, “I only tasted a little honey with the end
of the rod that was in my hand. “See, let me die!”
44 And Sha’ul answered, “Elohim do so and more
also, for you shall certainly die, Yahonathan.”
45 But the people said to Sha’ul, “Should Yahonathan
die, who has wrought this great deliverance in
Yisra’ĕl? Far be it! As hWhY lives, let not one hair of
his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with
Elohim this day.” Thus the people rescued
Yahonathan, and he did not die.
46 And Sha’ul returned from pursuing the Pelishtites,
and the Pelishtites went to their own place.
47 And Sha’ul took the reign over Yisra’ĕl, and fought
against all his enemies round about, against Mo’aḇ,
and against the children of Ammon, and against
Eḏom, and against the sovereigns of Tsoḇah, and
against the Pelishtites. And wherever he turned, he
caused trouble.
48 And he gathered an army and smote the
Amalĕqites, and delivered Yisra’ĕl from the hands of
those who plundered them.
49 And the sons of Sha’ul were Yahonathan and
Yishwi and Malkishua. And the names of his two
daughters were these: the name of the first-born
Mĕraḇ, and the name of the younger Miḵal.
704

1 SAMUEL

And the name of Sha’ul’s wife was Aḥino’am the
daughter of Aḥima’ats. And the name of the
commander of his army was Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr, uncle
of Sha’ul.’
51 And Qish was the father of Sha’ul, and Nĕr the
father of Aḇnĕr was the son of Aḇi’ĕl.
52 And there was fierce fighting against the
Pelishtites all the days of Sha’ul. And when Sha’ul
saw any mighty man or any brave man, he took him
for himself.
50

15 And Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “hWhY sent me to
anoint you sovereign over His people, over Yisra’ĕl.
And now, listen to the voice of the words of HWHY.
2 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘I shall punish Amalĕq
for what he did to Yisra’ĕl, how he positioned against
him on the way when he came up from Mitsrayim.
3 ‘Now go, and you shall smite Amalĕq and put
under the ban all that he has, and you shall not spare
them, and put to death from man to woman, from
infant to nursing child, from ox to sheep, from camel
to donkey.’ ”
4 Then Sha’ul summoned the people and mustered
them in Tela’im, two hundred thousand foot soldiers
and ten thousand men of Yahuḏah.
5 And Sha’ul came to a city of Amalĕq, and lay in
wait in the wadi.
6 And Sha’ul said to the Qĕynites, “Go, turn aside,
come down from among the Amalĕqites, lest I destroy
you with them. For you showed kindness to all the
children of Yisra’ĕl when they came up out of
Mitsrayim.” So the Qĕynites turned aside from the
midst of the Amalĕqites.
7 And Sha’ul smote the Amalĕqites, from Ḥawilah all
the way to Shur, which is before Mitsrayim.
705

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And he caught Aḡaḡ sovereign of the Amalĕqites
alive, and put under the ban all the people with the
edge of the sword.
9 But Sha’ul and the people spared Aḡaḡ and the
best of the sheep, and the cattle, and the fatlings, and
the lambs, and all that was good, and would not put
them under the ban. But all goods despised and
worthless, that they put under the ban.
10 And the word of hWhY came to Shemu’ĕl, saying,
11 “I am grieved that I have appointed Sha’ul as
sovereign, for he has turned back from following Me,
and has not performed My Words.” And it displeased
Shemu’ĕl, and he cried to hWhY all night.
12 And Shemu’ĕl rose early in the morning to meet
Sha’ul, and it was told to Shemu’ĕl, saying, “Sha’ul
went to Karmel, and see, he put up a monument for
himself, then turned and passed over, and went down
to Gilgal.”
13 And Shemu’ĕl came to Sha’ul, and Sha’ul said to
him, “Baruḵ are you of hWhY! I have performed the
word of hWhY.”
14 But Shemu’ĕl said, “What then is this bleating of
the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the cattle
which I hear?”
15 And Sha’ul said, “They have brought them from
Amalĕq, because the people spared the best of the
sheep and the cattle, to slaughter to hWhY your
Elohim. And the rest we have put under the ban.”
16 And Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “Wait, and let me
declare to you what hWhY said to me last night.” And
he said to him, “Speak.”
17 And Shemu’ĕl said, “Though you were little in your
own eyes, were you not head of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl?
And did not hWhY anoint you sovereign over Yisra’ĕl?
8

706

1 SAMUEL

“And hWhY sent you on the way, and said, ‘Go, and
you shall put under the ban the sinners, the
Amalĕqites, and fight against them until they are
consumed.’
19 “And why did you not obey the voice of hWhY, but
swooped down on the spoil, and did evil in the eyes
of hWhY?”
20 And Sha’ul said to Shemu’ĕl, “I did obey the voice
of hWhY, and I went on the way on which hWhY sent
me, and brought back Aḡaḡ sovereign of Amalĕq, and
I put Amalĕq under the ban.
21 “But the people took of the spoil, of the sheep and
cattle, the best of that which should have been put
under the ban, to slaughter to hWhY your Elohim in
Gilgal.”
22 Then Shemu’ĕl said, “Does hWhY delight in burnt
offerings and slaughterings, as in obeying the voice
of hWhY? Look, to obey is better than an offering, and
to heed than the fat of rams.
23 “For rebellion is as the sin of divination, and
stubbornness is as wickedness and idolatry. Because
you have rejected the Word of hWhY, He also rejects
you as sovereign.”
24 And Sha’ul said to Shemu’ĕl, “I have sinned, for I
have transgressed the Command of hWhY and your
words, because I feared the people and listened to
their voice.
25 “And now, please pardon my sin, and return with
me, and let me bow myself to hWhY.”
26 But Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “I do not return with
you, for you have rejected the Word of hWhY, and
hWhY rejects you from being sovereign over Yisra’ĕl.”
27 And as Shemu’ĕl turned around to go away,
Sha’ul seized the edge of his robe, and it tore.
18

707

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Shemu’ĕl said to him, “hWhY has torn the
reign of Yisra’ĕl from you today, and has given it to a
neighbour of yours, better than you.
29 “Moreover, the Eminence of Yisra’ĕl does not lie
nor relent. For He is not a man, that He should relent.”
30 Then he said, “I have sinned. But esteem me now,
please, before the elders of my people and before
Yisra’ĕl, and return with me, and I shall bow myself to
hWhY your Elohim.”
31 And Shemu’ĕl turned back after Sha’ul, and Sha’ul
bowed himself to hWhY.
32 And Shemu’ĕl said, “Bring Aḡaḡ sovereign of the
Amalĕqites here to me.” So Aḡaḡ came to him
delightedly, and Aḡaḡ said, “Truly, the bitterness of
death has turned aside.”
33 And Shemu’ĕl said, “As your sword bereaved
women, let your mother be bereaved among women
too.” Shemu’ĕl then hewed Aḡaḡ to pieces before
hWhY in Gilgal.
34 And Shemu’ĕl went to Ramah, while Sha’ul went
up to his house at Giḇ’ah of Sha’ul.
35 And Shemu’ĕl did not see Sha’ul again until the
day of his death, for Shemu’ĕl mourned for Sha’ul.
And hWhY was grieved that He had made Sha’ul to
reign over Yisra’ĕl.
28

16 And hWhY said to Shemu’ĕl, “How long are you
going to mourn for Sha’ul, seeing I have rejected him
from reigning over Yisra’ĕl? Fill your horn with oil, and
go, I am sending you to Yishai the Bĕyth Leḥemite. For
I have seen among his sons a sovereign for Myself.”
2 And Shemu’ĕl said, “How would I go? When
Sha’ul hears it, he shall kill me.” And hWhY said, “Take
a heifer with you, and say, ‘I have come to slaughter
to HWHY.’
708

1 SAMUEL

“And you shall invite Yishai to the slaughtering,
then let Me show you what to do. And you shall anoint
for Me the one I say to you.”
4 And Shemu’ĕl did what hWhY said, and went to
Bĕyth Leḥem. And the elders of the town trembled at
his coming, and said, “Do you come in peace?”
5 And he said, “In peace. I have come to slaughter
to HWHY. Qadosh yourselves, and you shall come with
me to the slaughtering.” And he qadosh Yishai and
his sons, and invited them to the slaughtering.
6 And it came to be, when they came, that he saw
Eliyaḇ and thought, “The anointed of hWhY is indeed
before Him.”
7 But hWhY said to Shemu’ĕl, “Do not look at his
appearance or at the height of his stature, because I
have refused him, for not as man sees, for man looks
at the eyes, but hWhY looks at the heart.”
8 Then Yishai called Aḇinaḏaḇ, and made him pass
before Shemu’ĕl. And he said, “Neither has hWhY
chosen this one.”
9 Next Yishai made Shammah pass by. And he said,
“Neither has hWhY chosen this one.”
10 And Yishai made seven of his sons pass before
Shemu’ĕl. And Shemu’ĕl said to Yishai, “hWhY has
not chosen these.”
11 And Shemu’ĕl said to Yishai, “Are these all the
young men?” And he said, “There remains yet the
youngest, and see, he is tending the sheep.” And
Shemu’ĕl said to Yishai, “Send and bring him, for we
do not turn round till he comes here.”
12 And he sent and brought him in. And he was
tanned, with bright eyes, and good-looking. And hWhY
said, “Arise, anoint him, for this is the one!”
13 And Shemu’ĕl took the horn of oil and anointed
him in the midst of his brothers. And the Ruaḥ of hWhY
3

709

SHEMU’ĔL 1

came upon Dawiḏ from that day and onwards. And
Shemu’ĕl arose and went to Ramah.
14 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY turned aside from Sha’ul,
and an evil spirit from hWhY troubled him.
15 And the servants of Sha’ul said to him, “Look, now,
an evil spirit from Elohim is troubling you.
16 “Please, let our master command your servants
who are before you, to seek out a man who is a skilled
player on the lyre. And it shall be that when the evil
spirit from Elohim is upon you, that he shall play with
his hand, and you be well.”
17 And Sha’ul said to his servants, “Please get me a
man that plays well, and bring him to me.”
18 And one of the servants answered and said,
“Look, I have seen a son of Yishai the Bĕyth
Leḥemite, who knows how to play, a brave one, and
a man of battle, and skilled in words, and a handsome
man. And hWhY is with him.”
19 So Sha’ul sent messengers to Yishai, and said,
“Send me your son Dawiḏ, who is with the sheep.”
20 And Yishai took a donkey loaded with bread, and
a skin of wine, and a young goat, and sent them by
his son Dawiḏ to Sha’ul.
21 And Dawiḏ came to Sha’ul and stood before him.
And he loved him greatly, and he became his armourbearer.
22 Sha’ul therefore sent to Yishai, saying, “Please let
Dawiḏ stand before me, for he has found favour in my
eyes.”
23 And it came to be, whenever the spirit from Elohim
was upon Sha’ul, that Dawiḏ would take a lyre and
play it with his hand. Then Sha’ul would become
refreshed and well, and the evil spirit would leave him.

710

1 SAMUEL

17 And the Pelishtites had gathered their armies for
battle, and came together at Soḵoh, which belongs to
Yahuḏah, and encamped between Soḵoh and Azĕqah,
in Ephes Dammim.
2 And Sha’ul and the men of Yisra’ĕl were gathered
and encamped in the Valley of Ĕlah, and drew up in
battle array to meet the Pelishtites.
3 And the Pelishtites stood on a mountain on one
side, and Yisra’ĕl stood on a mountain on the other
side, with the valley between them.
4 Then a champion came out from the camp of the
Pelishtites, named Golyath, from Gath, whose height
was six ammah and a zereth.
5 And a bronze helmet was on his head, and he was
armed with a scaled armour, and the weight of the
coat was five thousand sheqels of bronze,
6 and bronze shin guards on his legs and a bronze
spear between his shoulders.
7 And the wood of his spear was like a weaver’s
beam, and his iron spearhead six hundred sheqels,
and a shield-bearer went before him.
8 And he stood and shouted to the armies of
Yisra’ĕl, and said to them, “Why have you come out
to line up for battle? Am I not a Pelishtite, and you the
servants of Sha’ul? Choose a man for yourselves,
and let him come down to me.
9 “If he is able to fight with me, and shall smite me,
then we shall be your servants. But if I overcome him
and shall smite him, then you shall be our servants
and serve us.”
10 Then the Pelishtite said, “This day I shall reproach
the armies of Yisra’ĕl. Give me a man, and let us fight
together.”
711

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Sha’ul and all Yisra’ĕl heard these words of
the Pelishtite, and they were broken down and in
great fear.
12 Now Dawiḏ was the son of that Ephrathite of Bĕyth
Leḥem in Yahuḏah, whose name was Yishai, and he
had eight sons, and in the days of Sha’ul the man was
old among men.
13 And the three oldest sons of Yishai went, they had
gone to follow Sha’ul to the battle, and the names of
his three sons who went to the battle were Eliyaḇ the
first-born, and his second Aḇinaḏaḇ, and the third
Shammah.
14 And Dawiḏ was the youngest. And the three oldest
followed Sha’ul,
15 but Dawiḏ went and returned from Sha’ul to feed
his father’s sheep at Bĕyth Leḥem.
16 And for forty days the Pelishtite drew near,
morning and evening, and took his stand.
17 Then Yishai said to his son Dawiḏ, “Please take to
your brothers an ĕphah of this dried grain and these
ten loaves, and run to your brothers at the camp.
18 “And take these ten cheeses to the commander of
the thousand, and see how your brothers are, and
bring back news of them.”
19 For Sha’ul and they and all the men of Yisra’ĕl
were in the Valley of Ĕlah, fighting with the Pelishtites.
20 And Dawiḏ rose up early in the morning, and left
the sheep with a herdsman, and took and went as
Yishai had commanded him. And he came to the
camp as the army was going out to the fight, and they
shouted for the battle.
21 And Yisra’ĕl and the Pelishtites drew up in battle
array, army against army.
11

712

1 SAMUEL

And Dawiḏ left his supplies in the hand of the
keeper of the supplies, and ran to the army, and came
and greeted his brothers.
23 And he was speaking with them and saw the
champion, the Pelishtite of Gath, Golyath by name,
coming up from the armies of the Pelishtites. And he
spoke according to the same words, and Dawiḏ
heard.
24 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl, when they saw the
man, ran from him and were in great fear.
25 And the men of Yisra’ĕl said, “Have you seen this
man who has come up? For he has come up to
reproach Yisra’ĕl. And it shall be that the man who
smites him, the sovereign is going to enrich him with
great riches, and give him his daughter, and give his
father’s house exemption in Yisra’ĕl.”
26 And Dawiḏ spoke to the men who stood by him,
saying, “What shall be done for the man who smites
this Pelishtite and shall take away reproach from
Yisra’ĕl? For who is this uncircumcised Pelishtite, that
he should reproach the armies of the living Elohim?”
27 And the people answered him according to this
word, saying, “This is what is done for the man who
smites him.”
28 And Eliyaḇ his oldest brother heard when he
spoke to the men. And Eliyaḇ’s displeasure burned
against Dawiḏ, and he said, “Why did you come down
here? And with whom have you left those few sheep
in the wilderness? I know your pride and the evil of
your heart, for you have come down to see the battle.”
29 And Dawiḏ said, “Now what have I done? Was it
not but a word?”
30 And he turned around from him toward another
and said the same word. And these people answered
him a word like the first word.
22

713

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And when the words which Dawiḏ spoke were
heard, they reported them to Sha’ul, and he sent for
him.
32 And Dawiḏ said to Sha’ul, “Let no man’s heart fail
because of him, your servant is going, and shall fight
with this Pelishtite.”
33 And Sha’ul said to Dawiḏ, “You are not able to go
against this Pelishtite to fight with him, for you are but
a youth, and he a man of battle from his youth.”
34 Then Dawiḏ said to Sha’ul, “Your servant has
been tending sheep for his father, and when a lion or
a bear came and took a lamb out of the flock,
35 I went out after it and smote it, and rescued from
its mouth. And when it rose against me, I took hold of
its beard, and smote it and killed it.
36 “Your servant has smitten both lion and bear. And
this uncircumcised Pelishtite shall be like one of them,
seeing he has reproached the armies of the living
Elohim.”
37 And Dawiḏ said, “hWhY, who delivered me from
the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear, He
delivers me from the hand of this Pelishtite.” And
Sha’ul said to Dawiḏ, “Go, and hWhY be with you!”
38 And Sha’ul dressed Dawiḏ with his garments, and
he put a bronze helmet on his head, and put a coat of
armour on him.
39 And Dawiḏ girded his sword over his garments,
and began to go, but he had not tried them. Then
Dawiḏ said to Sha’ul, “I am not able to go with these,
for I have not tried them.” So Dawiḏ took them off.
40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose for
himself five smooth stones from the wadi, and put
them in a shepherd’s bag, in a pouch which he had,
and his sling was in his hand. And he drew near to
the Pelishtite.
31

714

1 SAMUEL

And the Pelishtite came, and began drawing near
to Dawiḏ, and the man who bore the shield went
before him.
42 And when the Pelishtite looked about and saw
Dawiḏ, he despised him, for he was a youth, and
tanned and good-looking.
43 And the Pelishtite said to Dawiḏ, “Am I a dog, that
you come to me with sticks?” And the Pelishtite
cursed Dawiḏ by his mighty ones.
44 And the Pelishtite said to Dawiḏ, “Come to me,
and I give your flesh to the birds of the shamayim and
the beasts of the field!”
45 But Dawiḏ said to the Pelishtite, “You come to me
with a sword, and with a spear, and with a lance. But
I come to you in the Name of hWhY of hosts, the
Elohim of the armies of Yisra’ĕl, whom you have
reproached.
46 “This day hWhY shall deliver you into my hand, and
I shall smite you and take your head from you, and
give the carcasses of the camp of the Pelishtites
today to the birds of the shamayim and the wild
beasts of the earth, so that all the earth know that
Elohim is for Yisra’ĕl,
47 and all this assembly know that hWhY does not
save with sword and spear, for the battle belongs to
hWhY, and He shall give you into our hands.”
48 And it came to be, when the Pelishtite arose and
came and drew near to meet Dawiḏ, that Dawiḏ
hurried and ran toward the army to meet the
Pelishtite.
49 And Dawiḏ put his hand in his bag and took out a
stone, and slung it and smote the Pelishtite on his
forehead, so that the stone sank into his forehead,
and he fell on his face to the ground.
41

715

SHEMU’ĔL 1

Thus Dawiḏ prevailed over the Pelishtite with a
sling and a stone, and smote the Pelishtite and killed
him, and there was no sword in the hand of Dawiḏ.
51 Then Dawiḏ ran and stood over the Pelishtite, and
took his sword and drew it out of its sheath and killed
him, and cut off his head with it. And when the
Pelishtites saw that their champion was dead, they
fled.
52 And the men of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah arose and
shouted, and pursued the Pelishtites as far as the
entrance of the valley and to the gates of Eqron. And
the wounded of the Pelishtites fell along the way to
Sha’arayim, even as far as Gath and Eqron.
53 Then the children of Yisra’ĕl turned back from
chasing the Pelishtites, and they plundered their
camps.
54 And Dawiḏ took the head of the Pelishtite and
brought it to Yerushalayim, but he put his weapons in
his tent.
55 And when Sha’ul saw Dawiḏ going out against the
Pelishtite, he said to Aḇnĕr, the commander of the
army, “Aḇnĕr, whose son is this youth?” And Aḇnĕr
said, “As your being lives, O sovereign, I do not
know.”
56 And the sovereign said, “Ask whose son this
young man is.”
57 And when Dawiḏ returned from the slaughter of
the Pelishtite, Aḇnĕr took him and brought him before
Sha’ul with the head of the Pelishtite in his hand.
58 And Sha’ul said to him, “Whose son are you,
young man?” And Dawiḏ said, “The son of your
servant Yishai the Bĕyth Leḥemite.”
50

18 And it came to be, when he had ended speaking
to Sha’ul, that the being of Yahonathan was knit to the
716

1 SAMUEL

being of Dawiḏ, and Yahonathan loved him as his own
being.
2 And Sha’ul took him that day, and would not let
him return to his father’s house any more.
3 And Yahonathan and Dawiḏ made a covenant,
because he loved him as his own being.
4 And Yahonathan took off the robe that was on him
and gave it to Dawiḏ, and his garments, even to his
sword and his bow and his girdle.
5 And Dawiḏ went out wherever Sha’ul sent him. He
acted wisely, and Sha’ul appointed him over the men
of battle, and it was right in the eyes of all the people
and also in the eyes of Sha’ul’s servants.
6 And it came to be, as they came in, as Dawiḏ was
returning from smiting the Pelishtite, that the women
came out from all the cities of Yisra’ĕl, singing and
dancing, to meet Sha’ul the sovereign with
tambourines, with joy, and with musical instruments.
7 And the women sang as they danced, and said,
“Sha’ul smote his thousands, and Dawiḏ his ten
thousands.”
8 And Sha’ul was very wroth, and this matter was
evil in his eyes, and he said, “To Dawiḏ they have
given ten thousands, and to me they have given
thousands. So what more for him, except the reign?”
9 And from that day on Sha’ul eyed Dawiḏ.
10 And it came to be on the next day that an evil spirit
from Elohim came upon Sha’ul, and he naḇu inside
the house, while Dawiḏ was playing by his hand, as
usual. And the spear was in the hand of Sha’ul.
11 Then Sha’ul hurled the spear, for he said, “Let me
smite Dawiḏ, even to the wall.” But twice Dawiḏ
withdrew from his presence.
12 And Sha’ul was afraid of Dawiḏ, because hWhY
was with him, but from Sha’ul He had turned away.
717

SHEMU’ĔL 1

Sha’ul therefore removed him from his presence,
and made him his commander over a thousand. And
he went out and came in before the people.
14 And Dawiḏ was acting wisely in all his ways, and
hWhY was with him.
15 And Sha’ul saw that he was acting very wisely,
and was afraid of him.
16 But all Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah loved Dawiḏ, as he
went out and came in before them.
17 And Sha’ul said to Dawiḏ, “See my older daughter
Mĕraḇ! I give her to you as a wife. Only be brave for
me, and fight the battles of hWhY.” For Sha’ul thought,
“Let not my hand be against him, but let the hand of
the Pelishtites be against him.”
18 And Dawiḏ said to Sha’ul, “Who am I, and what is
my life or my father’s clan in Yisra’ĕl, that I should be
son-in-law to the sovereign?”
19 And it came to be at the time when Mĕraḇ, Sha’ul’s
daughter, should have been given to Dawiḏ, that she
was given to Aḏri’ĕl the Meḥolathite as a wife.
20 And Miḵal, Sha’ul’s daughter, loved Dawiḏ. And
they told Sha’ul, and the matter was right in his eyes.
21 And Sha’ul said, “Let me give her to him and let
her be a snare to him, and the hand of the Pelishtites
be against him.” So Sha’ul said to Dawiḏ a second
time, “Become my son-in-law today.”
22 And Sha’ul commanded his servants, “Speak to
Dawiḏ gently, and say, ‘See, the sovereign has
delighted in you, and all his servants have loved you.
And now, be the sovereign’s son-in-law!’ ”
23 And the servants of Sha’ul spoke those words in
the hearing of Dawiḏ. And Dawiḏ said, “Does it seem
to you a small matter to be a sovereign’s son-in-law,
seeing I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?”
13

718

1 SAMUEL

And the servants of Sha’ul told him, saying,
“Dawiḏ has spoken according to these words.”
25 And Sha’ul said, “Say to Dawiḏ, ‘The sovereign
has no delight in any payment for the bride but one
hundred foreskins of the Pelishtites, to take
vengeance on the sovereign’s enemies.’ ” But Sha’ul
intended to have Dawiḏ fall by the hand of the
Pelishtites.
26 And his servants declared these words to Dawiḏ,
and it pleased Dawiḏ well to become the sovereign’s
son-in-law. And the days had not expired,
27 and Dawiḏ arose and went, he and his men, and
smote two hundred men of the Pelishtites. And Dawiḏ
brought their foreskins, and they put them before the
sovereign, to become the sovereign’s son-in-law. And
Sha’ul gave him Miḵal his daughter as a wife.
28 And Sha’ul saw and knew that hWhY was with
Dawiḏ, and Miḵal daughter of Sha’ul loved him.
29 So then Sha’ul was still more afraid of Dawiḏ. And
Sha’ul came to be an enemy of Dawiḏ all the days.
30 And the princes of the Pelishtites went out. And it
came to be, whenever they went out, that Dawiḏ
acted more wisely than all the servants of Sha’ul, so
that his name came to be very precious.
24

19 And Sha’ul spoke to Yahonathan his son and to
all his servants, to put Dawiḏ to death. But
Yahonathan, Sha’ul’s son, delighted much in Dawiḏ,
2 and Yahonathan declared to Dawiḏ, saying, “My
father Sha’ul seeks to put you to death. And now,
please be on your guard until morning, and dwell in
secrecy, and hide.
3 “And I myself shall go out and stand beside my
father in the field where you are, and speak with my
719

SHEMU’ĔL 1

father about you, and shall see, and shall let you
know.”
4 And Yahonathan spoke well of Dawiḏ to Sha’ul his
father, and said to him, “Let not the sovereign sin
against his servant, against Dawiḏ, because he has
not sinned against you, and because his works have
been very good toward you.
5 “For he took his life in his hands and smote the
Pelishtite, and hWhY wrought a great deliverance for
all Yisra’ĕl. You saw it and rejoiced. Why then do you
sin against innocent blood, to put Dawiḏ to death
without cause?”
6 And Sha’ul listened to the voice of Yahonathan,
and Sha’ul swore, “As hWhY lives, he does not die.”
7 Yahonathan then called Dawiḏ, and Yahonathan
told him all these words. So Yahonathan brought
Dawiḏ to Sha’ul, and he was in his presence as
before.
8 And there was fighting again, and Dawiḏ went out
and fought with the Pelishtites, and smote them, a
great smiting, and they fled before him.
9 And an evil spirit from hWhY came upon Sha’ul as
he sat in his house with his spear in his hand. And
Dawiḏ was playing by hand,
10 and Sha’ul sought to smite the spear through
Dawiḏ, and into the wall, but he slipped away from the
presence of Sha’ul, so he smote the spear into the
wall. And Dawiḏ fled and escaped that night.
11 And Sha’ul sent messengers to Dawiḏ’s house to
watch him and to put him to death in the morning. And
Miḵal, Dawiḏ’s wife, informed him, saying, “If you do
not save your life tonight, tomorrow you are put to
death.”
12 So Miḵal let Dawiḏ down through a window, and
he went and fled and escaped.
720

1 SAMUEL

And Miḵal took the household idol and laid it in the
bed, and put a cover of goats’ hair for his head, and
covered it with a garment.
14 And when Sha’ul sent messengers to take Dawiḏ,
she said, “He is sick.”
15 And Sha’ul sent the messengers back to see
Dawiḏ, saying, “Bring him up to me in the bed to put
him to death.”
16 And the messengers came in and saw the
household idol in the bed, with a cover of goats’ hair
for his head.
17 Sha’ul then said to Miḵal, “Why have you deceived
me like this, and sent my enemy away, so that he
escaped?” And Miḵal answered Sha’ul, “He said to
me, ‘Let me go, why should I put you to death?’ ”
18 Now Dawiḏ fled and escaped, and went to
Shemu’ĕl at Ramah, and told him all that Sha’ul had
done to him. And he and Shemu’ĕl went and dwelt in
Nawith.
19 And it was reported to Sha’ul, saying, “See, Dawiḏ
is in Nawith in Ramah!”
20 And Sha’ul sent messengers to take Dawiḏ. And
they saw the assembly of the neḇi’im naḇa, and
Shemu’ĕl standing as leader over them, and the Ruaḥ
of Elohim came upon the messengers of Sha’ul, and
they also naḇu.
21 And when Sha’ul was told, he sent other
messengers, and they naḇu likewise. So Sha’ul sent
messengers again, the third time, and they naḇu also.
22 Then he himself went to Ramah, and came to the
great well that is at Seḵu. And he asked, and said,
“Where are Shemu’ĕl and Dawiḏ?” And one said,
“There in Nawith in Ramah.”
13

721

SHEMU’ĔL 1

So he went there to Nawith in Ramah. And the
Ruaḥ of Elohim was upon him too, and he went on
and naḇu until he came to Nawith in Ramah.
24 And he also stripped off his garments and naḇu
before Shemu’ĕl, and lay down naked all that day and
all that night. Therefore they say, “Is Sha’ul also
among the neḇi’im?”
23

20 And Dawiḏ fled from Nawith in Ramah, and went
and said to Yahonathan, “What have I done? What is
my wickedness, and what is my sin before your father,
that he seeks my life?”
2 And Yahonathan said to him, “Far be it! You are
not going to die! See, my father does no big matter
nor small matter without disclosing it to me. And why
should my father hide this matter from me? It is not
so!”
3 But Dawiḏ swore again, and said, “Your father
knows well that I have found favour in your eyes, and
he says, ‘Do not let Yahonathan know this, lest he be
grieved.’ But truly, as hWhY lives and as your being
lives, there is but a step between me and death.”
4 And Yahonathan said to Dawiḏ, “Whatever your
desire is, I do it for you.”
5 And Dawiḏ said to Yahonathan, “See, tomorrow is
the New Moon, and I ought to sit with the sovereign
to eat. But let me go, and I shall hide in the field until
the third day at evening.
6 “If your father misses me at all, then you shall say,
‘Dawiḏ earnestly asked my permission to run over to
Bĕyth Leḥem, his city, for a yearly slaughtering is
made there for all the clan.’
7 “If he says thus, ‘It is well,’ your servant is safe.
But if he is very displeased, then know that he has
resolved to do evil.
722

1 SAMUEL

“And you shall show kindness to your servant, for
you have brought your servant into a covenant of
hWhY with you. And if there is wickedness in me, put
me to death yourself, for why should you bring me to
your father?”
9 And Yahonathan said, “Far be it from you! For if I
knew with certainty that my father has resolved that
evil is to come upon you, then would I not make it
known to you?”
10 And Dawiḏ said to Yahonathan, “Who would make
it known to me, or what if your father answers you
sharply?”
11 And Yahonathan said to Dawiḏ, “Come, and let us
go out into the field.” And they both went out into the
field.
12 And Yahonathan said to Dawiḏ, “hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl! When I search out my father sometime
tomorrow, or the third day, and see if there is good
toward Dawiḏ, and I do not send to you or disclose it
to you,
13 so let hWhY do so and much more to Yahonathan.
And if it pleases my father to do you evil, then I shall
disclose it to you and send you away, and you shall
go in peace. And hWhY be with you as He has been
with my father.
14 “But show me the kindness of hWhY, not only while
I still live, so that I do not die,
15 and do not cut off your kindness from my house
forever, no, not when hWhY has cut off every one of
the enemies of Dawiḏ from the face of the earth.”
16 And Yahonathan made a covenant with the house
of Dawiḏ: “hWhY shall require it at the hand of the
enemies of Dawiḏ.”
8

723

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Yahonathan again made Dawiḏ swear,
because he loved him, for he loved him as he loved
his own being.
18 So Yahonathan said to him, “Tomorrow is the New
Moon, and you shall be missed, because your seat
shall be empty.
19 “And on the third day, go down quickly and you
shall come to the place where you hid on the day of
the deed, and shall remain by the stone of Ezel.
20 “And let me shoot three arrows to the side of it as
though shooting at a target,
21 and see, I shall send the youth, saying, ‘Go, find
the arrows.’ If I expressly say to the youth, ‘Look, the
arrows are on this side of you, get them and come,’
then, as hWhY lives, there is safety for you and no
concern.
22 “But if I say thus to the youth, ‘Look, the arrows are
beyond you,’ go your way, for hWhY has sent you
away.
23 “And as for the word which you and I have spoken
of, see, hWhY is between you and me forever.”
24 And Dawiḏ hid in the field. And when the New
Moon came, the sovereign sat down by the food to
eat.
25 And the sovereign sat on his seat, as at other
times, on a seat by the wall, with Yahonathan
standing, and Aḇnĕr sitting by Sha’ul’s side, but the
place of Dawiḏ was empty.
26 But Sha’ul did not speak anything that day, for he
thought, “It is an accident; he is not clean, for he has
not been cleansed.”
27 And it came to be the next day, the second of the
month, that Dawiḏ’s place was empty. And Sha’ul
said to Yahonathan his son, “Why has the son of
Yishai not come to eat, either yesterday or today?”
17

724

1 SAMUEL

And Yahonathan answered Sha’ul, “Dawiḏ
earnestly asked for leave to Bĕyth Leḥem.
29 “And he said, ‘Please let me go, for our clan has a
slaughtering in the city, and my brother has
commanded me to be there. And now, if I have found
favour in your eyes, please let me get away and see
my brothers.’ That is why he has not come to the
sovereign’s table.”
30 Then the displeasure of Sha’ul burned against
Yahonathan, and he said to him, “You son of a
perverse, rebellious woman! Do I not know that you
have chosen the son of Yishai to your own shame and
to the shame of your mother’s nakedness?
31 “For as long as the son of Yishai lives on the earth,
you shall not be established, you and your reign. And
now, send and bring him to me, for he is a son of
death.”
32 And Yahonathan answered Sha’ul his father, and
said to him, “Why should he be put to death? What
has he done?”
33 At that, Sha’ul hurled a spear at him to smite him.
Then Yahonathan knew that his father had resolved
to put Dawiḏ to death.
34 And Yahonathan rose up from the table in the heat
of displeasure, and ate no food the second day of the
month, for he was grieved for Dawiḏ, because his
father put him to shame.
35 And it came to be, in the morning, that Yahonathan
went out into the field at the time appointed with
Dawiḏ, and a small youth was with him.
36 And he said to the youth, “Now run, find the arrows
which I shoot.” As the youth ran, he shot an arrow
beyond him.
37 And when the youth came to the place where the
arrow was which Yahonathan had shot, Yahonathan
28

725

SHEMU’ĔL 1

called out after the youth and said, “Is not the arrow
beyond you?”
38 And Yahonathan shouted after the youth, “Make
haste, hurry, do not stand still!” And Yahonathan’s
youth picked up the arrows and came to his master.
39 But the youth knew not a speck. Only Yahonathan
and Dawiḏ knew of the matter.
40 Then Yahonathan gave his weapons to the youth
and said to him, “Go, take them to the city.”
41 And as soon as the youth had gone, Dawiḏ rose
up from the south side, and fell on his face to the
ground, and bowed down three times. And they
kissed one another. And they wept together, but
Dawiḏ more so.
42 And Yahonathan said to Dawiḏ, “Go in peace,
since we have both sworn in the Name of hWhY
saying, ‘hWhY is between you and me, and between
your seed and my seed, forever.’ ” Then he arose and
left, and Yahonathan went into the city.

21 And Dawiḏ came to Noḇ, to Aḥimeleḵ the kohĕn.
And Aḥimeleḵ trembled when he met Dawiḏ, and
asked him, “Why are you alone, and no one is with
you?”
2 And Dawiḏ said to Aḥimeleḵ the kohĕn, “The
sovereign has commanded me a word, and said to
me, ‘Let no one know whatever of the word about
which I send you, and which I have commanded you.’
And I have directed my young men to such and such
a place.
3 “And now, what do you have on hand? Give five
loaves into my hand, or whatever is found.”
4 And the kohĕn answered Dawiḏ and said, “There
is no ordinary bread on hand, but there is qodesh
726

1 SAMUEL

bread - provided the young men have kept
themselves from women.”
5 And Dawiḏ answered the kohĕn, and said to him,
“Truly, women have been kept from us about three
days since I came out. And the vessels of the young
men are qodesh, and it is an ordinary mission, and
also, it was qodesh in the vessel today.”
6 Then the kohĕn gave him qodesh bread, for there
was no bread there except the showbread which had
been taken from before hWhY, in order to put hot
bread in on the day it is taken away.
7 Now one of the servants of Sha’ul was there that
day, detained before hWhY. And his name was Do’ĕḡ,
an Eḏomite, the chief of the herdsmen who belonged
to Sha’ul.
8 And Dawiḏ said to Aḥimeleḵ, “Is there not here on
hand a spear or a sword? For I have brought neither
my sword nor my weapons with me, because the
matter of the sovereign was urgent.”
9 And the kohĕn said, “The sword of Golyath the
Pelishtite, whom you smote in the Valley of Ĕlah. See,
it is wrapped in a garment behind the shoulder
garment. If you would take it, take it. For there is none
other except this one here.” And Dawiḏ said, “There
is none like it, give it to me.”
10 And Dawiḏ rose and fled that day from before
Sha’ul, and went to Aḵish the sovereign of Gath.
11 But the servants of Aḵish said to him, “Is this not
Dawiḏ the sovereign of the land? Did they not sing of
him to each other in dances, saying, ‘Sha’ul smote his
thousands, and Dawiḏ his ten thousands’?”
12 And Dawiḏ took these words to heart, and was
very much afraid of Aḵish the sovereign of Gath,
13 and changed his behaviour before them, and
feigned madness in their hands, and scratched on the
727

SHEMU’ĔL 1

doors of the gate, and let his saliva run down on his
beard.
14 Then Aḵish said to his servants, “Look, you see
the man is acting like a madman. Why do you bring
him to me?
15 “Am I short of madmen, that you have brought this
one to act as a madman near me? Should this one
come into my house?”

22 And Dawiḏ went from there and escaped to the
cave of Aḏullam. And his brothers and all his father’s
house heard it, and went down to him there.
2 And everyone who was in distress, everyone who
was in debt, and everyone bitter in being gathered to
him. So he became head over them, and there were
about four hundred men with him.
3 And Dawiḏ went from there to Mitspĕh of Mo’aḇ
and said to the sovereign of Mo’aḇ, “Please let my
father and mother come here with you, till I know what
Elohim does for me.”
4 And he left them with the sovereign of Mo’aḇ, and
they dwelt with him all the time that Dawiḏ was in the
stronghold.
5 And the naḇi Gaḏ said to Dawiḏ, “Do not remain in
the stronghold. Leave, and go to the land of
Yahuḏah.” So Dawiḏ left and went into the Ḥereth
woods.
6 And Sha’ul heard that Dawiḏ and the men who
were with him had been discovered, while Sha’ul was
in Giḇ’ah, sitting under a tamarisk tree in Ramah, with
his spear in his hand, and all his servants standing
about him.
7 And Sha’ul said to his servants who were standing
around him, “Hear now, you Binyamites! Does the
son of Yishai give every one of you fields and
728

1 SAMUEL

vineyards, and make you all commanders of
thousands and commanders of hundreds?
8 “For all of you have conspired against me, and
there is no one who reveals to me that my son has
made a covenant with the son of Yishai. And there is
not one of you who is grieved for me or reveals to me
that my son has stirred up my servant against me, to
lie in wait, as it is this day.”
9 And Do’ĕḡ the Eḏomite, who was put over the
servants of Sha’ul, answered and said, “I saw the son
of Yishai going to Noḇ, to Aḥimeleḵ son of Aḥituḇ.
10 “And he inquired of hWhY for him, gave him food,
and gave him the sword of Golyath the Pelishtite.”
11 And the sovereign sent someone to call Aḥimeleḵ
the kohĕn, son of Aḥituḇ, and all his father’s house,
the kohenim who were in Noḇ. And they all came to
the sovereign,
12 and Sha’ul said, “Hear now, son of Aḥituḇ!” And he
answered, “Here I am, my master.”
13 And Sha’ul said to him, “Why have you conspired
against me, you and the son of Yishai, by giving him
bread and a sword, and have inquired of Elohim for
him, to rise against me, to lie in wait, as it is this day?”
14 And Aḥimeleḵ answered the sovereign and said,
“And who among all your servants is so trustworthy
as Dawiḏ, who is the sovereign’s son-in-law, and has
turned aside to your counsel, and is esteemed in your
house?
15 “Have I today begun to inquire of Elohim for him?
Far be it from me! Let not the sovereign lay a case
against his servant, or against any in the house of my
father. For your servant knew not of all this, little or
much.”
16 And the sovereign said, “You shall certainly die,
Aḥimeleḵ, you and all your father’s house!”
729

SHEMU’ĔL 1

The sovereign then said to the guards who stood
about him, “Turn and put the kohenim of hWhY to
death, because their hand also is with Dawiḏ, and
because they knew when he fled and did not reveal it
to me.” But the servants of the sovereign would not
lift their hands to come against the kohenim of HWHY.
18 And the sovereign said to Do’ĕḡ, “You turn and
come against the kohenim!” So Do’ĕḡ the Eḏomite
turned and came against the kohenim, and put to
death on that day eighty-five men who wore a linen
shoulder garment.
19 And he smote Noḇ, the city of the kohenim, with
the edge of the sword, from men even to women, from
children even to nursing infants, and oxen and
donkeys and sheep, with the edge of the sword.
20 And one of the sons of Aḥimeleḵ son of Aḥituḇ,
named Eḇyathar, escaped and fled after Dawiḏ.
21 And Eḇyathar reported to Dawiḏ that Sha’ul had
slain the kohenim of HWHY.
22 And Dawiḏ said to Eḇyathar, “I knew that day,
when Do’ĕḡ the Eḏomite was there, that he would
certainly inform Sha’ul. I am accountable for all the
lives of your father’s house.
23 “Remain with me, do not fear. For he who seeks
my life seeks your life, but with me you are safe.”
17

23 And they informed Dawiḏ, saying, “See, the
Pelishtites are fighting against Qe’ilah, and they are
plundering the threshing-floors.”
2 So Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY, saying, “Shall I go and
smite these Pelishtites?” And hWhY said to Dawiḏ,
“Go and smite the Pelishtites, and save Qe’ilah.”
3 And Dawiḏ’s men said to him, “See, we here in
Yahuḏah are afraid. How much more, then, if we go
to Qe’ilah against the armies of the Pelishtites?”
730

1 SAMUEL

And Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY once again. And
hWhY answered him and said, “Arise, go down to
Qe’ilah, for I am giving the Pelishtites into your hand.”
5 So Dawiḏ and his men went to Qe’ilah and fought
with the Pelishtites, and he led away their livestock
and smote them, a great smiting. Thus Dawiḏ saved
the inhabitants of Qe’ilah.
6 And it came to be, when Eḇyathar son of Aḥimeleḵ
fled to Dawiḏ at Qe’ilah, that he went down with a
shoulder garment in his hand.
7 And Sha’ul was informed that Dawiḏ had gone to
Qe’ilah. Then Sha’ul said, “Elohim has estranged him
into my hand, for he has shut himself in by entering a
town that has gates and bars.”
8 And Sha’ul summoned all the people to battle, to
go down, to Qe’ilah to besiege Dawiḏ and his men.
9 And Dawiḏ knew that Sha’ul was plotting evil
against him, and said to Eḇyathar the kohĕn, “Bring
the shoulder garment here.”
10 And Dawiḏ said, “O hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, Your
servant has heard for certain that Sha’ul seeks to
come to Qe’ilah to destroy the city for my sake.
11 “Are the landowners of Qe’ilah going to surrender
me into his hand? Is Sha’ul coming down, as Your
servant has heard? O hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, I pray,
let Your servant know.” And hWhY said, “He is coming
down.”
12 And Dawiḏ said, “Are the land-owners of Qe’ilah
going to surrender me and my men into the hand of
Sha’ul?” And hWhY said, “They are going to surrender
you.”
13 Then Dawiḏ and his men, about six hundred,
arose and left Qe’ilah and went wherever they could
go. And Sha’ul was informed that Dawiḏ had escaped
from Qe’ilah, and he ceased to go out.
4

731

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Dawiḏ remained in the wilderness, in
strongholds, and remained in the hill country in the
Wilderness of Ziph. And Sha’ul sought him every day,
but Elohim did not give him into his hand.
15 And Dawiḏ saw that Sha’ul had come out to seek
his life while Dawiḏ was in the Wilderness of Ziph at
Ḥoresh.
16 And Yahonathan, Sha’ul’s son, arose and went to
Dawiḏ at Ḥoresh and strengthened his hand in
Elohim,
17 and said to him, “Do not fear, for the hand of Sha’ul
my father is not going to find you, and you are to reign
over Yisra’ĕl, and I am to be next to you. Even my
father Sha’ul knows that.”
18 And they made a covenant before hWhY. And
Dawiḏ remained at Ḥoresh while Yahonathan went to
his own house.
19 And the Ziphites came up to Sha’ul at Giḇ’ah,
saying, “Is Dawiḏ not hiding with us in the strongholds
of Ḥoresh, in the hill of Ḥaḵilah, which is on the south
of the wasteland?
20 “And now, O sovereign, by all the desire of your
being, come down, come down, and our part is to
surrender him into the sovereign’s hand.”
21 And Sha’ul said, “Baruḵ are you of hWhY, for you
have sympathy with me.
22 “Please go, prepare yet further and find out and
see the place where his hide-out is, who has seen him
there. For I am told that he is very cunning.
23 “So look, and learn all about the hiding places
where he hides. And you shall come back to me with
certainty, then I shall go with you. And it shall be, if he
is in the land, that I shall search for him throughout all
the clans of Yahuḏah.”
14

732

1 SAMUEL

And they rose up and went to Ziph before Sha’ul,
while Dawiḏ and his men were in the Wilderness of
Ma’on, in the desert plain on the south of the
wasteland.
25 And Sha’ul and his men went to seek him, and
they informed Dawiḏ, so he went down to the rock,
and remained in the Wilderness of Ma’on. And when
Sha’ul heard this, he pursued Dawiḏ in the
Wilderness of Ma’on.
26 And Sha’ul went on one side of the mountain, and
Dawiḏ and his men on the other side of the mountain.
And Dawiḏ was hurrying to get away from Sha’ul, for
Sha’ul and his men were surrounding Dawiḏ and his
men to take them.
27 Then a messenger came to Sha’ul, saying, “Hurry
and come, for the Pelishtites have invaded the land!”
28 So Sha’ul turned back from pursuing Dawiḏ, and
went against the Pelishtites. Therefore they called
that place Sela ha’Maḥleqoth.
29 And Dawiḏ went up from there and remained in
strongholds at Ĕyn Geḏi.
24

24 And it came to be, when Sha’ul had returned from
pursuing the Pelishtites, that it was reported to him,
saying, “See, Dawiḏ is in the Wilderness of Ĕyn Geḏi.”
2 So Sha’ul took three thousand chosen men from
all Yisra’ĕl, and went to seek Dawiḏ and his men on
the face of Tsurĕy ha’Ye’Ĕylim.
3 And he came to the sheepfolds, on the way, and
there was a cave. And Sha’ul went in to relieve
himself. Now Dawiḏ and his men were sitting in the
sides of the cave.
4 And the men of Dawiḏ said to him, “See, the day
of which hWhY said to you, ‘See, I am giving your
enemy into your hand, and you shall do to him as it
733

SHEMU’ĔL 1

seems good to you!’ ” And Dawiḏ arose and gently
cut off a corner of Sha’ul’s robe.
5 And it came to be afterward that the heart of Dawiḏ
smote him because he had cut the robe of Sha’ul.
6 So he said to his men, “Far be it from me, by hWhY,
that I should do this matter to my master, anointed of
hWhY, to stretch out my hand against him, for he is
the anointed of hWhY.”
7 And Dawiḏ dispersed his servants with words, and
did not allow them to rise against Sha’ul. And Sha’ul
rose up from the cave and went on his way.
8 And afterward Dawiḏ arose and went out of the
cave, and called out to Sha’ul, saying, “My master the
sovereign!” And when Sha’ul looked behind him,
Dawiḏ bowed with his face to the earth, and did
obeisance.
9 And Dawiḏ said to Sha’ul, “Why do you listen to
the words of men who say, ‘See, Dawiḏ seeks to do
you evil’?
10 “See, this day your eyes have seen that hWhY
gave you today into my hand in the cave, and one
said to slay you. But my eye pardoned you, and I said,
‘I do not stretch out my hand against my master, for
he is the anointed of hWhY.’
11 “And my father, see! Even see the corner of your
robe in my hand! For in that I cut off the corner of your
robe, and did not slay you, know and see that there is
neither evil nor rebellion in my hand, and I have not
sinned against you, while you are hunting my life to
take it.
12 “Let hWhY judge between you and me, and let
hWhY revenge me on you, but my hand is not against
you.

734

1 SAMUEL

“As the proverb of the ancients says, ‘Wickedness
comes from the wicked.’ But my hand is not against
you.
14 “After whom has the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl come
out? Whom do you pursue? A dead dog? A flea?
15 “And hWhY shall be judge, and rightly rule between
you and me, and see and plead my case, and rightly
rule me out of your hand.”
16 And it came to be, when Dawiḏ had ended
speaking these words to Sha’ul, that Sha’ul said, “Is
this your voice, my son Dawiḏ?” So Sha’ul lifted up
his voice and wept.
17 And he said to Dawiḏ, “You are more righteous
than I, for you have rewarded me with good, whereas
I have rewarded you with evil.
18 “And you have shown today how you have done
good to me, for when hWhY surrendered me into your
hand you did not slay me.
19 “For if a man finds his enemy, shall he let him get
away safely? And let hWhY reward you with good for
what you have done to me today.
20 “And now look, I know that you shall certainly
reign, and that the reign of Yisra’ĕl shall be
established in your hand.
21 “And now, swear to me by hWhY that you do not
cut off my seed after me, nor destroy my name from
my father’s house.”
22 And Dawiḏ swore to Sha’ul. Then Sha’ul went
home, and Dawiḏ and his men went up to the
stronghold.
13

25 And Shemu’ĕl died, and all Yisra’ĕl gathered
and mourned for him, and buried him at his home in
Ramah. And Dawiḏ arose and went down into the
Wilderness of Paran.
735

SHEMU’ĔL 1

Now there was a man in Ma’on and his work was
in Karmel, and the man was very great. And he had
three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. And he
came to be shearing his sheep in Karmel.
3 And the name of the man was Naḇal, and the
name of his wife Aḇiḡayil. And she was a woman of
good understanding and good-looking. But the man
was hard and evil in his doings. And he was of Kalĕḇ.
4 And Dawiḏ heard in the wilderness that Naḇal was
shearing his sheep.
5 And Dawiḏ sent ten young men, and Dawiḏ said
to the young men, “Go up to Karmel, and you shall
come to Naḇal, and greet him in my name,
6 and say this, ‘Long life and peace to you! And
peace to your house, and peace to all that you have!
7 ‘And now, I have heard that you have shearers.
Now your shepherds have been with us. We did not
put them to shame, and not a speck of theirs was
missing all the days they were in Karmel.
8 ‘Ask your young men, and let them inform you. So
let the young men find favour in your eyes, for we
come on a good day. Please give whatever comes to
your hand to your servants and to your son Dawiḏ.’ ”
9 And the young men of Dawiḏ came and spoke to
Naḇal according to all these words in the name of
Dawiḏ, and waited.
10 But Naḇal answered the servants of Dawiḏ and
said, “Who is Dawiḏ, and who is the son of Yishai?
The servants who are running away from their
masters, have become many nowadays.
11 “And shall I take my bread and my water and my
meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers, and
give it to men coming from who knows where?”
2

736

1 SAMUEL

And the young men of Dawiḏ turned around on
their way and went back, and came and reported to
him all these words.
13 And Dawiḏ said to his men, “Each one gird on his
sword.” So they each girded on his sword, and Dawiḏ
also girded on his sword. And about four hundred
men went with Dawiḏ, and two hundred remained
with the baggage.
14 And one of the young men informed Aḇiḡayil, the
wife of Naḇal, saying, “See, Dawiḏ sent messengers
from the wilderness to greet our master, but he
scoffed at them.
15 “But the men were very good to us, and did not put
us to shame, nor did we miss anything all the days we
accompanied them, when we were in the fields.
16 “They were a wall to us both by night and day, all
the days we were with them tending the sheep.
17 “And now, know and see what you should do, for
evil has been resolved against our master, and
against all his household, and he is too much of a son
of Beliya’al to speak to.”
18 Then Aḇiḡayil made haste and took two hundred
loaves, and two skins of wine, and five sheep made
ready, five se’im of roasted grain, and one hundred
clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and
loaded them on donkeys.
19 And she said to her servants, “Pass over before
me. See, I am coming after you.” But she did not
inform her husband Naḇal.
20 And it came to be, as she rode on the donkey, that
she went down under cover of the hill, and there were
Dawiḏ and his men, coming down toward her, and
she met them.
21 And Dawiḏ had said, “Only in vain have I protected
all that this one has in the wilderness, so that not a
12

737

SHEMU’ĔL 1

speck was missing of all that belongs to him. And he
has repaid me evil for good.
22 “Let Elohim do so, and more also, to the enemies
of Dawiḏ, if I leave one male of all who belong to him
by morning light.”
23 And Aḇiḡayil saw Dawiḏ, and she hastened to
come down from the donkey, and fell on her face
before Dawiḏ, and bowed down to the ground,
24 and fell at his feet and said, “On me, my master,
let this wickedness be on me! And please let your
female servant speak in your ears, and hear the
words of your female servant.
25 “Please, let not my master regard this man of
Beliya’al, Naḇal. For as his name is, so is he: Naḇal
is his name, and folly is with him. But I, your female
servant, did not see the young men of my master
whom you sent.
26 “And now my master, as hWhY lives and as your
being lives, since hWhY has withheld you from coming
to bloodshed and from avenging yourself with your
own hand, now then, let your enemies be as Naḇal,
even those seeking evil against my master.
27 “And now this present which your female servant
has brought to my master, let it be given to the young
men who follow my master.
28 “Please bear the transgression of your female
servant. For hWhY is certainly making a steadfast
house for my master, because my master fights the
battles of hWhY, and evil is not found in you in your
days.
29 “And if a man rises to pursue you and seek your
life, and the life of my master has been bound in the
bundle of the living with hWhY your Elohim, then the
lives of your enemies He shall sling out, as from the
pocket of a sling.
738

1 SAMUEL

“And it shall be, when hWhY has done for my
master according to all the good that He has spoken
concerning you, and has appointed you ruler over
Yisra’ĕl,
31 do not let this be a staggering and stumbling of
heart to my master, that you have shed blood without
cause, or that my master has saved himself. And
when hWhY has done good to my master, then
remember your female servant.”
32 And Dawiḏ said to Aḇiḡayil, “Baruḵ be hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, who sent you to meet me today!
33 “And baruḵ is your good taste, and baruḵ are you,
because you have kept me this day from coming to
bloodshed and from avenging myself with my own
hand.
34 “Nevertheless, as hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl lives,
who has kept me back from doing evil to you, if you
had not hurried and come to meet me, not a male
would have been left to Naḇal by break of day, for
certain.”
35 And Dawiḏ received from her hand what she had
brought him, and said to her, “Go up in peace to your
house. See, I have listened to your voice and have
accepted your face.”
36 And Aḇiḡayil went to Naḇal, and see, he was at a
feast in his house, like the feast of a sovereign. And
Naḇal’s heart was glad within him, and he was
exceedingly drunk. So she told him not a word, little
or much, until morning light.
37 And it came to be, in the morning, when the wine
had gone from Naḇal, and his wife had told him these
matters, that his heart died within him, and he
became like a stone.
38 And it came to be in about ten days, that hWhY
smote Naḇal, and he died.
30

739

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Dawiḏ heard that Naḇal was dead, and he
said, “Baruḵ be hWhY, who has pleaded the cause of
my reproach from the hand of Naḇal, and has kept
His servant from evil! For hWhY has returned the evil
of Naḇal on his own head.” And Dawiḏ sent and
spoke to Aḇiḡayil, to take her as his wife.
40 And when the servants of Dawiḏ had come to
Aḇiḡayil at Karmel, they spoke to her saying, “Dawiḏ
sent us to you, to ask you to become his wife.”
41 And she arose, bowed her face to the earth, and
said, “Here is your female servant, a servant to wash
the feet of the servants of my master.”
42 And Aḇiḡayil hurried and rose, and rode on a
donkey, with five of her female attendants. And she
followed the messengers of Dawiḏ, and became his
wife.
43 Dawiḏ had also taken Aḥino’am of Yizre’ĕl, and so
both of them were his wives.
44 But Sha’ul had given Miḵal his daughter, Dawiḏ’s
wife, to Palti son of Layish, who was from Gallim.
39

26 And the Ziphites came to Sha’ul at Giḇ’ah,
saying, “Is not Dawiḏ hiding himself in the hill of
Ḥaḵilah, overlooking the wasteland?”
2 And Sha’ul rose up and went down to the
Wilderness of Ziph, and with him three thousand
chosen men of Yisra’ĕl, to seek Dawiḏ in the
Wilderness of Ziph.
3 And Sha’ul encamped in the hill of Ḥaḵilah,
overlooking the wasteland, by the way, while Dawiḏ
was dwelling in the wilderness, and he saw that
Sha’ul came after him into the wilderness.
4 And Dawiḏ sent out spies, and learned that Sha’ul
had indeed come.
740

1 SAMUEL

And Dawiḏ rose up and came to the place where
Sha’ul had encamped. And Dawiḏ saw the place
where Sha’ul lay, and Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr, the
commander of his army. And Sha’ul was lying within
the enclosure, with the people encamped all around
him.
6 And Dawiḏ spoke up and said to Aḥimeleḵ the
Ḥittite and to Aḇishai son of Tseruyah, brother of
Yo’aḇ, saying, “Who goes down with me to Sha’ul in
the camp?” And Aḇishai said, “I, I go down with you.”
7 And Dawiḏ and Aḇishai came to the people by
night and saw Sha’ul lying asleep within the camp,
with his spear stuck in the ground by his head, and
Aḇnĕr and the people lay all around him.
8 And Aḇishai said to Dawiḏ, “Elohim has
surrendered your enemy into your hand this day. And
now, please, let me smite him at once with the spear,
right into the earth, and not a second time!”
9 But Dawiḏ said to Aḇishai, “Do not destroy him, for
who shall stretch out his hand against the anointed of
hWhY, and be guiltless?”
10 Dawiḏ also said, “As hWhY lives, except hWhY
smites him, or his day come that he shall die, or he
shall go out to battle and perish,
11 far be it from me, by hWhY, that I stretch out my
hand against the anointed of hWhY. And now, please
take the spear and the jug of water that are by his
head, and let us go.”
12 So Dawiḏ took the spear and the jug of water by
Sha’ul’s head, and they went away. And no man saw
it or knew it or awoke, for they were all asleep,
because a deep sleep from hWhY had fallen on them.
13 And Dawiḏ passed over to the other side, and
stood on the top of a hill far away, a great distance
being between them.
5

741

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Dawiḏ called out to the people and to Aḇnĕr
son of Nĕr, saying, “Do you not answer, Aḇnĕr?” And
Aḇnĕr answered and said, “Who are you, calling out
to the sovereign?”
15 And Dawiḏ said to Aḇnĕr, “Are you not a man?
And who is like you in Yisra’ĕl? Why then have you
not guarded your master the sovereign? For one of
the people came in to destroy your master the
sovereign.
16 “What you have done is not good. As hWhY lives,
you are worthy to die, because you have not guarded
your master, the anointed of hWhY. And now see
where the sovereign’s spear is, and the jug of water
that was by his head.”
17 And Sha’ul recognised Dawiḏ’s voice, and said, “Is
that your voice, my son Dawiḏ?” And Dawiḏ said, “It
is my voice, my master, O sovereign.”
18 And he said, “Why is this that my master is
pursuing his servant? For what have I done, or what
evil is in my hand?
19 “And now, please, let my master the sovereign
hear the words of his servant: If hWhY has moved you
against me, let Him accept an offering. But if it is the
children of men, then they are cursed before hWhY,
for they have driven me out today that I should not
join myself to the inheritance of hWhY, saying, ‘Go,
serve other mighty ones.’
20 “And now, do not let my blood fall to the earth
before the face of hWhY. For the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
has come out to seek a flea, as when one hunts a
partridge in the mountains.”
21 And Sha’ul said, “I have sinned. Come back, my
son Dawiḏ. For no more am I going to do evil to you,
because my life was precious in your eyes today.
See, I have acted foolishly, and have greatly strayed.”
14

742

1 SAMUEL

And Dawiḏ answered and said, “See, the
sovereign’s spear! And let one of the young men
come over and get it.
23 “And let hWhY reward every man for his
righteousness and his trustworthiness, for this day
hWhY gave you into my hand, but I would not stretch
out my hand against the anointed of hWhY.
24 “And see, as your life has been valued in my eyes
today, so let my life be valued in the eyes of hWhY,
and let Him deliver me out of all distress.”
25 And Sha’ul said to Dawiḏ, “Baruḵ are you, my son
Dawiḏ, achieving much, and indeed prevailing!” Then
Dawiḏ went on his way, and Sha’ul returned to his
place.
22

27 And Dawiḏ said in his heart, “Now I shall perish
by the hand of Sha’ul, some day. There is naught
better for me than to escape to the land of the
Pelishtites. Then Sha’ul shall give up searching for
me any longer in any part of Yisra’ĕl, and I shall
escape out of his hand.”
2 So Dawiḏ rose up and passed over with the six
hundred men who were with him to Aḵish son of
Ma’oḵ, sovereign of Gath.
3 And Dawiḏ dwelt with Aḵish at Gath, he and his
men, each man with his household - Dawiḏ with his
two wives, Aḥino’am the Yizre’ĕlitess, and Aḇiḡayil
the Karmelitess, Naḇal’s widow.
4 And it was reported to Sha’ul that Dawiḏ had fled
to Gath, so he sought him no more.
5 And Dawiḏ said to Aḵish, “If I have now found
favour in your eyes, let them give me a place in some
town in the country, to dwell there. For why should
your servant dwell in the royal city with you?”
743

SHEMU’ĔL 1

And Aḵish gave him Tsiqlaḡ that day. That is why
Tsiqlaḡ has belonged to the sovereigns of Yahuḏah
to this day.
7 And the time that Dawiḏ dwelt in the country of the
Pelishtites came to be a year and four months.
8 And Dawiḏ and his men went up and raided the
Geshurites, and the Girzites, and the Amalĕqites. For
those nations were the inhabitants of the land from of
old, as you go to Shur, even as far as the land of
Mitsrayim.
9 And when Dawiḏ had smitten the land, he left
neither man nor woman alive, but took away sheep,
and cattle, and donkeys, and camels, and garments,
and returned and came to Aḵish.
10 And Aḵish would say, “Where have you made a
raid today?” And Dawiḏ would say, “Against the South
of Yahuḏah, or against the South of the
Yeraḥme’ĕlites, or against the South of the Qĕynites.”
11 Dawiḏ did not keep alive man nor woman, to bring
news to Gath, saying, “Lest they inform against us,
saying, ‘Thus Dawiḏ did.’ ” And this was his practice
all the days that he dwelt in the country of the
Pelishtites.
12 And Aḵish trusted Dawiḏ, saying, “He has indeed
made himself a stench to his people in Yisra’ĕl, and
has become my servant forever.”
6

28 And it came to be in those days that the
Pelishtites gathered their armies for battle, to fight with
Yisra’ĕl. And Aḵish said to Dawiḏ, “You know, of
course, that you are to go out with me in the army, you
and your men.”
2 And Dawiḏ said to Aḵish, “Very well, you shall
know what your servant should do.” And Aḵish said to
744

1 SAMUEL

Dawiḏ, “Very well, I make you one of my chief
guardians forever.”
3 And Shemu’ĕl had died, and all Yisra’ĕl had
mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, in his own
city. And Sha’ul had put away the mediums and the
spiritists from the land.
4 And the Pelishtites were gathered, and came and
encamped at Shunĕm. And Sha’ul gathered all
Yisra’ĕl, and they encamped at Gilboa.
5 And when Sha’ul saw the army of the Pelishtites,
he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.
6 And Sha’ul inquired of hWhY, but hWhY did not
answer him, either by dreams or by Urim or by the
neḇi’im.
7 Sha’ul then said to his servants, “Find me a
woman who is a medium, to go to her and inquire of
her.” And his servants said to him, “Look, there is a
woman who is a medium at Ĕyn Dor.”
8 And Sha’ul disguised himself and put on other
garments, and went, he and two men with him. And
they came to the woman by night. And he said,
“Please divine for me, and bring up for me the one I
shall name.”
9 But the woman said to him, “Look, you know what
Sha’ul has done, how he has cut off the mediums and
the spiritists from the land. Why then do you lay a
snare for my life, to put me to death?”
10 And Sha’ul swore to her by hWhY, saying, “As
hWhY lives, no punishment comes upon you for this
matter.”
11 And the woman said, “Whom do I bring up for
you?” So he said, “Bring up Shemu’ĕl for me.”
12 And when the woman saw Shemu’ĕl, she cried out
with a loud voice. And the woman spoke to Sha’ul,
745

SHEMU’ĔL 1

saying, “Why have you deceived me? You yourself
are Sha’ul!”
13 And the sovereign said to her, “Do not be afraid.
What did you see?” And the woman said to Sha’ul, “I
saw a spirit coming up out of the earth.”
14 And he said to her, “What is his form?” And she
said, “An old man is coming up, and he is covered
with a mantle.” And Sha’ul knew that it was Shemu’ĕl,
and he bowed with his face to the ground and did
obeisance.
15 And Shemu’ĕl said to Sha’ul, “Why have you
disturbed me by bringing me up?” And Sha’ul
answered, “I am deeply distressed, for the Pelishtites
are fighting against me, and Elohim has turned aside
from me and does not answer me any more, neither
by neḇi’im nor by dreams. So I have called you, to
reveal to me what I should do.
16 Then Shemu’ĕl said, “And why do you ask me,
seeing hWhY has turned aside from you and has
become your enemy?
17 “And hWhY has done for Himself as He spoke by
me. For hWhY has torn the reign out of your hand and
given it to your neighbour, to Dawiḏ.
18 “Because you did not obey the voice of hWhY nor
execute His burning wrath upon Amalĕq, therefore
hWhY has done this matter to you today.
19 “Further, hWhY also gives Yisra’ĕl with you into the
hand of the Pelishtites. And tomorrow you and your
sons are with me. hWhY also gives the army of
Yisra’ĕl into the hand of the Pelishtites.”
20 And immediately Sha’ul fell on the ground, his
complete length, and greatly feared because of the
words of Shemu’ĕl. And there was no strength in him,
for he had eaten no food all day or all night.
746

1 SAMUEL

And the woman came to Sha’ul and saw that he
had been greatly disturbed, and said to him, “See,
your female servant has obeyed your voice, and I
have put my life in my hands and have listened to the
words which you spoke to me.
22 “And now, please listen to the voice of your female
servant too, and let me put a piece of bread before
you. And eat, so that you have strength when you go
on your way.”
23 But he refused and said, “I am not going to eat.”
But his servants, together with the woman, urged him.
And he listened to their voice. So he rose from the
ground and sat on the bed.
24 And the woman had a fatted calf in the house, and
she quickly slaughtered it. And she took flour and
kneaded it, and baked unleavened bread from it.
25 And she brought it before Sha’ul and his servants.
And they ate, and rose up and went away that night.
21

29 And the Pelishtites gathered all their armies at
Aphĕq, while Yisra’ĕl encamped by a fountain which
is in Yizre’ĕl.
2 And the princes of the Pelishtites were passing on
by hundreds and by thousands, and Dawiḏ and his
men were passing on in the rear with Aḵish.
3 And the princes of the Pelishtites said, “Who are
these Iḇrim?” And Aḵish said to the princes of the
Pelishtites, “Is this not Dawiḏ, the servant of Sha’ul
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, who has been with me these
days, or these years? And to this day I have found
naught in him since he came over.”
4 But the princes of the Pelishtites were wroth with
him, and the princes of the Pelishtites said to him,
“Send the man back, let him return to the place which
you have appointed for him, and do not let him go
747

SHEMU’ĔL 1

down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become
our adversary. For with what could he appease his
master, if not with the heads of these men?
5 “Is this not Dawiḏ, of whom they sang to each
other in dances, saying, ‘Sha’ul smote his thousands,
and Dawiḏ his ten thousands’?”
6 And Aḵish called Dawiḏ and said to him, “As hWhY
lives, you have been straight, and your going out and
your coming in with me in the army is good in my
eyes. For to this day I have not found evil in you since
the day of your coming to me. But in the eyes of the
princes you are not good.
7 “And now, return, and go in peace, and do no evil
in the eyes of the princes of the Pelishtites.”
8 And Dawiḏ said to Aḵish, “But what have I done?
And to this day what have you found in your servant
as long as I have been with you, that I should not go
and fight against the enemies of my master the
sovereign?”
9 But Aḵish answered and said to Dawiḏ, “I know
that you are as good in my eyes as a messenger of
Elohim, but the princes of the Pelishtites have said,
‘Let him not go up with us to the battle.’
10 “And now, rise early in the morning with your
master’s servants who have come with you. And as
soon as you are up early in the morning and have
light, then go.”
11 And Dawiḏ and his men rose up early to go in the
morning, to return to the land of the Pelishtites, and
the Pelishtites went up to Yizre’ĕl.

30 And it came to be, when Dawiḏ and his men
came to Tsiqlaḡ, on the third day, that the Amalĕqites
had invaded the South and Tsiqlaḡ, and smote Tsiqlaḡ
and burned it with fire.
748

1 SAMUEL

And they took captive the women and those who
were there, from small to great. They did not kill
anyone, but they led them away and went their way.
3 And Dawiḏ and his men came to the city and saw
it burned with fire, and their wives and their sons and
their daughters had been taken captive.
4 And Dawiḏ and the people who were with him
lifted up their voices and wept, until they had no more
power to weep.
5 And
Dawiḏ’s two wives, Aḥino’am the
Yizre’ĕlitess, and Aḇiḡayil the widow of Naḇal the
Karmelite, had been taken captive.
6 And Dawiḏ was greatly distressed, for the people
spoke of stoning him, because the being of all the
people was grieved, each for his sons and his
daughters. But Dawiḏ strengthened himself in hWhY
his Elohim.
7 And Dawiḏ said to Eḇyathar the kohĕn, son of
Aḥimeleḵ, “Please bring the shoulder garment here to
me.” So Eḇyathar brought the shoulder garment to
Dawiḏ.
8 And Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY, saying, “Do I pursue
this band? Do I overtake them?” And He answered
him, “Pursue, for you shall certainly overtake them,
and certainly rescue.”
9 So Dawiḏ went, he and the six hundred men who
were with him, and came to the wadi Besor, where a
halt was made by those who were left behind,
10 while Dawiḏ pursued, he and four hundred men for two hundred halted, who were too faint to pass
over the wadi Besor.
11 And they found a man in the field, a Mitsrite, and
took him to Dawiḏ. And they gave him bread and he
ate, and they let him drink water,
2

749

SHEMU’ĔL 1

and gave him a piece of a cake of figs and two
clusters of raisins. And when he had eaten, his
strength came back to him, for he had not eaten
bread nor drunk water for three days and three nights.
13 And Dawiḏ said to him, “To whom do you belong,
and where are you from?” And he said, “I am a young
man from Mitsrayim, servant of an Amalĕqite. And my
master left me behind, for I had been sick three days.
14 “We attacked the south of the Kerĕthites and
against that which belongs to Yahuḏah, and upon the
south of Kalĕḇ, and we burned Tsiqlaḡ with fire.”
15 And Dawiḏ said to him, “Could you bring me down
to this marauding band?” And he said, “Swear to me
by Elohim that you neither kill me nor surrender me
into the hands of my master, then I bring you down to
this marauding band.”
16 And he brought him down and saw they were
spread out over all the land, eating and drinking and
dancing, because of all the great spoil which they had
taken from the land of the Pelishtites and from the
land of Yahuḏah.
17 And Dawiḏ smote them from twilight until the
evening of the next day. And none of them escaped,
except four hundred young men who rode on camels
and fled.
18 And Dawiḏ rescued all that the Amalĕqites had
taken. Dawiḏ also rescued his two wives.
19 And there was none missing of them, whether
small or great, whether sons or daughters, or spoil or
whatever they had taken from them. Dawiḏ recovered
all.
20 Besides, Dawiḏ captured all the flocks and herds
they had driven before those livestock, and they said,
“This is Dawiḏ’s spoil.”
12

750

1 SAMUEL

And Dawiḏ came to the two hundred men who
were too faint to follow Dawiḏ, who had also been left
at the wadi Besor. And they went out to meet Dawiḏ
and to meet the people who were with him. And when
Dawiḏ came near the people, he greeted them.
22 And all the evil and worthless men of those who
went with Dawiḏ answered and said, “Because they
did not go with us, we do not give them any of the
spoil that we have rescued, except for every man’s
wife and children, and let them take them and go.”
23 But Dawiḏ said, “My brothers, do not do so with
what hWhY has given us, who has protected us and
gave into our hand the band that came against us.
24 “And who would listen to you in this matter? For as
his portion is who goes down to the battle, so is his
portion who remains with the baggage, they share
alike.”
25 And it came to be, from that day forward, he
appointed it for a law and a right-ruling for Yisra’ĕl to
this day.
26 And when Dawiḏ came to Tsiqlaḡ, he sent some
of the spoil to the elders of Yahuḏah, to his friends,
saying, “Here is a present for you from the spoil of the
enemies of hWhY,”
27 to those in Bĕyth Ĕl, and to those in Ramoth of the
South, and to those in Yattir,
28 and to those in Aro’ĕr, and to those in Siphmoth,
and to those in Eshtemoa,
29 and to those in Raḵal, and to those in the cities of
the Yeraḥme’ĕlites, and to those in the cities of the
Qĕynites,
30 and to those in Ḥormah, and to those in Korashan,
and to those in Athaḵ,
31 and to those in Ḥeḇron, and to all the places where
Dawiḏ had gone up and down, he and his men.
21

751

SHEMU’ĔL 1

31 And the Pelishtites were fighting against Yisra’ĕl,
and the men of Yisra’ĕl fled from before the Pelishtites,
and fell slain on Mount Gilboa.
2 And the Pelishtites followed hard after Sha’ul and
his sons. And the Pelishtites smote Yahonathan, and
Aḇinaḏaḇ, and Malkishua, sons of Sha’ul.
3 And the battle went hard against Sha’ul, and the
archers hit him, so that he was severely wounded by
the archers.
4 And Sha’ul said to his armour-bearer, “Draw your
sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these
uncircumcised men come and thrust me through and
roll themselves on me.” But his armour-bearer would
not, for he was greatly afraid. So Sha’ul took the
sword and fell on it.
5 And when his armour-bearer saw that Sha’ul was
dead, he also fell on his sword, and died with him.
6 Thus Sha’ul died, and three of his sons, and his
armour-bearer, also all his men, together on that day.
7 And they saw - the men of Yisra’ĕl who were
beyond the valley, and those who were beyond the
Yardĕn - that the men of Yisra’ĕl had fled and that
Sha’ul and his sons were dead. So they forsook the
cities and fled, and the Pelishtites came and dwelt in
them.
8 And the next day it came to be, when the
Pelishtites came to strip the slain, that they found
Sha’ul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
9 And they cut off his head and stripped off his
armour, and sent word throughout the land of the
Pelishtites, to announce it in the house of their idols
and to the people.

752

1 SAMUEL

And they placed his armour in the house of the
Ashtaroth, and they fastened his body to the wall of
Bĕyth Shan.
11 And the inhabitants of Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ heard what
the Pelishtites had done to Sha’ul,
12 and all the brave men arose and went all night,
and took the body of Sha’ul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of Bĕyth Shan. And they came to
Yaḇĕsh and burned them there.
13 And they took their bones and buried them under
the tamarisk tree at Yaḇĕsh, and fasted for seven
days.
10

753

2 SAMUEL

SHEMU’ĔL 2
‫ ׁשמואל ב‬B ּLAWmv

1 And it came to be after the death of Sha’ul, when
Dawiḏ had returned from smiting the Amalĕqites, that
Dawiḏ remained two days in Tsiqlaḡ.
2 And it came to be on the third day, that see, a man
came out of the camp from Sha’ul with his garments
torn and dust on his head. And it came to be, when
he came to Dawiḏ, that he fell to the ground and did
obeisance.
3 And Dawiḏ said to him, “From where do you
come?” And he said to him, “I have escaped from the
camp of Yisra’ĕl.”
4 And Dawiḏ said to him, “What was the matter?
Please inform me.” And he said, “The people have
fled from the battle, and also many of the people have
fallen and are dead, and Sha’ul and Yahonathan his
son are dead too.”
5 And Dawiḏ said to the young man who informed
him, “How do you know that Sha’ul and Yahonathan
his son are dead?”
6 And the young man who informed him said, “By
chance I was on Mount Gilboa and saw Sha’ul
leaning on his spear. And see, the chariots and
horsemen followed hard after him.
7 “And when he looked behind him, he saw me and
called to me, and I answered, ‘Here I am.’
8 “And he said to me, ‘Who are you?’ So I answered
him, ‘I am an Amalĕqite.’
9 “And he said to me, ‘Please stand over me and put
me to death, for agony has seized me, but my life is
still in me.’
754

SHEMU’ĔL 2

“So I stood beside him and put him to death, for I
knew he would not live after he had fallen. And I took
the diadem that was on his head and the bracelet that
was on his arm, and have brought them here to my
master.”
11 And Dawiḏ took hold of his own garments and tore
them, and also all the men who were with him.
12 And they mourned and wept and fasted until
evening for Sha’ul and for Yahonathan his son, and
for the people of hWhY and for the house of Yisra’ĕl,
because they had fallen by the sword.
13 Then Dawiḏ asked the young man who informed
him, “Where are you from?” And he answered, “I am
the son of a sojourner, an Amalĕqite.”
14 And Dawiḏ said to him, “How was it you were not
afraid to stretch out your hand to destroy the anointed
of hWhY?”
15 And Dawiḏ called one of the young men and said,
“Draw near and fall on him!” And he smote him so that
he died.
16 And Dawiḏ said to him, “Your blood is on your own
head, for your own mouth has witnessed against you,
saying, ‘I myself have put to death the anointed of
hWhY.’ ”
17 Then Dawiḏ lamented with this lamentation over
Sha’ul and over Yahonathan his son,
18 and he ordered “The Bow” to be taught to the
children of Yahuḏah. See, it is written in the Book of
Yashar:
19 “The
splendour
of
Yisra’ĕl
Is
slain
on
your
high
places!
How the mighty have fallen!
20 “Declare
it
not
in
Gath,
Proclaim it not in the streets of Ashqelon,
10

755

2 SAMUEL

Lest the daughters of the Pelishtites rejoice,
Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised exult.
21 “Mountains
of
Gilboa!
No
dew
or
rain
be
upon
you,
Nor
fields
of
offerings.
For there the shield of the mighty lay rejected,
The shield of Sha’ul, not anointed with oil.
22 “From
the
blood
of
the
slain,
From
the
fat
of
the
mighty,
The bow of Yahonathan did not turn back,
And the sword of Sha’ul did not return empty.
23 “Sha’ul
and
Yahonathan
were
beloved
And
pleasant
in
their
lives,
And in their death they were not parted.
They
were
swifter
than
eagles,
They were stronger than lions.
24 “Daughters of Yisra’ĕl - weep over Sha’ul,
Who wrapped you in scarlet, with finery;
Who decked your robes with ornaments of gold.
25 “How
the
mighty
have
fallen
In
the
midst
of
the
battle!
Yahonathan was slain in your high places.
26 “I am distressed for you, my brother Yahonathan.
You
have
been
very
pleasant
to
me.
Your
love
to
me
was
wondrous,
Surpassing the love of women.
27 “How
the
mighty
have
fallen,
And the weapons of battle perish!”

2 And it came to be afterwards that Dawiḏ inquired of
hWhY, saying, “Do I go up to any of the cities of
Yahuḏah?” And hWhY said to him, “Go up.” And Dawiḏ
said, “Where should I go up?” And He said, “To
Ḥeḇron.”
756

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Dawiḏ went up there, as well as his two wives,
Aḥino’am the Yizre’ĕlitess, and Aḇiḡayil the widow of
Naḇal the Karmelite.
3 And Dawiḏ brought up the men who were with him,
each man with his household, and they dwelt in the
cities of Ḥeḇron.
4 And the men of Yahuḏah came, and anointed
Dawiḏ sovereign over the house of Yahuḏah there.
They also reported to Dawiḏ, saying, “The men of
Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ are they who buried Sha’ul.”
5 Dawiḏ then sent messengers to the men of
Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ, and said to them, “You are baruḵ of
hWhY, for you have shown this kindness to your
master, to Sha’ul, that you buried him.
6 “And now, hWhY show kindness and truth to you,
and I am also going to do you good, because you
have done this deed.
7 “And now, let your hands be strengthened and be
brave, for your master Sha’ul is dead, and also the
house of Yahuḏah has anointed me sovereign over
them.”
8 But Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr, commander of the army of
Sha’ul, took Ishbosheth the son of Sha’ul, and
brought him over to Maḥanayim,
9 and appointed him to reign over Gil’aḏ, and over
the Ashĕrites, and over Yizre’ĕl, and over Ephrayim,
and over Binyamin, and over all Yisra’ĕl.
10 Ishbosheth, son of Sha’ul, was forty years old
when he began to reign over Yisra’ĕl, and he reigned
two years. Only the house of Yahuḏah followed
Dawiḏ.
11 And the time that Dawiḏ was sovereign in Ḥeḇron
over the house of Yahuḏah was seven years and six
months.
2

757

2 SAMUEL

And Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr, and the servants of
Ishbosheth son of Sha’ul, went out from Maḥanayim
to Giḇ’on.
13 And Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah, and the servants of
Dawiḏ, went out and met them by the pool of Giḇ’on.
And they sat down, one on one side of the pool and
the other on the other side of the pool.
14 And Aḇnĕr said to Yo’aḇ, “Let the young men now
rise and compete before us.” And Yo’aḇ said, “Let
them rise.”
15 And they rose and went over by number, twelve
from Binyamin, followers of Ishbosheth son of Sha’ul,
and twelve from the servants of Dawiḏ.
16 And each one grasped his opponent by the head
and thrust his sword in his opponent’s side, and they
fell down together. So that place was called the Field
of Sharp Swords, which is in Giḇ’on.
17 And the battle was fierce that day, and Aḇnĕr and
the men of Yisra’ĕl were smitten before the servants
of Dawiḏ.
18 And there were three sons of Tseruyah there,
Yo’aḇ and Aḇishai and Asah’ĕl. And Asah’ĕl was light
on his feet, as one of the gazelles in the field.
19 And Asah’ĕl pursued Aḇnĕr, and in going he did
not turn aside to the right or to the left from following
Aḇnĕr.
20 And Aḇnĕr looked behind him and said, “Are you
Asah’ĕl?” And he answered, “I am.”
21 And Aḇnĕr said to him, “Turn aside to your right
hand or to your left, and lay hold on one of the young
men and take his armour for yourself.” But Asah’ĕl
would not turn aside from following him.
22 And Aḇnĕr again said to Asah’ĕl, “Turn aside from
following me. Why should I smite you to the ground?
How then could I face your brother Yo’aḇ?”
12

758

SHEMU’ĔL 2

But he refused to turn aside, and Aḇnĕr smote him
with the blunt end of the spear in the stomach, so that
the spear came out of his back. And he fell down there
and died on the spot. And it came to be that as many
as came to the place where Asah’ĕl fell down and
died, stood still.
24 And Yo’aḇ and Aḇishai pursued Aḇnĕr. And the
sun was going down and they came to the hill of
Ammah, which overlooks Giyaḥ by the way to the
Wilderness of Giḇ’on.
25 And the children of Binyamin gathered together
behind Aḇnĕr and became a single company, and
took their stand on top of a hill.
26 And Aḇnĕr called to Yo’aḇ and said, “Should the
sword devour forever? Do you not know that it is bitter
in the latter end? And when are you going to say to
the people to turn back from pursuing their brothers?”
27 And Yo’aḇ said, “As Elohim lives, if you had not
spoken, then all the people would have given up
pursuing their brothers only the next morning.”
28 Yo’aḇ then blew a ram’s horn, and all the people
halted and pursued Yisra’ĕl no further, nor did they
fight any more.
29 And Aḇnĕr and his men went on all that night
through the desert plain, and passed over the Yardĕn,
and went through all Bithron. And they came to
Maḥanayim.
30 And Yo’aḇ turned back from pursuing Aḇnĕr. And
when he had gathered all the people together, there
were missing of Dawiḏ’s servants nineteen men and
Asah’ĕl.
31 But the servants of Dawiḏ had smitten, of
Binyamin and Aḇnĕr’s men, three hundred and sixty
men who died.
23

759

2 SAMUEL

And they brought Asah’ĕl and buried him in his
father’s tomb, which was in Bĕyth Leḥem. And Yo’aḇ
and his men went all night, and they came to Ḥeḇron
at daybreak.

32

3 And the fighting between the house of Sha’ul and
the house of Dawiḏ was long drawn out. And Dawiḏ
continued to strengthen, but the house of Sha’ul
continued to weaken. But he refused to turn aside,
2 And sons were born to Dawiḏ in Ḥeḇron. And his
first-born was Amnon by Aḥino’am the Yizre’ĕlitess;
3 and his second, Kil’aḇ, by Aḇiḡayil the widow of
Naḇal the Karmelite; and the third, Aḇshalom son of
Ma’aḵah, the daughter of Talmai, sovereign of
Geshur;
4 and the fourth, Aḏoniyah son of Ḥaggith; and the
fifth, Shephatyah son of Aḇital;
5 and the sixth, Yithre’am, by Dawiḏ’s wife Eḡlah.
These were born to Dawiḏ in Ḥeḇron.
6 And it came to be, while there was fighting
between the house of Sha’ul and the house of Dawiḏ,
that Aḇnĕr was strengthening himself in the house of
Sha’ul.
7 And Sha’ul had a concubine, whose name was
Ritspah, daughter of Ayah. And Ishbosheth said to
Aḇnĕr, “Why have you gone in to my father’s
concubine?”
8 And Aḇnĕr was very displeased at the words of
Ishbosheth, and said, “Am I a dog’s head that belongs
to Yahuḏah, that I show kindness to the house of
Sha’ul your father, to his brothers, and to his friends
today, and have not let you fall into the hand of Dawiḏ,
that you charge me today with a wickedness
concerning this woman?
760

SHEMU’ĔL 2

“Elohim does so to Aḇnĕr, and more also, if I do
not do for Dawiḏ as hWhY has sworn to him:
10 to cause the reign to pass over from the house of
Sha’ul, and to raise up the throne of Dawiḏ over
Yisra’ĕl and over Yahuḏah, from Dan to Be’ĕrsheḇa.”
11 And he was unable to answer Aḇnĕr another word,
because he feared him.
12 And Aḇnĕr sent messengers on his behalf to
Dawiḏ, saying, “Whose is the land?” saying also,
“Make your covenant with me, and see, my hand is
with you to bring all Yisra’ĕl to you.”
13 And Dawiḏ said, “Good, I make a covenant with
you. Only one matter I am asking of you: you do not
see my face unless you first bring Miḵal, daughter of
Sha’ul, when you come to see my face.”
14 Dawiḏ then sent messengers to Ishbosheth son of
Sha’ul, saying, “Give me my wife Miḵal, to whom I
became engaged for a hundred foreskins of the
Pelishtites.”
15 And Ishbosheth sent and took her from her
husband, from Palti’ĕl son of Layish.
16 But her husband went with her to Baḥurim, going
on and weeping behind her. And Aḇnĕr said to him,
“Go, turn back!” And he turned back.
17 And Aḇnĕr had a word with the elders of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “In time past you were seeking for Dawiḏ to
be sovereign over you.
18 “And now, do it! For hWhY has spoken of Dawiḏ,
saying, ‘By the hand of My servant Dawiḏ, I save My
people Yisra’ĕl from the hand of the Pelishtites and
the hand of all their enemies.’ ”
19 And Aḇnĕr also spoke in the hearing of Binyamin.
And Aḇnĕr also went to speak in the hearing of Dawiḏ
in Ḥeḇron all that seemed good to Yisra’ĕl and all the
house of Binyamin.
9

761

2 SAMUEL

And Aḇnĕr and twenty men with him came to
Dawiḏ at Ḥeḇron. And Dawiḏ made a feast for Aḇnĕr
and the men who were with him.
21 And Aḇnĕr said to Dawiḏ, “Let me arise and go,
and gather all Yisra’ĕl to my master the sovereign,
and let them make a covenant with you, and you shall
reign over all that your being desires.” And Dawiḏ
sent Aḇnĕr away, and he went in peace.
22 And see, the servants of Dawiḏ and Yo’aḇ came
from a raid and brought much spoil with them. But
Aḇnĕr was not with Dawiḏ in Ḥeḇron, for he had sent
him away, and he had gone in peace.
23 And Yo’aḇ and all the army that was with him
came, and they reported to Yo’aḇ, saying, “Aḇnĕr son
of Nĕr came to the sovereign, and he sent him away,
and he has gone in peace.”
24 And Yo’aḇ went to the sovereign and said, “What
have you done? See, Aḇnĕr has come to you! Why is
it that you sent him away, and he has already gone?
25 “You know that Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr came to deceive
you, to know your going out and your coming in, and
to know all that you are doing.”
26 Yo’aḇ then left Dawiḏ, and he sent messengers
after Aḇnĕr, who brought him back from the well of
Sirah. But Dawiḏ did not know it.
27 Thus Aḇnĕr returned to Ḥeḇron, and Yo’aḇ took
him aside in the gate to speak with him privately, and
there struck him in the stomach, so that he died for
the blood of Asah’ĕl his brother.
28 And when Dawiḏ heard it afterwards, he said, “My
reign and I are guiltless before hWhY forever of the
blood of Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr.
29 “Let it rest on the head of Yo’aḇ and on all his
father’s house. And let there never fail to be in the
house of Yo’aḇ one who has a discharge or is a leper,
20

762

SHEMU’ĔL 2

who leans on a staff or falls by the sword, or who lacks
bread.”
30 So Yo’aḇ and Aḇishai his brother slew Aḇnĕr,
because he had killed their brother Asah’ĕl at Giḇ’on
in the battle.
31 And Dawiḏ said to Yo’aḇ and to all the people who
were with him, “Tear your garments, gird yourselves
with sackcloth, and mourn for Aḇnĕr.” And Sovereign
Dawiḏ followed the coffin.
32 And they buried Aḇnĕr in Ḥeḇron. And the
sovereign lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of
Aḇnĕr, and all the people wept.
33 And the sovereign sang a lament over Aḇnĕr and
said, “Should Aḇnĕr die as a fool dies?
34 “Your hands were not bound nor your feet put into
shackles. As one falls before sons of evil, so you fell.”
And all the people wept over him again.
35 And all the people came to cause Dawiḏ to eat
food while it was still day, but Dawiḏ swore, saying,
“Elohim do so to me, and more also, if I taste bread
or whatever else till the sun goes down!”
36 And all the people took note of it, and it was good
in their eyes, since whatever the sovereign did was
good in the eyes of all the people.
37 And all the people and all Yisra’ĕl knew that day
that it had not been the sovereign’s intent to kill Aḇnĕr
son of Nĕr.
38 The sovereign also said to his servants, “Do you
not know that a prince and a great one has fallen in
Yisra’ĕl today?
39 “And I am weak today, though anointed sovereign.
And these men, the sons of Tseruyah, are too harsh
for me. Let hWhY repay the evil-doer according to his
evil.”
763

2 SAMUEL

4 And the son of Sha’ul heard that Aḇnĕr had died
in Ḥeḇron, and he lost heart, and all Yisra’ĕl was
troubled.
2 And the son of Sha’ul had two men, commanders
of bands, and the name of one was Ba’anah and the
name of the other Rĕḵaḇ, sons of Rimmon the
Be’ĕrothite, of the children of Binyamin. For Be’ĕroth
was also reckoned to Binyamin,
3 because the Be’ĕrothites fled to Gittayim and have
been sojourners there until this day.
4 Now Yahonathan, son of Sha’ul, had a son who
was lame in his feet. He was five years old when the
news about Sha’ul and Yahonathan came from
Yizre’ĕl, and his nurse took him up and fled. And it
came to be, as she hurried to flee, that he fell and
became lame. And his name was Mephiḇosheth.
5 So the sons of Rimmon the Be’ĕrothite, Rĕḵaḇ and
Ba’anah, went and came at about the heat of the day
to the house of Ishbosheth, who was lying on his bed
at noon.
6 And they came into the midst of the house, to fetch
wheat, and they struck him in the stomach, and
Rĕḵaḇ and Ba’anah his brother escaped.
7 Thus they came into the house when he was lying
on his bed in his bedroom, and they smote him, and
slew him, and beheaded him. And they took his head,
and went the way of the desert plain all night,
8 and brought the head of Ishbosheth to Dawiḏ at
Ḥeḇron, and said to the sovereign, “See, the head of
Ishbosheth, the son of Sha’ul your enemy, who
sought your life. So hWhY has given my master the
sovereign vengeance on Sha’ul and his seed this
day.”
764

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Dawiḏ answered Rĕḵaḇ and Ba’anah his
brother, sons of Rimmon the Be’ĕrothite, and said to
them, “As hWhY lives, who has redeemed my life out
of all distress,
10 when someone reported to me, saying, ‘See,
Sha’ul is dead,’ and he was a bearer of good news in
his own eyes, I then took hold of him and slew him in
Tsiqlaḡ, which was the reward I gave him for his
news.
11 “How much more, when wicked men have slain a
righteous man in his own house on his bed, should I
not now require his blood at your hand and remove
you from the earth?”
12 And Dawiḏ commanded his young men, and they
slew them, and cut off their hands and feet, and
hanged them by the pool in Ḥeḇron. And they took the
head of Ishbosheth and buried it in the tomb of Aḇnĕr
in Ḥeḇron.
9

5 And all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl came to Dawiḏ at
Ḥeḇron and spoke, saying, “Look, we are your bone
and your flesh.
2 “Formerly, when Sha’ul was sovereign over us,
you were the one who led Yisra’ĕl out and brought
them in. And hWhY said to you, ‘Shepherd My people
Yisra’ĕl, and be ruler over Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
3 And all the elders of Yisra’ĕl came to the sovereign
at Ḥeḇron, and Sovereign Dawiḏ made a covenant
with them at Ḥeḇron before hWhY. And they anointed
Dawiḏ sovereign over Yisra’ĕl.
4 Dawiḏ was thirty years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned forty years.
5 In Ḥeḇron he reigned over Yahuḏah seven years
and six months, and in Yerushalayim he reigned
thirty-three years over all Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.
765

2 SAMUEL

And the sovereign and his men went to
Yerushalayim against the Yeḇusites, the inhabitants
of the land. And they spoke to Dawiḏ, saying, “Except
you take away the blind and the lame, you are not
going to come in here,” thinking, “Dawiḏ is not going
to come in here.”
7 But Dawiḏ captured the stronghold of Tsiyon, the
City of Dawiḏ.
8 And Dawiḏ said on that day, “Anyone who reaches
the water-shaft, let him smite the Yeḇusites and the
lame and the blind, who are hated by Dawiḏ’s being.”
That is why they say, “The blind and the lame do not
come into the house.”
9 And Dawiḏ dwelt in the stronghold, and called it
the City of Dawiḏ. And Dawiḏ built all around from
ha’Millo and inward.
10 And Dawiḏ went on and became great, and hWhY
Elohim of hosts was with him.
11 Now Ḥiram sovereign of Tsor sent messengers to
Dawiḏ, and cedar trees, and carpenters and masons.
And they built a house for Dawiḏ.
12 And Dawiḏ knew that hWhY had established him
as sovereign over Yisra’ĕl, and that He had exalted
His reign, because of His people Yisra’ĕl.
13 And Dawiḏ took more concubines and wives from
Yerushalayim, after he had come from Ḥeḇron, and
more sons and daughters were born to Dawiḏ.
14 And these were the names of those born to him in
Yerushalayim: Shammua, and Shoḇaḇ, and Nathan,
and Shelomoh,
15 and Yiḇḥar, and Elishua, Nepheḡ, and Yaphiya,
16 and Elishama, and Elyaḏa, and Eliphelet.
17 And the Pelishtites heard that they had anointed
Dawiḏ sovereign over Yisra’ĕl, and all the Pelishtites
6

766

SHEMU’ĔL 2

went up to search for Dawiḏ, but Dawiḏ heard and
went down to the stronghold.
18 And the Pelishtites came and spread themselves
out in the Valley of Repha’im.
19 And Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY, saying, “Do I go up
against the Pelishtites? Do You give them into my
hand?” And hWhY said to Dawiḏ, “Go up, for I shall
certainly give the Pelishtites into your hand.”
20 And Dawiḏ came to Ba’al Peratsim, and Dawiḏ
smote them there. And he said, “hWhY has broken
through my enemies before me, like a breakthrough
of water.” So he called the name of that place Ba’al
Peratsim.
21 And they left their images there, and Dawiḏ and
his men took them away.
22 And the Pelishtites again came up and were
spread out in the Valley of Repha’im.
23 And when Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY, He said, “Do
not go up, turn around behind them, and you shall
come upon them in front of the mulberry trees.
24 “And it shall be, when you hear the sound of
stepping in the tops of the mulberry trees, then act
promptly, for then hWhY shall go out before you to
smite the camp of the Pelishtites.”
25 And Dawiḏ did so, as hWhY commanded him, and
smote the Pelishtites from Geḇa as far as Gezer.

6 Now Dawiḏ again gathered all the chosen men of
Yisra’ĕl, thirty thousand.
2 And Dawiḏ rose up and went with all the people
who were with him from Ba’alĕ Yahuḏah, to bring up
from there the ark of Elohim, that is called by the
Name, the Name hWhY of Hosts, who dwells between
the keruḇim.
767

2 SAMUEL

And they placed the ark of Elohim on a new
wagon, and brought it from the house of Aḇinaḏaḇ,
which was on the hill. And Uzzah and Aḥyo, sons of
Aḇinaḏaḇ, were leading the new wagon.
4 And they brought it from the house of Aḇinaḏaḇ,
which was on the hill, with the ark of Elohim. And
Aḥyo was walking before the ark.
5 And Dawiḏ and all the house of Yisra’ĕl were
dancing before hWhY, with all fir wood instruments,
and with lyres, and with harps, and with tambourines,
and with sistrums, and with cymbals.
6 And when they came to the threshing-floor of
Naḵon, Uzzah reached out toward the ark of Elohim
and took hold of it, for the oxen stumbled.
7 And the wrath of hWhY burned against Uzzah, and
Elohim smote him there for the fault. And he died
there by the ark of Elohim.
8 And Dawiḏ was displeased because hWhY had
broken out against Uzzah. And he called the name of
the place Perets Uzzah, until this day.
9 And Dawiḏ was afraid of hWhY on that day, and
said, “How shall the ark of hWhY come to me?”
10 And Dawiḏ would not move the ark of hWhY with
him into the City of Dawiḏ, but Dawiḏ turned it aside
to the house of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom the Gittite.
11 And the ark of hWhY remained in the house of
Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom the Gittite three months, and hWhY baraḵ
Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom and all his house.
12 And it was reported to Sovereign Dawiḏ, saying,
“hWhY has baraḵ the house of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom and all
that he has, because of the ark of Elohim.” Dawiḏ
then went and brought up the ark of Elohim from the
house of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom to the City of Dawiḏ with
rejoicing.
3

768

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And it came to be, when those bearing the ark of
hWhY had gone six steps, that he slaughtered bulls
and fatlings.
14 And Dawiḏ danced before hWhY with all his might.
And Dawiḏ was wearing a linen shoulder garment.
15 Thus Dawiḏ and all the house of Yisra’ĕl brought
up the ark of hWhY with shouting and with the sound
of the ram’s horn.
16 And it came to be, when the ark of hWhY came into
the City of Dawiḏ, that Miḵal, daughter of Sha’ul,
looked through a window and saw Sovereign Dawiḏ
leaping and dancing before hWhY, and she despised
him in her heart.
17 So they brought the ark of hWhY in, and put it in its
place in the midst of the Tent that Dawiḏ had pitched
for it. And Dawiḏ brought burnt offerings before hWhY,
and peace offerings.
18 And when Dawiḏ had finished bringing burnt
offerings and peace offerings, he baraḵ the people in
the Name of hWhY of hosts.
19 And he apportioned to all the people, to all the
crowd of Yisra’ĕl, from man even to women, to each
one a loaf of bread, and a measure, and a cake of
raisins. And all the people left, each one to his house.
20 And Dawiḏ returned to baraḵ his household, and
Miḵal the daughter of Sha’ul came out to meet Dawiḏ,
and said, “How esteemed was the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl today, uncovering himself today in the eyes
of the female servants of his servants, as one of the
foolish ones shamelessly uncovers himself!”
21 So Dawiḏ said to Miḵal, “Before hWhY, who chose
me instead of your father and all his house,
commanding me to be ruler over the people of hWhY,
over Yisra’ĕl, so I danced before hWhY.
13

769

2 SAMUEL

“And I shall be even more slight than this, and shall
be humble in my own eyes. But as for the female
servants of whom you have spoken, by them I am
esteemed.”
23 And Miḵal the daughter of Sha’ul had no children
to the day of her death.
22

7 And it came to be when the sovereign was dwelling
in his house, and hWhY had given him rest from all his
enemies all around,
2 that the sovereign said to Nathan the naḇi, “See
now, I am dwelling in a house of cedar, but the ark of
Elohim dwells within curtains.”
3 And Nathan said to the sovereign, “Go, do all that
is in your heart, for hWhY is with you.”
4 And it came to be that night that the word of hWhY
came to Nathan, saying,
5 “Go and say to My servant Dawiḏ, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “Would you build a house for Me to dwell in?
6 “For I have not dwelt in a house since the time that
I brought the children of Yisra’ĕl up from Mitsrayim,
even to this day, but have moved about in a Tent and
in a Dwelling Place.
7 “Wherever I have walked with all the children of
Yisra’ĕl, have I ever spoken a word to anyone from
the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, whom I commanded to shepherd
My people Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘Why have you not built
Me a house of cedar?’ ” ’
8 “And now, say to My servant Dawiḏ, ‘Thus said
hWhY of hosts, “I took you from the pasture, from
following the flock, to be ruler over My people, over
Yisra’ĕl.
9 “And I have been with you wherever you have
gone, and have cut off all your enemies from before
770

SHEMU’ĔL 2

you, and have made you a great name, like the name
of the great ones who are on the earth.
10 “And I shall appoint a place for My people Yisra’ĕl,
and shall plant them, and they shall dwell in a place
of their own and no longer be afraid, neither shall the
children of wickedness oppress them again, as at the
first,
11 even from the day I appointed rulers over My
people Yisra’ĕl, and have caused you to rest from all
your enemies. And hWhY has declared to you that
hWhY would make you a house.
12 “When your days are filled and you rest with your
fathers, I shall raise up your seed after you, who
comes from your inward parts, and shall establish his
reign.
13 “He builds a house for My Name, and I shall
establish the throne of his reign forever.
14 “I am to be his Father, and he is My son. If he does
perversely, I shall reprove him with the rod of men
and with the blows of the sons of men.
15 “But My kindness does not turn aside from him, as
I turned it aside from Sha’ul, whom I removed from
before you.
16 “And your house and your reign are to be steadfast
forever before you - your throne is established
forever.” ’ ”
17 According to all these words and according to all
this vision, so Nathan spoke to Dawiḏ.
18 And Sovereign Dawiḏ went in and sat before hWhY
and he said, “Who am I, O Aḏonai hWhY? And what
is my house, that You have brought me this far?
19 “And yet this was a small matter in Your eyes, O
Aḏonai hWhY. And You have also spoken of Your
servant’s house for a great while to come. And is this
the teaching of man, O Aḏonai hWhY?
771

2 SAMUEL

“And what more does Dawiḏ say to You? For You,
Aḏonai hWhY, know Your servant.
21 “Because of Your word, and according to Your
own heart, You have done all this greatness, to make
it known to Your servant.
22 “You are great indeed, O Aḏonai hWhY. For there
is none like You, and there is no Elohim but You,
according to all that we have heard with our ears.
23 “And who is like Your people, like Yisra’ĕl, the one
nation on the earth whom Elohim went to redeem for
Himself as a people, to make for Himself a Name, and
to do for You greatness, and awesome deeds for
Your land before Your people, whom You redeemed
for Yourself from Mitsrayim, from the nations and their
mighty ones?
24 “And You have established for Yourself Your
people Yisra’ĕl as Your own people forever, and You,
hWhY, have become their Elohim.
25 “And now, O hWhY Elohim, the word which You
have spoken concerning Your servant and
concerning his house, establish it forever and do as
You have said.
26 “And let Your Name be made great forever,
saying, ‘hWhY of hosts is the Elohim over Yisra’ĕl.’
And let the house of Your servant Dawiḏ be
established before You.
27 “For You, O hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
have revealed this to Your servant, saying, ‘I build you
a house.’ Therefore Your servant has taken heart to
pray this prayer to You.
28 “And now, O Aḏonai hWhY, You are Elohim, and
Your words are true, and You have spoken this
goodness to Your servant.
29 “And now, be pleased to baraḵ the house of Your
servant, to be before You, forever. For You, O Aḏonai
20

772

SHEMU’ĔL 2

hWhY, have spoken it, and with Your beraḵah let the
house of Your servant be baruḵ forever.”

8 And after this it came to be that Dawiḏ smote the
Pelishtites and humbled them. And Dawiḏ took the
bridle of the mother city out of the hand of the
Pelishtites.
2 He also smote Mo’aḇ, and measured them off with
a line, causing them to lie down on the earth. With two
lines he measured off those to be put to death, and
with one complete line those to be kept alive. And the
Mo’aḇites became Dawiḏ’s servants, and brought
presents.
3 Dawiḏ also smote Haḏaḏezer son of Reḥoḇ,
sovereign of Tsoḇah, as he went to restore his rule at
the River Perath.
4 And Dawiḏ captured from him one thousand and
seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand foot
soldiers. And Dawiḏ destroyed all the chariots, but he
left of them a hundred chariots.
5 And the Arameans of Dammeseq came to help
Haḏaḏezer sovereign of Tsoḇah, and Dawiḏ smote
twenty-two thousand of the Arameans.
6 Then Dawiḏ put watch-posts in Aram of
Dammeseq. And the Arameans became Dawiḏ’s
servants, and brought presents. And hWhY saved
Dawiḏ wherever he went.
7 And Dawiḏ took the shields of gold which were on
the servants of Haḏaḏezer, and brought them to
Yerushalayim.
8 And from Betaḥ and from Bĕrothai, cities of
Haḏaḏezer, Sovereign Dawiḏ took very much bronze.
9 And To’i sovereign of Ḥamath heard that Dawiḏ
had smitten all the army of Haḏaḏezer,
773

2 SAMUEL

so To’i sent Yoram his son to Sovereign Dawiḏ, to
ask peace of him and baraḵ him, because he had
fought against Haḏaḏezer and smote him, for
Haḏaḏezer had battles with To’i. And brought with
him objects of silver, and objects of gold, and objects
of bronze.
11 Sovereign Dawiḏ also qadosh these to hWhY,
along with the silver and gold that he had qadosh from
all the nations which he had humbled:
12 from Aram, and from Mo’aḇ, and from the children
of Ammon, and from the Pelishtites, and from
Amalĕq, and from the spoil of Haḏaḏezer son of
Reḥoḇ, sovereign of Tsoḇah.
13 And Dawiḏ made a name when he returned from
smiting eighteen thousand Arameans in the Valley of
Salt.
14 And he put watch-posts in Eḏom. Throughout all
Eḏom he put watch-posts, and all the Eḏomites
became Dawiḏ’s servants. And hWhY saved Dawiḏ
wherever he went.
15 And Dawiḏ reigned over all Yisra’ĕl, and Dawiḏ
was doing right-ruling and righteousness to all his
people.
16 And Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah was over the army,
and Yahoshaphat son of Aḥiluḏ was recorder,
17 and Tsaḏoq son of Aḥituḇ and Aḥimeleḵ son of
Eḇyathar were the kohenim, and Serayah was the
scribe,
18 and Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa was over both the
Kerĕthites and the Pelĕthites, and Dawiḏ’s sons were
kohenim.
10

9 And Dawiḏ said, “Is there still anyone who is left of
the house of Sha’ul, that I might show him kindness,
because of Yahonathan?”
774

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And the house of Sha’ul had a servant whose
name was Tsiḇa. And they had called him to Dawiḏ,
and the sovereign said to him, “Are you Tsiḇa?” And
he said, “Your servant!”
3 And the sovereign said, “Is there not still someone
of the house of Sha’ul, so that I show him the
kindness of Elohim?” And Tsiḇa said to the sovereign,
“There is still a son of Yahonathan, lame in his feet.”
4 So the sovereign said to him, “Where is he?” And
Tsiḇa said to the sovereign, “See, he is in the house
of Maḵir son of Ammi’ĕl, in Lo Ḏeḇar.”
5 And Sovereign Dawiḏ sent and brought him out of
the house of Maḵir son of Ammi’ĕl, from Lo Ḏeḇar.
6 And Mephiḇosheth son of Yahonathan, son of
Sha’ul, came to Dawiḏ, and fell on his face and did
obeisance. And Dawiḏ said, “Mephiḇosheth!” And he
answered, “Here is your servant!”
7 Dawiḏ then said to him, “Do not fear, for I shall
certainly show you kindness because of Yahonathan
your father, and shall return to you all the land of
Sha’ul your grandfather, and let you eat bread at my
table continually.”
8 And he bowed himself and said, “What is your
servant, that you should turn to such a dead dog as
I?”
9 And the sovereign called Tsiḇa servant of Sha’ul,
and said to him, “I have given to your master’s son all
that belonged to Sha’ul and to all his house.
10 “And you and your sons and your servants, shall
work the land for him, and you shall bring, and your
master’s son shall have food to eat. But let
Mephiḇosheth your master’s son eat bread at my
table always.” And Tsiḇa had fifteen sons and twenty
servants.
2

775

2 SAMUEL

And Tsiḇa said to the sovereign, “According to all
that my master the sovereign has commanded his
servant, so your servant does.” “As for Mephiḇosheth,
he shall eat at my table as one of the sons of the
sovereign.”
12 And Mephiḇosheth had a young son whose name
was Miḵa. And all who dwelt in the house of Tsiḇa
were servants of Mephiḇosheth.
13 And Mephiḇosheth was dwelling in Yerushalayim,
for he ate continually at the sovereign’s table. And he
was lame in both his feet.
11

10 And after this it came to be that the sovereign of
the children of Ammon died, and Ḥanun his son
reigned in his place.
2 And Dawiḏ said, “Let me show kindness to Ḥanun
son of Naḥash, as his father showed kindness to me.”
So Dawiḏ sent by the hand of his servants to comfort
him concerning his father. And when Dawiḏ’s
servants came into the land of the children of Ammon,
3 the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to Ḥanun
their master, “Is Dawiḏ esteeming your father in your
eyes in that he has sent comforters to you? Has
Dawiḏ not rather sent his servants to you to search
the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?”
4 So Ḥanun took Dawiḏ’s servants and shaved off
half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the
middle, as far as their buttocks, and sent them away.
5 And they informed Dawiḏ, and he sent to meet
them, because the men were greatly ashamed. And
the sovereign said, “Wait at Yeriḥo until your beards
have grown, and then return.”
6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they
had become a stench to Dawiḏ, the children of
Ammon sent and hired Arameans of Bĕyth Reḥoḇ
776

SHEMU’ĔL 2

and Arameans of Tsoḇa, twenty thousand foot
soldiers, and the sovereign of Ma’aḵah, one thousand
men, and men of Toḇ, twelve thousand men.
7 And Dawiḏ heard, and sent Yo’aḇ and the entire
army, the mighty men.
8 And the children of Ammon came out and put
themselves in battle array at the entrance of the gate.
And the Arameans of Tsoḇa, and Reḥoḇ, and men of
Toḇ, and Ma’aḵah were by themselves in the field.
9 And Yo’aḇ saw that the battle line was against him
before and behind, and he chose out of all the chosen
men of Yisra’ĕl and put them in battle array against
the Arameans.
10 And the rest of the people he gave under the hand
of Aḇishai his brother, and he put them in battle array
against the children of Ammon.
11 And he said, “If the Arameans are too strong for
me, then you shall help me. But if the children of
Ammon are too strong for you, then I shall come and
help you.
12 “Be strong, and let us show strength for our people
and for the cities of our Elohim, and let hWhY do what
is good in His eyes.”
13 And Yo’aḇ drew near, and the people with him, to
battle against Aram, and they fled before him.
14 And when the children of Ammon saw that the
Arameans were fleeing, they also fled before Aḇishai,
and went into the city. And Yo’aḇ returned from the
children of Ammon and came to Yerushalayim.
15 And Aram saw that they were smitten before
Yisra’ĕl, and they gathered together,
16 and Haḏaḏezer sent and brought out the
Arameans who were beyond the River, and they
came to Ḥĕlam. And Shoḇaḵ the commander of the
army of Haḏaḏezer went before them.
777

2 SAMUEL

And it was reported to Dawiḏ, and he gathered all
Yisra’ĕl, and passed over the Yardĕn, and came to
Ḥĕlam. And Aram put themselves in battle array
against Dawiḏ and they fought with him.
18 And Aram fled before Yisra’ĕl, and Dawiḏ slew
seven hundred charioteers and forty thousand
horsemen of Aram, and he smote Shoḇaḵ,
commander of their army, who died there.
19 And all the sovereigns, the servants of Haḏaḏezer,
saw that they were smitten by Yisra’ĕl, and made
peace with Yisra’ĕl, and served them. And the
Arameans were afraid to help the children of Ammon
any more.
17

11 And it came to be at the turn of the year, at the
time sovereigns go out, that Dawiḏ sent Yo’aḇ and his
servants with him, and all Yisra’ĕl, and they destroyed
the children of Ammon and besieged Rabbah. But
Dawiḏ remained at Yerushalayim.
2 And it came to be, at evening time, that Dawiḏ rose
up from his bed and walked about on the roof of the
sovereign’s house. And from the roof he saw a
woman bathing, and the woman was very good to
look at.
3 And Dawiḏ sent and asked about the woman, and
one said, “Is this not Bathsheḇa, the daughter of
Eliyam, the wife of Uriyah the Ḥittite?”
4 And Dawiḏ sent messengers, to fetch her. And she
came to him, and he lay with her - for she was
cleansing herself from her uncleanness - and she
returned to her house.
5 And the woman conceived, and sent and informed
Dawiḏ, and said, “I am pregnant.”
6 Then Dawiḏ sent to Yo’aḇ, “Send Uriyah the Ḥittite
to me.” And Yo’aḇ sent Uriyah to Dawiḏ.
778

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Uriyah came to him, and Dawiḏ asked how
Yo’aḇ was doing, and how the people were doing,
and how the fighting was going.
8 And Dawiḏ said to Uriyah, “Go down to your house
and wash your feet.” And Uriyah went out from the
sovereign’s house, and a gift from the sovereign
followed him.
9 But Uriyah lay down at the door of the sovereign’s
house with all the servants of his master, and did not
go down to his house.
10 And they informed Dawiḏ, saying, “Uriyah did not
go down to his house,” So Dawiḏ said to Uriyah, “Did
you not come from a journey? Why did you not go
down to your house?”
11 And Uriyah said to Dawiḏ, “The ark and Yisra’ĕl
and Yahuḏah are dwelling in booths, and my master
Yo’aḇ and the servants of my master are encamped
in the open fields. And I, should I go to my house to
eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As you live,
and as your being lives, let me not do this.”
12 And Dawiḏ said to Uriyah, “Remain here today
also, and tomorrow I let you go.” So Uriyah remained
in Yerushalayim, that day and the next.
13 And Dawiḏ called him, and he ate and drank
before him, and he made him drunk. And at evening
he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his
master, but he did not go down to his house.
14 And it came to be in the morning that Dawiḏ wrote
a letter to Yo’aḇ and sent it by the hand of Uriyah.
15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, “Put Uriyah in
the front of the heaviest battle, and you shall turn
away from him, and he shall be smitten and shall die.”
16 And it came to be, as Yo’aḇ watched the city, that
he appointed Uriyah to the place where he knew there
were brave men.
7

779

2 SAMUEL

And the men of the city came out and fought with
Yo’aḇ. And some of the people of the servants of
Dawiḏ fell. And Uriyah the Ḥittite also died.
18 And Yo’aḇ sent and reported to Dawiḏ all the
events of the battle,
19 and commanded the messenger, saying, “When
you have finished reporting all the events of the battle
to the sovereign,
20 then it shall be, if the sovereign’s wrath rises and
he says to you, ‘Why did you go so near to the city
when you fought? Did you not know that they would
shoot from the wall?
21 ‘Who smote Aḇimeleḵ the son of Yerubbesheth?
Was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on
him from the wall, so that he died in Thĕḇĕts? Why
did you go near the wall?’ Then you shall say, ‘Your
servant Uriyah the Ḥittite is also dead.’ ”
22 And the messenger went, and came and reported
to Dawiḏ all with which Yo’aḇ had sent him.
23 And the messenger said to Dawiḏ, “The men have
been mighty against us and came out to us in the
field, but we drove them back as far as the entrance
of the gate.
24 “And the archers shot from the wall at your
servants. And some of the sovereign’s servants are
dead, and your servant Uriyah the Ḥittite is also
dead.”
25 And Dawiḏ said to the messenger, “Say to Yo’aḇ,
‘Do not let this matter be evil in your eyes, for the
sword devours one as well as another. Strengthen
your attack against the city, and overthrow it.’ And
encourage him.”
26 And the wife of Uriyah heard that Uriyah her
husband was dead, and she lamented for her
husband.
17

780

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And when her mourning was over, Dawiḏ sent and
brought her to his house, and she became his wife
and bore him a son. But the deed that Dawiḏ had
done was evil in the eyes of HWHY.

27

12 Then hWhY sent Nathan to Dawiḏ. And he came
to him, and said to him, “There were two men in one
city, one rich and the other poor.
2 “The rich one had flocks and herds, very many.
3 “But the poor one had only one little ewe lamb
which he had bought and kept alive. And it grew up
with him and with his children together. It ate of his
own food and drank from his own cup and lay in his
bosom. And it was like a daughter to him.
4 “And a traveller came to the rich man, who refused
to take from his own flock and from his own herd to
prepare one for the wayfaring man who had come to
him, but he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it
for the man who had come to him.”
5 And the wrath of Dawiḏ burned greatly against the
man, and he said to Nathan, “As HWHY lives, the man
who has done this is a son of death!
6 “Also, he has to repay fourfold for the lamb,
because he did this deed and because he had no
compassion.”
7 Then Nathan said to Dawiḏ, “You are the man!
Thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I anointed you
sovereign over Yisra’ĕl, and I delivered you from the
hand of Sha’ul.
8 ‘And I gave you your master’s house and your
master’s wives into your bosom, and gave you the
house of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah. And if that were not
enough, I also would have given you much more!
9 ‘Why have you despised the Word of hWhY to do
evil in His eyes? You have killed Uriyah the Ḥittite with
781

2 SAMUEL

the sword, and his wife you took to be your wife, and
you have killed him with the sword of the children of
Ammon.
10 ‘And now, the sword does not turn aside from your
house, because you have despised Me, and have
taken the wife of Uriyah the Ḥittite to be your wife.’
11 “Thus said hWhY, ‘See, I am raising up evil against
you, from your own house, and shall take your wives
before your eyes and give them to your neighbour,
and he shall lie with your wives in the sight of this sun.
12 ‘For you did it in secret, but I shall do this deed
before all Yisra’ĕl, and before the sun.’ ”
13 And Dawiḏ said to Nathan, “I have sinned against
hWhY.” And Nathan said to Dawiḏ, “Also, hWhY has
put away your sin, you shall not die.
14 “However, because by this deed you have greatly
scorned hWhY the child also who is born to you shall
certainly die.”
15 And Nathan went to his house, and hWhY afflicted
the child that Uriyah’s wife had born to Dawiḏ, and he
was sick.
16 And Dawiḏ sought Elohim for the child, and Dawiḏ
fasted and went in and spent all night lying on the
ground.
17 So the elders of his house stood up over him, to
raise him up from the earth. But he would not, nor did
he eat food with them.
18 And on the seventh day it came to be that the child
died. And the servants of Dawiḏ were afraid to inform
him that the child was dead, for they said, “Look, while
the child was still alive, we spoke to him, and he would
not listen to our voice. And how do we say to him that
the child is dead? He may act terribly!”
19 And Dawiḏ saw that his servants were whispering,
and Dawiḏ perceived that the child was dead. Then
782

SHEMU’ĔL 2

Dawiḏ said to his servants, “Is the child dead?” And
they said, “He is dead.”
20 Dawiḏ then rose up from the ground, and washed
and anointed himself, and changed his garments.
And he went into the House of hWhY and bowed
himself, then came to his own house, and asked, and
they put food before him, so he ate.
21 And his servants said to him, “What is this that you
have done? You fasted and wept because of the
living child, but when the child died, you rose up and
ate food.”
22 And he said, “While the child was alive I fasted and
wept, for I said, ‘Who knows whether hWhY shows
favour unto me, and the child shall live?’
23 “But now he is dead, why should I fast? Am I able
to bring him back again? I am going to him, but he
does not return to me.”
24 And Dawiḏ comforted Bathsheḇa his wife, and
went in to her and lay with her. So she bore a son,
and he called his name Shelomoh. And hWhY loved
him,
25 and sent by the hand of Nathan the naḇi, and
called his name Yeḏiḏeyah, because of hWhY.
26 And Yo’aḇ fought against Rabbah of the children
of Ammon, and captured the royal city.
27 And Yo’aḇ sent messengers to Dawiḏ, and said, “I
have fought against Rabbah, and I have captured the
city’s water supply.
28 “And now, gather the rest of the people together
and encamp against the city and capture it, lest I
capture the city and it be called after my name.”
29 And Dawiḏ gathered all the people and went to
Rabbah, and fought against it, and captured it.
30 And he took their sovereign’s crown from his head.
And its weight was a kiḵar of gold, with precious
783

2 SAMUEL

stones, and it was on Dawiḏ’s head. And he brought
out the spoil of the city, a very great amount.
31 And he brought out the people who were in it, and
put them to the saw and to sharp instruments of iron
and to axes of iron, and made them pass over to the
brick works. And so he did with all the cities of the
children of Ammon. And Dawiḏ and all the people
returned to Yerushalayim.

13 And after this it came to be that Aḇshalom son of
Dawiḏ had a lovely sister, whose name was Tamar,
and Amnon son of Dawiḏ loved her.
2 And Amnon was distressed, even to become sick,
because of his sister Tamar - for she was a maiden and it was hard in the eyes of Amnon to do whatever
to her.
3 And Amnon had a friend whose name was
Yonaḏaḇ son of Shim’ah, Dawiḏ’s brother. Now
Yonaḏaḇ was a very cunning man.
4 And he said to him, “Why are you, the sovereign’s
son, becoming thinner day after day? Explain it to
me.” And Amnon said to him, “I love Tamar, my
brother Aḇshalom’s sister.”
5 And Yonaḏaḇ said to him, “Lie down on your bed
and pretend to be sick. And when your father comes
to see you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar
come and give me food, and make the food before
my eyes so that I see it, and eat it from her hand.’ ”
6 So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick. And
when the sovereign came to see him, Amnon said to
the sovereign, “Please let Tamar my sister come and
make a couple of cakes for me before my eyes, so
that I eat from her hand.”

784

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Dawiḏ sent to Tamar, to the house, saying,
“Please go to the house of your brother Amnon, and
make food for him.”
8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house,
while he was lying down. And she took dough and
kneaded it, and made cakes before his eyes, and
baked the cakes.
9 And she took the pan and turned them out before
him, but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, “Make
everyone go away from me.” And they all went out
from him.
10 And Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the
bedroom, that I eat from your hand.” And Tamar took
the cakes which she had made, and brought them to
Amnon her brother in the bedroom.
11 And she brought them to him to eat, and he took
hold of her and said to her, “Come, lie with me, my
sister.”
12 And she answered him, “No, my brother, do not
humble me, for it is not done so in Yisra’ĕl. Do not do
this wickedness!
13 “And I, where could I take my shame? And you you would be like one of the fools in Yisra’ĕl. And now,
please speak to the sovereign, for he would not
withhold me from you.”
14 But he would not listen to her voice, and being
stronger than she, he humbled her and lay with her.
15 Amnon then exceedingly hated her, so that the
hatred with which he hated her was greater than the
love with which he had loved her. And Amnon said to
her, “Arise, go!”
16 And she said to him, “No, for this evil of sending
me away is worse than the other you have done to
me.” But he would not listen to her.
7

785

2 SAMUEL

And he called his young man serving him, and
said, “Now put this one out, away from me, and bolt
the door behind her.”
18 And she had on a long coat, for the sovereign’s
maiden daughters wore such garments. And his
servant put her out and bolted the door behind her.
19 And Tamar put ashes on her head, and tore her
long coat that was on her, and put her hand on her
head and went away crying bitterly.
20 And Aḇshalom her brother said to her, “Has
Amnon your brother been with you? But now, keep
silent, my sister. He is your brother, do not take this
matter to heart.” So Tamar remained in the house of
her brother Aḇshalom, but was ruined.
21 And Sovereign Dawiḏ heard all these reports, and
he was very wroth.
22 And Aḇshalom spoke to his brother Amnon neither
good nor evil. For Aḇshalom hated Amnon, because
he had humbled his sister Tamar.
23 And it came to be, after two years, that Aḇshalom
had sheep-shearers in Ba’al Ḥatsor, which is beside
Ephrayim, and Aḇshalom invited all the sons of the
sovereign.
24 And Aḇshalom came to the sovereign and said,
“See, your servant has sheep-shearers. Please, let
the sovereign and his servants go with your servant.”
25 But the sovereign said to Aḇshalom, “No, my son,
let us not all go now, lest we be too heavy on you.”
And he urged him, but he would not go. And he baraḵ
him.
26 And Aḇshalom said, “If not, please let my brother
Amnon go with us.” And the sovereign said to him,
“Why should he go with you?”
27 And Aḇshalom urged him, so he let Amnon and all
the sons of the sovereign go with him.
17

786

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Aḇshalom had commanded his servants,
saying, “Watch, and when the heart of Amnon is glad
with wine, and I shall say to you, ‘Smite Amnon!’ then
kill him. Do not be afraid. Have I not commanded
you? Be strong and brave.”
29 Then the servants of Aḇshalom did to Amnon as
Aḇshalom had commanded. Then all the sons of the
sovereign rose up, and each one mounted his mule
and fled.
30 And it came to be, while they were on the way, that
news came to Dawiḏ, saying, “Aḇshalom has smitten
all the sons of the sovereign, and not one of them is
left!”
31 And the sovereign rose up and tore his garments
and lay on the ground, and all his servants stood by
with their garments torn.
32 And Yonaḏaḇ son of Shim’ah, Dawiḏ’s brother,
answered and said, “Do not let my master say they
have killed all the young men, the sons of the
sovereign, for only Amnon is dead. For by the
command of Aḇshalom this has been appointed from
the day that he humbled his sister Tamar.
33 “And now, let not my master the sovereign take
the matter to his heart, to think that all the sons of the
sovereign are dead. For only Amnon is dead.”
34 And Aḇshalom fled, and the young man who was
watching lifted up his eyes and looked and saw many
people were coming from the way behind him, on the
side of the hill.
35 Then Yonaḏaḇ said to the sovereign, “Look, the
sons of the sovereign are coming; as your servant
said, so it is.”
36 And it came to be, as soon as he had finished
speaking, that look, the sons of the sovereign came,
28

787

2 SAMUEL

and they lifted up their voice and wept. And the
sovereign too, and all his servants wept very bitterly.
37 But Aḇshalom fled and went to Talmai son of
Ammihuḏ, sovereign of Geshur. And Dawiḏ mourned
for his son all the days.
38 So Aḇshalom fled and went to Geshur, and was
there three years.
39 Sovereign Dawiḏ then longed to go to Aḇshalom,
for he had been comforted concerning Amnon,
because he was dead.

14 And Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah knew that the heart
of the sovereign was towards Aḇshalom.
2 And Yo’aḇ sent to Teqowa and brought from there
a wise woman, and said to her, “Please pretend to be
a mourner, and put on mourning garments, and do
not anoint yourself with oil, but act like a woman who
has been mourning a long time for the dead.
3 “Then you shall go to the sovereign and speak to
him according to this word.” And Yo’aḇ put the words
in her mouth.
4 And when the woman of Teqowa spoke to the
sovereign, she fell on her face to the ground and did
obeisance, and said, “Save, O sovereign!”
5 And the sovereign said to her, “What is your
trouble?” And she answered, “Truly I am a widow, my
husband is dead.
6 “And your female servant had two sons. And the
two fought with each other in the field, and there was
no one to part them, but the one smote the other and
killed him.
7 “And see, the entire clan has risen up against your
female servant and said, ‘Give him who smote his
brother, so that we put him to death for the life of his
brother whom he killed, and destroy the heir also.’
788

SHEMU’ĔL 2

Thus they would extinguish my burning coal that is
left, and leave to my husband neither name nor
remnant on the earth.”
8 And the sovereign said to the woman, “Go to your
house, and let me give orders concerning you.”
9 And the woman of Teqowa said to the sovereign,
“My master, O sovereign, let the wickedness be on
me and on my father’s house, and the sovereign and
his throne be guiltless.”
10 And the sovereign said, “Whoever speaks to you,
bring him to me, and let him no longer touch you.”
11 And she said, “Please let the sovereign remember
hWhY your Elohim, and the redeemer of blood not
destroy any more, lest they destroy my son.” And he
said, “As hWhY lives, not one hair of your son shall fall
to the ground.”
12 And the woman said, “Please, let your female
servant speak a word to my master the sovereign.”
And he said, “Speak.”
13 And the woman said, “And why have you
reasoned like this against the people of Elohim? For
in speaking this word the sovereign is as one who is
guilty, in that the sovereign does not bring his outcast
one home again.
14 “For we shall certainly die and become like water
spilled on the ground, which is not gathered up again.
Yet Elohim does not take away a life, but shall devise
ways, so that His outcast ones are not cast out from
Him.
15 “And now I have come to speak this word to my
master the sovereign because the people have made
me afraid. And your female servant said, ‘Please let
me speak to the sovereign, it could be that the
sovereign does what his female servant asks,
789

2 SAMUEL

for the sovereign has listened to deliver his female
servant from the hand of the man seeking to destroy
me and my son together from the inheritance of
Elohim.’
17 “Then your female servant said, ‘Please let the word
of my master the sovereign be comforting, for my
master the sovereign is as the messenger of Elohim, in
discerning the good and the evil. And hWhY your Elohim
is with you.’ ”
18 And the sovereign answered and said to the
woman, “Please do not hide from me the matter that
I am asking you.” And the woman said, “Please, let
my master the sovereign speak.”
19 And the sovereign said, “Is the hand of Yo’aḇ with
you in all this?” And the woman answered and said,
“As your being lives, my master the sovereign, there
is none to the right or to the left from all that my master
the sovereign has spoken. For your servant Yo’aḇ
commanded me, and he put all these words in the
mouth of your female servant.
20 “Your servant Yo’aḇ has done this to change the
appearance of the matter. But my master is wise,
according to the wisdom of a messenger of Elohim,
to know all that is in the earth.”
21 And the sovereign said to Yo’aḇ, “See now, you
shall do this matter. And go, bring back the young
man Aḇshalom.”
22 And Yo’aḇ fell to the ground on his face and did
obeisance, and baraḵ the sovereign. And Yo’aḇ said,
“Today your servant knows that I have found favour
in your eyes, my master, O sovereign, in that the
sovereign has done the word of his servant.”
23 And Yo’aḇ rose up and went to Geshur, and
brought Aḇshalom to Yerushalayim.
16

790

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And the sovereign said, “Let him return to his own
house, but do not let him see my face.” And Aḇshalom
went to his own house, and did not see the
sovereign’s face.
25 And in all Yisra’ĕl there was no one who was
praised as much as Aḇshalom for his good looks.
From the sole of his foot to the crown of his head there
was no blemish in him.
26 And when he cut the hair of his head - for it was at
every year’s end that he cut it because it was heavy
on him - when he cut it, he weighed the hair of his
head at two hundred sheqels by the sovereign’s
weight.
27 And to Aḇshalom were born three sons, and one
daughter whose name was Tamar. She was a woman
of lovely appearance.
28 And Aḇshalom dwelt in Yerushalayim, two years,
and he had not seen the sovereign’s face.
29 Then Aḇshalom sent for Yo’aḇ, to send him to the
sovereign, but he would not come to him. And he sent
again the second time, but he would not come.
30 And he said to his servants, “See, Yo’aḇ’s field is
near mine, and he has barley there. Go and light it on
fire.” And Aḇshalom’s servants lit the field on fire.
31 Then Yo’aḇ rose up and came to the house of
Aḇshalom, and said to him, “Why have your servants
lit my field on fire?”
32 And Aḇshalom said to Yo’aḇ, “Look, I sent to you,
saying, ‘Come here, so that I send you to the
sovereign, to say, “Why have I come from Geshur? It
was good for me while I was there.” ’ And now, let me
see the sovereign’s face. And if there is any
wickedness in me, then you shall put me to death.”
33 Yo’aḇ then went to the sovereign and informed
him. And he called for Aḇshalom, and he came to the
24

791

2 SAMUEL

sovereign and bowed himself on his face to the
ground before the sovereign. Then the sovereign
kissed Aḇshalom.

15 And it came to be after this that Aḇshalom
prepared a chariot and horses for himself, and fifty
men to run before him.
2 And Aḇshalom used to rise early and stand beside
the way to the gate. And it came to be, whenever
anyone who had a complaint came to the sovereign
for a right-ruling, that Aḇshalom would call to him and
say, “What city are you from?” And when he said,
“Your servant is from such and such a tribe of
Yisra’ĕl,”
3 Aḇshalom would say to him, “Look, your matters
are good and right, but you have nobody from the
sovereign to hear you.”
4 And Aḇshalom would say, “Oh, that I were made
judge in the land, and everyone who has any
complaint or case would come to me, and I shall let
right be done to him.”
5 And it came to be, whenever anyone came near
him to bow down to him, that he would put out his
hand and take him and kiss him.
6 And Aḇshalom did this to all Yisra’ĕl who came to
the sovereign for right-ruling. And Aḇshalom stole the
hearts of the men of Yisra’ĕl.
7 And it came to be at the end of four years that
Aḇshalom said to the sovereign, “Please, let me go to
Ḥeḇron and pay the vow which I vowed to HWHY.
8 “For your servant vowed a vow while I dwelt at
Geshur in Aram, saying, ‘If hWhY indeed brings me back
to Yerushalayim, then I shall serve hWhY.’ ”
9 And the sovereign said to him, “Go in peace.” And
he rose up and went to Ḥeḇron.
792

SHEMU’ĔL 2

But Aḇshalom sent spies throughout all the tribes
of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “As soon as you hear the sound of
the ram’s horn, then you shall say, ‘Aḇshalom is
sovereign in Ḥeḇron!” ’
11 And with Aḇshalom went two hundred men from
Yerushalayim who were invited, and they went along
unsuspectingly, and did not know the matter at all.
12 Aḇshalom also sent for Aḥithophel the Gilonite,
counsellor of Dawiḏ, from his city, from Giloh, while
he was bringing offerings. And it came to be that the
conspiracy became strong, for the people with
Aḇshalom kept increasing.
13 Then a messenger came to Dawiḏ, saying, “The
hearts of the men of Yisra’ĕl are with Aḇshalom.”
14 And Dawiḏ said to all his servants who were with
him at Yerushalayim, “Rise up, and let us flee, for
none of us shall escape from Aḇshalom. Go in haste,
lest he overtake us quickly and bring evil upon us, and
smite the city with the edge of the sword.”
15 And the sovereign’s servants said to the
sovereign, “Look, your servants do according to all
my master the sovereign chooses.”
16 And the sovereign went out, and all his household
at his feet. But the sovereign left ten women,
concubines, to look after the house.
17 So the sovereign went out, and all the people at
his feet, and they stood still at the last house.
18 And all his servants were passing on at his side.
And all the Kerĕthites, and all the Pelĕthites, and all
the Gittites, six hundred men who had followed him
from Gath, were passing on before the sovereign.
19 And the sovereign said to Ittai the Gittite, “Why do
you go, you also, with us? Turn back and remain with
the sovereign, for you are a foreigner, and also an
exile from your own place.
10

793

2 SAMUEL

“You came yesterday, and should I today make
you wander up and down with us, when I am going
wherever I am going? Return, and take your brothers
back. Kindness and truth be with you.”
21 And Ittai answered the sovereign and said, “As
hWhY lives, and as my master the sovereign lives, in
whatever place my master the sovereign is, whether
in death or life, let your servant also be there.”
22 Therefore Dawiḏ said to Ittai, “Go, and pass over.”
And Ittai the Gittite and all his men and all the little
ones who were with him passed over.
23 And all the land was weeping with a loud voice,
and all the people were passing over. And the
sovereign himself was passing over the wadi Qiḏron,
and all the people were passing over toward the way
of the wilderness.
24 And see, Tsaḏoq also, and all the Lĕwites with
him, bearing the ark of the Covenant of Elohim. And
they put down the ark of Elohim, and Eḇyathar went
up until all the people completed passing over from
the city.
25 And the sovereign said to Tsaḏoq, “Take the ark
of Elohim back to the city. If I find favour in the eyes
of hWhY, then He shall bring me back and show me
both it and His dwelling.
26 “But if He says thus, ‘I have not delighted in you,’
here I am, let Him do to me as is good in His eyes.”
27 And the sovereign said to Tsaḏoq the kohĕn, “Are
you not a seer? Return to the city in peace, and your
two sons with you, Aḥima’ats your son, and
Yahonathan son of Eḇyathar.
28 “See, I am waiting in the desert plains of the
wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.”
29 And Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar took the ark of Elohim
back to Yerushalayim, and they remained there.
20

794

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Dawiḏ went up by the ascent of the Olives,
and wept as he went up. And he had his head covered
and went barefoot. And all the people who were with
him covered their heads and went up, weeping as
they went up.
31 And Dawiḏ was informed, saying, “Aḥithophel is
among the conspirators with Aḇshalom.” And Dawiḏ
said, “O hWhY, I pray You, make the counsel of
Aḥithophel foolish!”
32 And it came to be that Dawiḏ came to the summit,
where he bowed himself before Elohim, and saw
Ḥushai the Arkite, came to meet him with his robe torn
and dust on his head.
33 And Dawiḏ said to him, “If you pass on with me,
then you shall become a burden to me,
34 but if you return to the city, and say to Aḇshalom,
‘I am your servant, O sovereign - once servant of your
father, but now I am your servant,’ then you shall
nullify the counsel of Aḥithophel for me.
35 “And are not Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar the kohenim
with you there? And it shall be that every matter you
hear from the sovereign’s house, you should report to
Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar the kohenim.
36 “See, there with them are their two sons,
Aḥima’ats, Tsaḏoq’s son, and Yahonathan,
Eḇyathar’s son. And by them you shall send me every
matter you hear.”
37 And Ḥushai, Dawiḏ’s friend, went into the city. And
Aḇshalom came into Yerushalayim.
30

16 And Dawiḏ had passed on a little from the
summit, and saw Tsiḇa the servant of Mephiḇosheth,
who met him with a couple of saddled donkeys, and on
them two hundred loaves, and one hundred cakes of
795

2 SAMUEL

raisins, and one hundred summer fruit, and a skin of
wine.
2 And the sovereign said to Tsiḇa, “Why do you
have these?” And Tsiḇa said, “The donkeys are for
the sovereign’s household to ride on, and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat, and the
wine for the wearied to drink in the wilderness.”
3 And the sovereign said, “And where is the son of
your master?” And Tsiḇa said to the sovereign, “See,
he remains in Yerushalayim, for he said, ‘Today the
house of Yisra’ĕl is going to return the reign of my
father to me.’ ”
4 And the sovereign said to Tsiḇa, “See, all that
belongs to Mephiḇosheth is yours.” And Tsiḇa said, “I
have bowed myself, let me find favour in your eyes,
my master, O sovereign!”
5 And when Sovereign Dawiḏ came to Baḥurim he
saw a man from the clan of the house of Sha’ul,
whose name was Shim’i son of Gĕra, coming from
there. He came out, cursing as he came.
6 And he threw stones at Dawiḏ. And all the
servants of Sovereign Dawiḏ, and all the people and
all the mighty men were on his right and on his left.
7 And this is what Shim’i said as he cursed, “Get out!
Get out! O man of blood, and man of Beliya’al!
8 “hWhY has brought upon you all the blood of the
house of Sha’ul, in whose place you have reigned.
And hWhY has given the reign into the hand of
Aḇshalom your son. And see, you are in your own
evil, for you are a man of blood!”
9 And Aḇishai son of Tseruyah said to the
sovereign, “Why should this dead dog curse my
master the sovereign? Please, let me pass over and
take off his head!”
796

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And the sovereign said, “What have I to do with
you, you sons of Tseruyah? For let him curse, even
because hWhY has said to him, ‘Curse Dawiḏ.’ And
who should say, ‘Why did you do that?’ ”
11 And Dawiḏ said to Aḇishai and all his servants,
“See how my son who came from my own body seeks
my life, and how much more now this Binyamite?
Leave him alone, and let him curse, for hWhY has
spoken to him.
12 “If so be, hWhY looks on my affliction, and hWhY
shall return good to me for his cursing today.”
13 And as Dawiḏ and his men went in the way, Shim’i
walked alongside him on the hillside, and cursed as
he went, and threw stones at him and kicked up dust.
14 And the sovereign and all the people who were
with him became weary, and they refreshed
themselves there.
15 And Aḇshalom and all the people, the men of
Yisra’ĕl, came to Yerushalayim, and Aḥithophel was
with him.
16 And it came to be, when Ḥushai the Arkite, the
friend of Dawiḏ, had come to Aḇshalom, that Ḥushai
said to Aḇshalom, “Let the sovereign live! Let the
sovereign live!”
17 And Aḇshalom said to Ḥushai, “Is this your
kindness to your friend? Why did you not go with your
friend?”
18 And Ḥushai said to Aḇshalom, “No, I am for the
one whom hWhY and this people and all the men of
Yisra’ĕl have chosen, and with him I remain.
19 “And besides, whom should I serve? Should it not
be before his son? As I have served before your
father, so I am before you.”
20 And Aḇshalom said to Aḥithophel, “Give your
advice. What should we do?”
10

797

2 SAMUEL

And Aḥithophel said to Aḇshalom, “Go in to your
father’s concubines, whom he has left to look after the
house. And all Yisra’ĕl shall hear that you have made
yourself a stench to your father. And the hands of all
who are with you shall be strong.”
22 So they pitched a tent for Aḇshalom on the top of
the house, and Aḇshalom went in to his father’s
concubines before the eyes of all Yisra’ĕl.
23 Now the advice Aḥithophel gave in those days was
as if one had inquired at the word of Elohim. So was
all the advice of Aḥithophel both to Dawiḏ and to
Aḇshalom.
21

17 And Aḥithophel said to Aḇshalom, “Please let me
choose twelve thousand men, and let me arise and
pursue Dawiḏ tonight,
2 and come upon him while he is weary and weak.
And I shall make him afraid and all the people who
are with him shall flee. And I shall smite the sovereign
alone,
3 and bring back all the people to you. When all
return except the man whom you seek, all the people
should be at peace.”
4 And the saying pleased Aḇshalom and all the
elders of Yisra’ĕl.
5 But Aḇshalom said, “Now call Ḥushai the Arkite
also, and let us hear what he says too.”
6 And Ḥushai came to Aḇshalom, and Aḇshalom
spoke to him, saying, “Aḥithophel has spoken
according to this word. Should we do as he says? If
not, speak up.”
7 And Ḥushai said to Aḇshalom, “The advice that
Aḥithophel has given is not good at this time.”
8 And Ḥushai said, “You know your father and his
men, that they are mighty men, and they are as bitter
798

SHEMU’ĔL 2

in being as a bear robbed of her cubs in the field. And
your father is a man of battle, and would not spend
the night with the people.
9 “See, by now he is hidden in some pit, or in some
place. And it shall be, when some of them fall at the
first, that whoever hears it shall say, ‘There has been
a smiting among the people who are following
Aḇshalom.’
10 “And even he who is brave, whose heart is like the
heart of a lion, would utterly melt. For all Yisra’ĕl
knows that your father is a mighty man, and those
who are with him are brave men.
11 “But I advise: Let all Yisra’ĕl without fail be
gathered to you, from Dan to Be’ĕrsheḇa, as
numerous as the sand by the sea, and that you
yourself go to battle.
12 “And we shall come upon him in some place where
he is found, and fall on him as the dew falls on the
ground. And there shall be left of him and of all the
men with him not even one.
13 “And if he withdraws into a city, then all Yisra’ĕl
shall bring ropes to that city. And we shall pull it into
the wadi, until there is not one small stone found
there.”
14 Aḇshalom and all the men of Yisra’ĕl then said,
“The advice of Ḥushai the Arkite is better than the
advice of Aḥithophel.” For hWhY had ordained to
nullify the good advice of Aḥithophel, for the sake of
hWhY bringing evil upon Aḇshalom.
15 Ḥushai then said to Tsaḏoq and to Eḇyathar the
kohenim, “Aḥithophel has advised Aḇshalom and the
elders of Yisra’ĕl such and such, but I have advised
so and so.
16 “And now, send hastily and inform Dawiḏ, saying,
‘Do not spend this night in the desert plains of the
799

2 SAMUEL

wilderness, but pass over without fail, lest the
sovereign and all the people with him be swallowed
up.’ ”
17 And Yahonathan and Aḥima’ats were stationed at
Ĕyn Roḡĕl, and a female servant would come and
inform them, and they would go and inform Sovereign
Dawiḏ, for they could not be seen entering the city.
18 But a youth saw them, and informed Aḇshalom.
So the two of them went away at once and came to a
man’s house in Baḥurim, who had a well in his
courtyard, and they went down into it.
19 And the woman took and spread a covering over
the well’s mouth, and spread ground grain on it, so
the matter was not known.
20 And the servants of Aḇshalom came to the woman
at the house and said, “Where are Aḥima’ats and
Yahonathan?” And the woman said to them, “They
have passed over the stream of water.” And they
looked and did not find them, and returned to
Yerushalayim.
21 And it came to be, after they had left, that they
came up out of the well and went and informed
Sovereign Dawiḏ, and said to Dawiḏ, “Arise and pass
over the water quickly. For thus Aḥithophel has
advised against you.”
22 And Dawiḏ and all the people who were with him
rose up and passed over the Yardĕn. And by morning
light not even one remained who had not gone over
the Yardĕn.
23 And Aḥithophel saw that his advice was not
followed, so he saddled his donkey, and rose up and
went home to his house, to his city. Then he gave
charge to his house, and hanged himself, and died.
And he was buried in his father’s tomb.
800

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Dawiḏ came to Maḥanayim. And Aḇshalom
passed over the Yardĕn, he and all the men of
Yisra’ĕl with him.
25 And Aḇshalom appointed Amasa over the army
instead of Yo’aḇ. Now Amasa was the son of a man
whose name was Yithra, an Yisra’ĕlite, who had gone
in to Aḇiḡayil the daughter of Naḥash, sister of
Tseruyah, Yo’aḇ’s mother.
26 And Yisra’ĕl and Aḇshalom encamped in the land
of Gil’aḏ.
27 And it came to be, when Dawiḏ had come to
Maḥanayim, that Shoḇi son of Naḥash from Rabbah
of the children of Ammon, and Maḵir son of Ammi’ĕl
from Lo Ḏeḇar, and Barzillai the Gil’aḏite from
Roḡelim,
28 brought beds and basins, and earthen vessels and
wheat, and barley and flour, and roasted grain and
beans, and lentils, and parched grain,
29 and honey and curds, and sheep and cheese of
the herd, for Dawiḏ and the people who were with him
to eat. For they said, “The people are hungry and
weary and thirsty in the wilderness.”
24

18 And Dawiḏ mustered the people who were with
him, and put commanders of thousands and
commanders of hundreds over them.
2 And Dawiḏ sent out one third of the people under
the hand of Yo’aḇ, and one third under the hand of
Aḇishai son of Tseruyah, Yo’aḇ’s brother, and one
third under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the
sovereign said to the people, “I shall certainly go out
with you too.”
3 But the people answered, “Do not go out, for if we
flee away, they would not lay heart upon us. Even if
half of us die, they would not lay heart upon us. For
801

2 SAMUEL

now, ten thousand are like us. Therefore, it is better
for you to support us from the city.”
4 And the sovereign said to them, “That which is
good in your eyes I do.” And the sovereign stood
beside the gate, and all the people went out by
hundreds and by thousands.
5 And the sovereign ordered Yo’aḇ, and Aḇishai and
Ittai, saying, “Be gentle with the young man Aḇshalom
for my sake.” And all the people heard when the
sovereign gave all the commanders orders
concerning Aḇshalom.
6 So the people went out into the field to meet
Yisra’ĕl. And the battle was in the forest of Ephrayim,
7 and the people of Yisra’ĕl were smitten there
before the servants of Dawiḏ. And the smiting there
that day was great - twenty thousand.
8 And the battle there was scattered over the face of
all the land, and the forest devoured more people that
day than the sword devoured.
9 And when Aḇshalom met the servants of Dawiḏ,
Aḇshalom was riding on a mule, and the mule went
under the thick branches of a great terebinth tree, and
his head caught in the terebinth. And he was
suspended between the shamayim and earth while
the mule which was under him passed on.
10 And a certain man saw it and informed Yo’aḇ, and
said, “Look, I saw Aḇshalom hanging in a terebinth
tree!”
11 And Yo’aḇ said to the man who informed him,
“Now look, you saw, and why did you not smite him
to the earth there? Then I would have given you ten
pieces of silver and a belt.”
12 But the man answered Yo’aḇ, “Though I were to
receive a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, I
would not raise my hand against the son of the
802

SHEMU’ĔL 2

sovereign. Because in our hearing the sovereign
ordered you and Aḇishai and Ittai, saying, ‘Take heed,
you who go against the youth, against Aḇshalom!’
13 “Otherwise I would have been untrue to my own
life. For no matter is hidden from the sovereign, and
you yourself would have put yourself against me.”
14 And Yo’aḇ said, “Let me not waste time here with
you.” And he took three spears in his hand and thrust
them through Aḇshalom’s heart, while he was still
alive in the midst of the terebinth tree.
15 And ten young men who bore Yo’aḇ’s armour went
around, and smote Aḇshalom and put him to death.
16 And Yo’aḇ blew the ram’s horn, and the people
returned from pursuing Yisra’ĕl, for Yo’aḇ had held
the people back.
17 And they took Aḇshalom and threw him into a
large pit in the forest, and heaped a very large pile of
stones over him. And all Yisra’ĕl fled, each one to his
tent.
18 And Aḇshalom in his lifetime had taken and put up
a monument for himself, which is in the Sovereign’s
Valley. For he said, “I have no son to keep my name
in remembrance.” And he called the monument after
his own name. And to this day it is called Aḇshalom’s
Monument.
19 And Aḥima’ats son of Tsaḏoq said, “Please let me
run and take the news to the sovereign, for hWhY has
judged his enemies.”
20 But Yo’aḇ said to him, “You are not the man to take
the news today, but you shall take the news another
day. But today you do not take news, because the
sovereign’s son is dead.”
21 And Yo’aḇ said to the Kushite, “Go, inform the
sovereign what you have seen.” And the Kushite
bowed himself to Yo’aḇ and ran.
803

2 SAMUEL

And Aḥima’ats son of Tsaḏoq said again to Yo’aḇ,
“And whatever might be, please let me also run after
the Kushite.” And Yo’aḇ said, “Why would you run, my
son, there is no news to bring you reward.”
23 “But whatever might be, let me run.” So he said to
him, “Run.” And Aḥima’ats ran by the way of the plain,
and passed the Kushite.
24 Now Dawiḏ was sitting between the two gates.
And the watchman went up to the roof over the gate,
to the wall, and lifted his eyes and looked and saw a
man, running alone.
25 So the watchman called out and told the
sovereign. And the sovereign said, “If he is alone,
there is news in his mouth.” And he came nearer and
nearer.
26 And the watchman saw another man running, and
the watchman called out to the gatekeeper and said,
“See, a man, running by himself!” And the sovereign
said, “This one is also bringing news.”
27 And the watchman said, “I see the running of the
first is like the running of Aḥima’ats son of Tsaḏoq.”
And the sovereign said, “This is a good man, and he
comes with good news.”
28 And Aḥima’ats called out and said to the
sovereign, “Peace!” Then he bowed down with his
face to the earth before the sovereign, and said,
“Baruḵ be hWhY your Elohim, who has surrendered
the men who raised their hand against my master the
sovereign!”
29 And the sovereign said, “Peace to the young man,
to Aḇshalom?” And Aḥima’ats answered, “When
Yo’aḇ sent the sovereign’s servant and me your
servant, I saw a great crowd, but I did not know why.”
30 And the sovereign said, “Turn aside and stand
here.” And he turned aside and stood still.
22

804

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And see, the Kushite came, and the Kushite said,
“Receive news, my master the sovereign! For hWhY
has judged this day all those who rose against you.”
32 And the sovereign said to the Kushite, “Peace to
the young man, to Aḇshalom?” And the Kushite
answered, “Let the enemies of my master the
sovereign, and all who rise against you for evil, be as
that young man is!”
33 And the sovereign was shaken, and went up to the
room over the gate, and wept. And as he went, he
said this, “O my son Aḇshalom! My son, my son
Aḇshalom, if only I had died instead of you! O
Aḇshalom my son, my son!”
31

19 And it was reported to Yo’aḇ, “See, the sovereign
is weeping and mourning for Aḇshalom.”
2 So the deliverance that day was turned into
mourning for all the people. For the people heard on
that day, saying, “The sovereign has been grieved for
his son.”
3 And the people stole back into the city that day, as
people who are ashamed steal away when they flee
in battle.
4 And the sovereign covered his face, and the
sovereign cried out with a loud voice, “O my son
Aḇshalom! O Aḇshalom, my son, my son!”
5 And Yo’aḇ came into the house to the sovereign,
and said, “Today you have put to shame all your
servants who today have saved your life, and the lives
of your sons and daughters, and the lives of your
wives and the lives of your concubines,
6 by loving those who hate you, and by hating those
who love you. For you have made it clear today that
you have neither commanders nor servants, for today
805

2 SAMUEL

I know that if Aḇshalom had lived and all of us had
died today, then it would be right in your eyes.
7 “And now, arise, go out and speak to the heart of
your servants. For I swear by hWhY, if you do not go
out, not one passes the night with you. And that is
worse for you than all the evil that has come upon you
from your youth until now.”
8 So the sovereign rose up and sat in the gate. And
they told all the people, saying, “Look, the sovereign
is sitting in the gate.” And all the people came before
the sovereign. As for Yisra’ĕl, they had fled, each one
to his tent.
9 And it came to be, that all the people were
contending throughout all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “The sovereign delivered us from the hand of
the enemies, he rescued us from the hand of the
Pelishtites, and now he has fled from the land
because of Aḇshalom,
10 and Aḇshalom, whom we anointed over us, has
died in battle. And now, why are you silent about
bringing back the sovereign?”
11 And Sovereign Dawiḏ sent to Tsaḏoq and
Eḇyathar the kohenim, saying, “Speak to the elders
of Yahuḏah, saying, ‘Why are you the last to bring the
sovereign back to his house, since the words of all
Yisra’ĕl have come to the sovereign, to his house?
12 ‘You are my brothers, you are my bone and my
flesh. Why then are you the last to bring back the
sovereign?’
13 “And say to Amasa, ‘Are you not my bone and my
flesh? Elohim do so to me, and more also, if you are
not commander of the army before me all the days in
place of Yo’aḇ.’ ”

806

SHEMU’ĔL 2

Thus he swayed the hearts of all the men of
Yahuḏah as one man, so that they sent to the
sovereign, “Return, you and all your servants!”
15 So the sovereign returned and came to the
Yardĕn. And Yahuḏah came to Gilgal, to go to meet
the sovereign, to bring the sovereign over the Yardĕn.
16 And Shim’i son of Gĕra, a Binyamite, who was
from Baḥurim, hastened and came down with the
men of Yahuḏah to meet Sovereign Dawiḏ.
17 And with him were a thousand men of Binyamin,
and Tsiḇa the servant of the house of Sha’ul, and his
fifteen sons, and his twenty servants with him. And
they rushed over the Yardĕn before the sovereign.
18 And they passed over the ford to bring over the
sovereign’s household, and to do what was good in
his eyes. And Shim’i son of Gĕra fell down before the
sovereign when he had passed over the Yardĕn,
19 and said to the sovereign, “Do not let my master
reckon wickedness to me, neither remember what
wickedness your servant did on the day that my
master the sovereign left Yerushalayim, that the
sovereign should take it to heart.
20 “For I, your servant, know that I have sinned. And
see, I have come today, first of all the house of
Yosĕph, to go down to meet my master the
sovereign.”
21 But Aḇishai son of Tseruyah answered and said,
“Should Shim’i not be put to death for this, because
he cursed the anointed of hWhY?”
22 And Dawiḏ said, “What have I to do with you, you
sons of Tseruyah, that you are to be adversaries to
me today? Should any man be put to death in Yisra’ĕl
today? For do I not know that I am sovereign over
Yisra’ĕl today?”
14

807

2 SAMUEL

So the sovereign said to Shim’i, “You do not die.”
And the sovereign swore to him.
24 And Mephiḇosheth son of Sha’ul came down to
meet the sovereign. And he had not attended to his
feet, nor trimmed his moustache, nor washed his
garments, from the day the sovereign went away until
the day he came back in peace.
25 And it came to be, when he had come to
Yerushalayim to meet the sovereign, that the
sovereign said to him, “Why did you not go with me,
Mephiḇosheth?”
26 And he answered, “My master, O sovereign, my
servant deceived me. For your servant said, ‘I am
saddling a donkey for myself to ride on it and go to
the sovereign,’ because your servant is lame.
27 “And he spoke slander against your servant to my
master the sovereign, but my master the sovereign is
as a messenger of Elohim. Therefore do what is good
in your eyes.
28 “For all of my father’s house were but dead men
before my master the sovereign. Yet you put your
servant among those who eat at your own table.
Therefore what right have I still to cry out any more to
the sovereign?”
29 Then the sovereign said to him, “Why do you
speak any more of your matters? I have said, ‘You
and Tsiḇa share the land.’ ”
30 And Mephiḇosheth said to the sovereign, “Rather,
let him take it all, since my master the sovereign has
come back in peace to his own house.
31 And Barzillai the Gil’aḏite came down from
Roḡelim and passed over the Yardĕn with the
sovereign, to send him on his way over the Yardĕn.
23

808

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Barzillai was a very aged man, eighty years
old. And he had sustained the sovereign while he was
dwelling at Maḥanayim, for he was a very rich man.
33 And the sovereign said to Barzillai, “Pass over with
me, and I shall provide for you with me in
Yerushalayim.”
34 But Barzillai said to the sovereign, “How many are
the days of my life, that I should go up with the
sovereign to Yerushalayim?
35 “I am now eighty years old. Do I discern between
the good and evil? Does your servant taste what I eat
or what I drink? Do I still hear the voice of singing men
and singing women? Why then should your servant
be a further burden to my master the sovereign?
36 “Your servant would only pass over the Yardĕn
with the sovereign for a short distance. And why
should the sovereign repay me with such a reward?
37 “Please let your servant turn back again to die in
my own city, near the burying-place of my father and
mother. But here is your servant Kimham, let him
pass over with my master the sovereign, and do for
him what is good in your eyes.”
38 And the sovereign answered, “Kimham is passing
over with me, and let me do for him what is good in
your eyes. Now whatever you choose of me, I do for
you.”
39 Then all the people went over the Yardĕn. And
when the sovereign had passed over, the sovereign
kissed Barzillai and baraḵ him, and he returned to his
own place.
40 And the sovereign passed over to Gilgal, and
Kimham passed over with him. And all the people of
Yahuḏah brought the sovereign over, and also half
the people of Yisra’ĕl.
32

809

2 SAMUEL

And see, all the men of Yisra’ĕl were coming to the
sovereign! And they said to the sovereign, “Why have
our brothers, the men of Yahuḏah, stolen you away
and brought the sovereign, and his household, and all
Dawiḏ’s men with him over the Yardĕn?”
42 And all the men of Yahuḏah answered the men of
Yisra’ĕl, “Because the sovereign is our relative. And
why are you displeased over this matter? Have we at
all eaten at the sovereign’s cost? Or has he given us
any gift?”
43 And the men of Yisra’ĕl answered the men of
Yahuḏah, and said, “We have ten parts in the
sovereign, and in Dawiḏ too, we have more than you.
Why then did you despise us? Was it not our advice
first to bring back our sovereign?” But the words of
the men of Yahuḏah were harsher than the words of
the men of Yisra’ĕl.
41

20 And there came to be a man of Beliya’al, whose
name was Sheḇa son of Biḵri, a Binyamite. And he
blew a ram’s horn, and said, “We have no part in
Dawiḏ, nor do we have inheritance in the son of Yishai
- each one to his tents, O Yisra’ĕl!”
2 Then all the men of Yisra’ĕl deserted Dawiḏ, to
follow Sheḇa the son of Biḵri. But the men of
Yahuḏah, from the Yardĕn as far as Yerushalayim,
clung to their sovereign.
3 And Dawiḏ came to his house at Yerushalayim.
And the sovereign took the ten women, his
concubines whom he had left to look after the house,
and put them in a protected house and supported
them, but did not go in to them. So they were shut up
to the day of their death, living in widowhood.

810

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And the sovereign said to Amasa, “Call the men of
Yahuḏah for me within three days, and be present
here yourself.”
5 And Amasa went to call the men of Yahuḏah. But
he delayed longer than the appointed time which
Dawiḏ had appointed him.
6 And Dawiḏ said to Aḇishai, “Now Sheḇa son of
Biḵri is going to do us more evil than Aḇshalom. Take
the servants of your master, and pursue him, lest he
find for himself walled cities, and escape us.”
7 Then the men of Yo’aḇ went out after him, with the
Kerĕthites and the Pelĕthites, and all the mighty men.
And they went out of Yerushalayim to pursue Sheḇa
son of Biḵri.
8 When they were near the large stone which is in
Giḇ’on, Amasa came before them. And Yo’aḇ was
dressed in battle armour, and on it was a girdle with
a sword fastened in its sheath at his hips. And as he
went forward, it fell out.
9 And Yo’aḇ said to Amasa, “Peace, my brother?”
And Yo’aḇ took Amasa by the beard with his right
hand to kiss him.
10 But Amasa was not on guard against the sword in
Yo’aḇ’s hand. And he struck him with it in the
stomach, and his inward parts poured out on the
ground, and he did not do so again, and he died. Then
Yo’aḇ and Aḇishai his brother pursued Sheḇa son of
Biḵri.
11 And a man, one of Yo’aḇ’s men, stood beside him,
and said, “Whoever is well pleased with Yo’aḇ and
whoever is for Dawiḏ, let him follow Yo’aḇ!”
12 And Amasa was rolling in his blood in the middle
of the highway. And the man saw that all the people
stood still, so he moved Amasa from the highway to
4

811

2 SAMUEL

the field and threw a garment over him, when he saw
that everyone who came upon him halted.
13 When he was removed from the highway, all the
men passed on after Yo’aḇ to pursue Sheḇa son of
Biḵri.
14 And he passed over through all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl to Aḇĕl, and to Bĕyth Ma’aḵah, and to all the
Bĕrites. And they were assembled and went after him
too.
15 And they went and besieged him in Aḇĕl of Bĕyth
Ma’aḵah, and they cast up a siege mound against the
city. And it stood in a rampart, and all the people who
were with Yo’aḇ battered the wall to throw it down.
16 Then a wise woman called out from the city,
“Listen, listen! Please say to Yo’aḇ, ‘Come nearby, so
that I speak to you.’ ”
17 And he came near to her, and the woman said,
“Are you Yo’aḇ?” And he answered, “I am.” Then she
said to him, “Listen to the words of your female
servant.” And he answered, “I am listening.”
18 Then she spoke, saying, “In former times they
often spoke, saying, ‘Let them inquire of Aḇĕl,’ and so
it ended.
19 “I am of the peaceable and trustworthy ones in
Yisra’ĕl. You seek to destroy a city and a mother in
Yisra’ĕl. Why do you swallow up the inheritance of
hWhY?”
20 And Yo’aḇ answered and said, “Far be it, far be it
from me to swallow up or to destroy!
21 “That is not the case. But a man from the
mountains of Ephrayim, Sheḇa son of Biḵri by name,
has raised his hand against the sovereign, against
Dawiḏ. Hand him over, him alone, and I withdraw
from the city.” And the woman said to Yo’aḇ, “Look,
his head is going to be thrown to you over the wall.”
812

SHEMU’ĔL 2

So the woman in her wisdom went to all the
people. And they cut off the head of Sheḇa son of
Biḵri, and threw it out to Yo’aḇ. Then he blew a ram’s
horn, and they dispersed from the city, each one to
his tent. And Yo’aḇ returned to the sovereign at
Yerushalayim.
23 Now Yo’aḇ was over all the army of Yisra’ĕl, and
Benayah son of Yahoyaḏa was over the Kerĕthites
and the Pelĕthites,
24 and Aḏoram was over the compulsory labour, and
Yahoshaphat son of Aḥiluḏ was recorder,
25 and Shewa was scribe, and Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar
were the kohenim,
26 and Ira the Ya’irite was kohĕn to Dawiḏ.
22

21 And there was a scarcity of food in the days of
Dawiḏ for three years, year after year. And Dawiḏ
sought the face of hWhY, and hWhY answered,
“Because of Sha’ul and his bloodthirsty house,
because he killed the Giḇ’onites.”
2 The sovereign therefore called the Giḇ’onites and
spoke to them. Now the Giḇ’onites were not of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, but of the remnant of the
Amorites. And the children of Yisra’ĕl had sworn
protection to them, but Sha’ul had sought to kill them
in his ardour for the children of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.
3 So Dawiḏ said to the Giḇ’onites, “What should I do
for you? And with what do I make atonement, so that
you baraḵ the inheritance of HWHY?”
4 And the Giḇ’onites said to him, “It is no matter of
silver or gold between us and Sha’ul, or his house,
neither is it for us to put to death any man in Yisra’ĕl.”
And he said, “Whatever you say I do for you.”
5 And they said to the sovereign, “The man who
consumed us and plotted against us, that we should
813

2 SAMUEL

be destroyed from remaining in all the border of
Yisra’ĕl,
6 let seven men of his sons be given to us, and we
shall hang them before hWhY in Giḇ’ah of Sha’ul,
whom hWhY chose.” And the sovereign said, “I give
them.”
7 But the sovereign spared Mephiḇosheth son of
Yahonathan, son of Sha’ul, because of the oath of
hWhY that was between them, between Dawiḏ and
Yahonathan son of Sha’ul.
8 And the sovereign took the two sons of Ritspah
the daughter of Ayah, whom she bore to Sha’ul:
Armoni and Mephiḇosheth, and the five sons of Miḵal
the daughter of Sha’ul, whom she brought up for
Aḏri’ĕl the son of Barzillai, the Meḥolathite,
9 and gave them into the hands of the Giḇ’onites,
and they hanged them on the hill before hWhY. So the
seven fell together, and were put to death in the days
of harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley
harvest.
10 And Ritspah the daughter of Ayah took sackcloth
and spread it for herself on the rock, from the
beginning of harvest until the late rains poured on
them from the shamayim. And she did not allow the
birds of the shamayim to rest on them by day nor the
beasts of the field by night.
11 And Dawiḏ was informed what Ritspah the
daughter of Ayah, the concubine of Sha’ul, had done.
12 And Dawiḏ went and took the bones of Sha’ul, and
the bones of Yahonathan his son, from the men of
Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ who had stolen them from the street of
Bĕyth Shan, where the Pelishtites had hung them up,
after the Pelishtites had struck down Sha’ul in Gilboa.

814

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And he brought up the bones of Sha’ul and the
bones of Yahonathan his son from there, and they
gathered the bones of those who had been hanged,
14 and buried the bones of Sha’ul and Yahonathan
his son in the land of Binyamin in Tsela, in the tomb
of Qish his father, and did all that the sovereign
commanded. And after that Elohim heard prayer for
the land.
15 And the Pelishtites were again fighting against
Yisra’ĕl, so Dawiḏ and his servants with him went
down and fought against the Pelishtites. And Dawiḏ
was weary,
16 and Yishbo Benoḇ - who was one of the sons of
the giant, the weight of whose bronze spear was three
hundred pieces, who was bearing a new sword spoke of killing Dawiḏ.
17 But Aḇishai son of Tseruyah came to help him,
and smote the Pelishtite and killed him. Then Dawiḏ’s
men swore to him, saying, “Do not go out with us to
battle any more, lest you put out the lamp of Yisra’ĕl.”
18 And it came to be afterward, that there was a battle
again with the Pelishtites at Goḇ. Then Sibbeḵai the
Ḥushathite smote Saph, who was one of the sons of
the giant.
19 And there was a battle with the Pelishtites again at
Goḇ, where Elḥanan son of Ya’arĕy-Oreḡim the
Bĕyth Leḥemite smote Golyath the Gittite, the shaft of
whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.
20 And there was a battle in Gath again, where there
was a man of great height, who had six fingers on
each hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in
number. And he also was descended from the giants.
21 And he reproached Yisra’ĕl, and Yahonathan son
of Shim’i, the brother of Dawiḏ, smote him.
13

815

2 SAMUEL

These four were born to the giant in Gath, and they
fell by the hand of Dawiḏ and by the hand of his
servants.

22

22 Then Dawiḏ spoke to hWhY the words of this
song, on the day when hWhY had delivered him from
the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of
Sha’ul.
2 And he said, “hWhY is my rock and my stronghold
and my deliverer.
3 “My Elohim is my rock,
I take refuge in Him,
My shield and the horn of my deliverance,
My high tower and my refuge.
My Saviour, You save me from violence.
4 “I call on hWhY, the One to be praised,
And I am saved from my enemies.
5 “For the waves of death surrounded me,
Floods of Beliya’al made me afraid,
6 “The cords of the grave were all around me;
The snares of death were before me.
7 “In my distress I called upon hWhY,
And to my Elohim I cried.
And from His Hĕyḵal He heard my voice,
And my cry was in His ears.
8 “And the earth shook and trembled,
The foundations of the shamayim were troubled,
Because He was wroth.
9 “Smoke went up from His nostrils,
And devouring fire from His mouth;
Coals were kindled by it.
10 “And He bowed the shamayim and came down,
And dense cloud was under His feet.
11 “And He rode upon a keruḇ, and flew,
And was seen upon the wings of the wind.
816

SHEMU’ĔL 2

“And He put darkness around Him as booths,
Gatherings of waters, thick clouds.
13 “From the brightness before Him Coals of fire
were kindled.
14 “hWhY thundered from the shamayim,
And the Most High sent forth His voice.
15 “And He sent out arrows and scattered them,
Lightning, and confused them.
16 “And the channels of the sea were seen,
The foundations of the world were uncovered
At the rebuke of hWhY,
At the blast of the breath of His nostrils.
17 “He sent from above, He took me,
He drew me out of many waters.
18 “He delivered me from my strong enemy,
From those hating me,
For they were stronger than I.
19 “They confronted me in the day of my calamity,
But hWhY was my support.
20 “And He brought me out into a large place,
He delivered me for He delighted in me.
21 “hWhY rewarded me according to my
righteousness;
According to the cleanness of my hands He repaid
me.
22 “For I have guarded the Ways of hWhY,
And have not acted wickedly against my Elohim.
23 “For all His Right-Rulings are before me;
As for His Laws, I do not turn from them.
24 “And I am perfect before Him,
And I guard myself from my wickedness.
25 “And hWhY repays me according to my
righteousness,
According to my cleanness before His eyes.
12

817

2 SAMUEL

“With the kind You show Yourself kind,
With the perfect one You show Yourself perfect,
27 “With the clean You show Yourself clean,
And with the wicked You show Yourself twisted.
28 “For You save the humble people,
But Your eyes are on the haughty to bring them low.
29 “For You are my lamp, O hWhY,
And hWhY makes my darkness light.
30 “For with You I run against a band,
With my Elohim I leap over a wall.
31 “The Ĕl - His Way is perfect;
The Word of hWhY is proven;
He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him.
32 “For who is Ĕl, besides hWhY?
And who is a rock, besides our Elohim?
33 “Ĕl is my mighty stronghold,
And He makes my way perfect,
34 “Making my feet like the feet of a deer,
And puts me on my high places,
35 “Teaching my hands for battle,
So that my arms bend a bow of bronze.
36 “And You give me the shield of Your deliverance,
And Your lowliness makes me great.
37 “You enlarge my step under me,
So that my feet shall not slip.
38 “I pursue my enemies and destroy them,
And I do not turn back till they are destroyed.
39 “And I destroy them and crush them,
So that they do not rise,
And fall under my feet.
40 “And You gird me with strength for battle,
You cause my adversaries to bow under me.
41 “And You make my enemies turn their backs,
Those hating me, and I cut them off.
26

818

SHEMU’ĔL 2

“They look but there is no saviour,
Unto hWhY, but He shall not answer them.
43 “And I beat them as dust of the earth,
I beat them small as dirt in the streets I spread them out.
44 “And You deliver me from the strivings of my
people,
You safeguard me as the head of the nations;
A people I have not known serve me.
45 “Sons of the foreigner submit to me,
As soon as they hear they obey me.
46 “Sons of the foreigner fade away,
And gird themselves from their strongholds.
47 “hWhY lives! And baruḵ is my Rock!
And exalted is my Elohim,
The Rock of my deliverance,
48 “Ĕl who avenges me,
And bringing peoples down under me,
49 “And bringing me out from my enemies;
You raise me up above those rising up against me;
You deliver me from a man of violence.
50 “Therefore I give thanks to You, O hWhY, among
nations,
And I sing praise to Your Name.
51 “A tower of deliverance is He to His sovereign,
And showing kindness to His anointed,
To Dawiḏ and his seed, forever.”
42

23 And these are the last words of Dawiḏ, the saying
of Dawiḏ son of Yishai, the saying of the man raised
up on high, the anointed of the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, and
the sweet singer of Yisra’ĕl:
2 “The Ruaḥ of hWhY has spoken through me,
And His Word is on my tongue.
819

2 SAMUEL

“The Elohim of Yisra’ĕl said,
The Rock of Yisra’ĕl spoke to me,
‘One who rules over man righteously,
4 “Who rules in the reverence of Elohim,
Is like the light of the morning when the sun rises,
A morning without clouds,
Tender grass from the earth
From sunshine, from rain.’
5 “For is not my house so with Ĕl?
For He has made an everlasting Covenant with me,
Ordered in all, and guarded.
For all my deliverance and all desire,
Shall He not make it send forth a Branch?
6 “But the worthless are all as thorns thrust away,
For they are not taken with hands,
7 “But the man who touches them
Uses iron or the shaft of a spear,
And with fire they are burned up in place.”
8 These are the names of the mighty men whom
Dawiḏ had: Yoshĕḇ Bashsheḇeth the Taḥkemonite,
chief among the officers, he was Aḏino the Etsnite,
for eight hundred slain at one time.
9 And after him was El’azar son of Doḏo, the
Aḥoḥite, one of the three mighty men with Dawiḏ
when they taunted the Pelishtites who were gathered
there for battle, and the men of Yisra’ĕl had gone up.
10 He arose and smote the Pelishtites until his hand
was weary, but his hand clung to the sword, so hWhY
brought about a great deliverance that day. And the
people returned after him only to plunder.
11 And after him was Shammah son of Aḡĕ the
Hararite. And the Pelishtites had gathered into a
company where there was a plot of ground covered
with lentils, and the people fled from the Pelishtites.
3

820

SHEMU’ĔL 2

But he took his stand in the middle of the field, and
delivered it, and smote the Pelishtites, and hWhY
wrought a great deliverance.
13 And three of the thirty chief men went down at
harvest time and came to Dawiḏ at the cave of
Aḏullam, while the army of Pelishtites encamped in
the Valley of Repha’im.
14 And Dawiḏ was then in the stronghold, while a
watch-post of the Pelishtites was then in Bĕyth
Leḥem.
15 And Dawiḏ longed and said, “Oh that someone
would give me a drink of the water from the well of
Bĕyth Leḥem, which is by the gate!”
16 And the three mighty men broke through the camp
of the Pelishtites, and drew water from the well of
Bĕyth Leḥem that was by the gate, and took it and
brought it to Dawiḏ. But he would not drink it, but
poured it out to hWhY.
17 And he said, “Far be it from me, O hWhY, to do this
- the blood of the men who went at the risk of their
lives!” So he would not drink it. This is what the three
mighty men did.
18 And Aḇishai the brother of Yo’aḇ, son of Tseruyah,
was chief of another three. And he lifted his spear
against three hundred men whom he slew, and had a
name among these three.
19 Was he not the most esteemed of three? And he
became their commander, but he did not come to the
first three.
20 And Benayahu was the son of Yahoyaḏa, son of a
brave man from Qaḇtse’ĕl, great in deeds. He smote
two lion-like men of Mo’aḇ. And he went down and
smote a lion in the midst of a pit on a snowy day.
21 And he smote a Mitsrite, an impressive man. And
the Mitsrite had a spear in his hand, so he went down
12

821

2 SAMUEL

to him with a staff, wrenched the spear out of the
Mitsrite’s hand, and slew him with, his own spear.
22 This is what Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa did, and
had a name among three mighty men.
23 He was more esteemed than the thirty, but he did
not come to the first three. And Dawiḏ put him over
his guard.
24 Asah’ĕl the brother of Yo’aḇ was one of the thirty;
Elḥanan son of Doḏo of Bĕyth Leḥem,
25 Shammah the Ḥaroḏite, Eliqa the Ḥaroḏite,
26 Ḥelets the Paltite, Ira son of Iqqĕsh the Teqowite,
27 Aḇi’ezer
the Anethothite, Meḇunnai the
Ḥushathite,
28 Tsalmon the Aḥoḥite, Maharai the Netophathite,
29 Ḥĕleḇ son of Ba’anah the Netophathite, Ittai son of
Riḇai from Giḇ’ah of the children of Binyamin,
30 Benayahu the Pirathonite, Hiddai from the wadis
of Ga’ash,
31 Aḇi-Alḇon the Arbathite, Azmaweth the Barḥumite,
32 Elyaḥba the Sha’albonite of the sons of Yashĕn,
Yahonathan,
33 Shammah the Hararite, Aḥyam son of Sharar the
Hararite,
34 Eliphelet son of Aḥasbai, son of the Ma’aḵathite,
Eliyam son of Aḥithophel the Gilonite,
35 Ḥetsrai the Karmelite, Pa’arai the Arbite,
36 Yiḡ’al son of Nathan of Tsoḇah, Bani the Gaḏite,
37 Tseleq the Ammonite, Naḥarai the Be’ĕrothite,
armour-bearer of Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah,
38 Ira the Yithrite, Garĕḇ the Yithrite,
39 and Uriyah the Ḥittite - thirty-seven in all.

24 And again the displeasure of hWhY burned
against Yisra’ĕl, and moved Dawiḏ against them to
say, “Go, number Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.”
822

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And the sovereign said to Yo’aḇ the commander
of the army who was with him, “Go please, throughout
all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, from Dan to Be’ĕrsheḇa, and
register the people, so that I know the number of the
people.”
3 And Yo’aḇ said to the sovereign, “Even if hWhY
your Elohim adds to the people a hundredfold more
than there are, and the eyes of my master the
sovereign see it, but why does my master the
sovereign delight in this matter?”
4 However, the sovereign’s word prevailed against
Yo’aḇ and against the commanders of the army. And
Yo’aḇ and the commanders of the army went out from
the presence of the sovereign to register the people
of Yisra’ĕl.
5 And they passed over the Yardĕn and camped in
Aro’ĕr, on the right side of the town which is in the
midst of the wadi of Gaḏ, and toward Ya’zĕr.
6 Then they came to Gil’aḏ and to the land of Taḥtim
Ḥoḏshi, and they came to Dan Ya’an and around to
Tsiḏon.
7 And they came to the stronghold of Tsor and to all
the cities of the Ḥiwwites and the Kena’anites, and
went out to South Yahuḏah as far as Be’ĕrsheḇa.
8 And when they had gone through all the land, they
came to Yerushalayim at the end of nine months and
twenty days.
9 And Yo’aḇ gave the number of the registration of
the people to the sovereign, and there were in Yisra’ĕl
eight hundred thousand brave men who drew the
sword, and the men of Yahuḏah were five hundred
thousand men.
10 And the heart of Dawiḏ smote him after he had
numbered the people. And Dawiḏ said to hWhY, “l
have sinned greatly in what I have done. But now, I
2

823

2 SAMUEL

pray, O hWhY, take away the wickedness of Your
servant, for I have done very foolishly.”
11 And Dawiḏ rose up in the morning, and the word
of hWhY came to the naḇi Gaḏ, Dawiḏ’s seer, saying,
12 “Go, and you shall speak to Dawiḏ, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “I hold three before you. Choose one of them,
and I do it to you.” ’ ”
13 Gaḏ then came to Dawiḏ and informed him. And
he said to him, “Should seven years of scarcity of food
come to you in your land? Or would you flee three
months before your enemies, while they pursue you?
Or should there be three days’ plague in your land?
Now know and see what answer I take back to Him
who sent me.”
14 And Dawiḏ said to Gaḏ, “I am in great trouble.
Please let us fall into the hand of hWhY, for His
compassion is great, but do not let me fall into the
hand of man.”
15 And hWhY sent a plague upon Yisra’ĕl from the
morning till the appointed time, and from Dan to
Be’ĕrsheḇa seventy thousand men of the people
died.
16 And the messenger stretched out His hand over
Yerushalayim to destroy it, and hWhY relented
concerning the evil, and said to the messenger who
was destroying the people, “It is enough, now stop
Your hand.” And the messenger of hWhY was by the
threshing-floor of Arawnah the Yeḇusite.
17 And Dawiḏ spoke to hWhY when he saw the
messenger who was smiting the people, and said,
“See, I have sinned, and I have done perversely. But
these sheep, what have they done? Let Your hand, I
pray, be against me and against my father’s house.”

824

SHEMU’ĔL 2

And Gaḏ came that day to Dawiḏ and said to him,
“Go up, raise an altar to hWhY on the threshing-floor
of Arawnah the Yeḇusite.”
19 And Dawiḏ, according to the word of Gaḏ, went up
as hWhY commanded.
20 And Arawnah looked and saw the sovereign and
his servants coming toward him. And Arawnah went
out and bowed before the sovereign with his face to
the ground.
21 And Arawnah said, “Why has my master the
sovereign come to his servant?” And Dawiḏ said, “To
buy the threshing-floor from you, to build an altar to
hWhY, so that the plague be withdrawn from the
people.”
22 And Arawnah said to Dawiḏ, “Let my master the
sovereign take and offer that which seems good to
him. Here are cattle for burnt offering, and threshing
implements and the yokes of the cattle for wood.
23 “All these, O sovereign, Arawnah has given to the
sovereign.” And Arawnah said to the sovereign,
“hWhY your Elohim accept you!”
24 And the sovereign said to Arawnah, “No, let me
buy it from you for a price, for certain. I am not offering
burnt offerings to hWhY my Elohim without cost.” So
Dawiḏ bought the threshing-floor and the cattle for
fifty sheqels of silver.
25 And Dawiḏ built an altar to hWhY there, and offered
burnt offerings and peace offerings. And hWhY
answered the prayers for the land, and the plague
was withdrawn from Yisra’ĕl.
18

825

1 KINGS

MELAḴIM 1
‫ מלכים א‬A mYKLm

1 And Sovereign Dawiḏ was old, advanced in years.
And they covered him with garments, but he could
not get warm.
2 So his servants said to him, “Let them seek for
our master the sovereign a young woman, a
maiden, and she shall stand before the sovereign
and be his companion, and shall lie in your bosom,
so that our master the sovereign gets warm.”
3 And they sought for a lovely young woman in all
the border of Yisra’ĕl, and found Aḇishaḡ the
Shunammite, and brought her to the sovereign.
4 And the young woman was very lovely. And she
was a companion for the sovereign, and served him,
but the sovereign did not know her.
5 And Aḏoniyah son of Ḥaggith exalted himself,
saying, “I reign.” And he prepared for himself a
chariot and horsemen, and fifty men to run before
him.
6 Now his father had not worried him at any time
by saying, “Why have you done so?” He was also
very good-looking. And he was born after Aḇshalom.
7 And he talked with Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah and
with Eḇyathar the kohĕn, and they supported
Aḏoniyah.
8 But Tsaḏoq the kohĕn, and Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa, and Nathan the naḇi, and Shim’i, and
Rĕ’i, and the mighty men who belonged to Dawiḏ
were not with Aḏoniyahu.
9 And Aḏoniyahu offered sheep and cattle and
fatlings by the stone of Zoḥeleth, which is by Ĕyn
Roḡĕl. He also invited all his brothers, the
826

MELAḴIM 1

sovereign’s sons, and all the men of Yahuḏah,
servants of the sovereign.
10 But he did not invite Nathan the naḇi, or
Benayahu, or the mighty men, or Shelomoh his
brother.
11 Nathan then spoke to Bathsheḇa the mother of
Shelomoh, saying, “Have you not heard that
Aḏoniyahu son of Ḥaggith has become sovereign,
and Dawiḏ our master does not know it?
12 “And now, come let me give you advice, and
deliver your own life and the life of your son
Shelomoh.
13 “Go immediately to Sovereign Dawiḏ and say to
him, ‘Did you not, my master, O sovereign, swear to
your female servant, saying, “Certainly, your son
Shelomoh shall reign after me, and he shall sit on
my throne”? Why then has Aḏoniyahu become
sovereign?’
14 “Look, while you are still speaking there with the
sovereign let me come in after you and confirm your
words.”
15 And Bathsheḇa went into the room to the
sovereign. Now the sovereign was very old, and
Aḇishaḡ the Shunammite was serving the
sovereign.
16 And Bathsheḇa bowed and did obeisance to the
sovereign. And the sovereign said, “What do you
want?”
17 And she said to him, “My master, you swore by
hWhY your Elohim to your female servant, saying,
‘Certainly, Shelomoh your son shall reign after me,
and he shall sit on my throne.’
18 “And
now, look! Aḏoniyah has become
sovereign. And now, my master the sovereign, you
do not know about it.
827

1 KINGS

“And he has offered great numbers of bulls and
fatlings and sheep, and has invited all the sons of
the sovereign, and Eḇyathar the kohĕn, and Yo’aḇ
the commander of the army, but he did not invite
Shelomoh your servant.
20 “And you my master, O sovereign, the eyes of all
Yisra’ĕl are on you, to declare to them who is going
to sit on the throne of my master the sovereign after
him.
21 “Otherwise it shall be, when my master the
sovereign rests with his fathers, that I and my son
Shelomoh shall be considered sinners.”
22 And see, while she was still speaking with the
sovereign, Nathan the naḇi also came in.
23 So they informed the sovereign, saying, “Here is
Nathan the naḇi.” And when he came in before the
sovereign, he bowed down before the sovereign
with his face to the ground.
24 And Nathan said, “My master, O sovereign, have
you said, ‘Aḏoniyahu shall reign after me, and he
shall sit on my throne’?
25 “For he has gone down today, and has offered
great numbers of bulls and fatlings and sheep, and
has invited all the sovereign’s sons, and the
commanders of the army, and Eḇyathar the kohĕn.
And look! They are eating and drinking before him.
And they say, ‘Let Sovereign Aḏoniyahu live!’
26 “But he has not invited me, me your servant, nor
Tsaḏoq the kohĕn, nor Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa,
nor your servant Shelomoh.
27 “If this matter is from my master the sovereign,
then you did not let your servant know who should
sit on the throne of my master the sovereign after
him.”
19

828

MELAḴIM 1

And Sovereign Dawiḏ answered and said, “Call
Bathsheḇa to me.” So she came into the sovereign’s
presence and stood before the sovereign.
29 And the sovereign took an oath and said, “As
hWhY lives, who has redeemed my life out of all
distress,
30 even as I swore to you by hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘Certainly, Shelomoh your son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my
place,’ even so I do this day.”
31 And Bathsheḇa bowed with her face to the earth,
and did obeisance to the sovereign, and said, “Let
my master Sovereign Dawiḏ live forever!”
32 And Sovereign Dawiḏ said, “Call me Tsaḏoq the
kohĕn, and Nathan the naḇi, and Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa.” And they came before the sovereign.
33 And the sovereign said to them, “Take with you
the servants of your master, and you shall have
Shelomoh my son ride on my own mule, and take
him down to Giḥon.
34 “And there Tsaḏoq the kohĕn and Nathan the
naḇi shall anoint him sovereign over Yisra’ĕl. And
blow the horn, and say, ‘Let Sovereign Shelomoh
live!’
35 “And you shall come up after him, and he shall
come and sit on my throne, and he shall reign in my
place. For I have appointed him to be ruler over
Yisra’ĕl and over Yahuḏah.”
36 And Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa answered the
sovereign and said, “Amĕn! So says hWhY Elohim of
my master the sovereign.
37 “As hWhY has been with my master the
sovereign, so let Him be with Shelomoh and make
his throne greater than the throne of my master
Sovereign Dawiḏ.”
28

829

1 KINGS

Then Tsaḏoq the kohĕn, and Nathan the naḇi,
and Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa, and the Kerĕthites,
and the Pelĕthites went down and had Shelomoh
ride on Sovereign Dawiḏ’s mule, and took him to
Giḥon.
39 And Tsaḏoq the kohĕn took a horn of oil from the
Tent and anointed Shelomoh. And they blew the
horn, and all the people said, “Let Sovereign
Shelomoh live!”
40 And all the people came up after him. And the
people played the flutes and rejoiced with great joy,
so that the earth was split by their noise!
41 And Aḏoniyahu and all the guests who were with
him heard it as they had finished eating. And Yo’aḇ
heard the sound of the horn, and said, “Why is the
city in such a noisy uproar?”
42 And he was still speaking, then see, Yahonathan
came, son of Eḇyathar the kohĕn. And Aḏoniyahu
said to him, “Come in, for you are a brave man, and
you bring good news.”
43 But
Yahonathan answered and said to
Aḏoniyahu, “No! Our master Sovereign Dawiḏ has
made Shelomoh sovereign,
44 and the sovereign has sent with him Tsaḏoq the
kohĕn, and Nathan the naḇi, and Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa, and the Kerĕthites, and the Pelĕthites.
And they had him ride on the sovereign’s mule.
45 “And Tsaḏoq the kohĕn and Nathan the naḇi
have anointed him sovereign at Giḥon. And they
have gone up from there rejoicing, and the city is
moved. This is the noise you heard.
46 “And further, Shelomoh sits on the throne of the
reign.
47 “And further, the servants of the sovereign have
gone to baraḵ our master Sovereign Dawiḏ, saying,
38

830

MELAḴIM 1

‘Let your Elohim make the name of Shelomoh better
than your name, and his throne greater than your
throne.’ And the sovereign bowed himself on the
bed.
48 “And the sovereign also said thus, ‘Baruḵ be
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, who has given to sit on my
throne this day, while my eyes see it!’ ”
49 And all the guests who were invited by
Aḏoniyahu were afraid, and rose, and each one
went his way.
50 And Aḏoniyahu was afraid of Shelomoh, and
rose, and went and took hold of the horns of the
altar.
51 And it was reported to Shelomoh, saying, “Look,
Aḏoniyahu is afraid of Sovereign Shelomoh. And
look, he has taken hold of the horns of the altar,
saying, ‘Let Sovereign Shelomoh swear to me today
that he does not put his servant to death with the
sword.’ ”
52 And Shelomoh said, “If he proves himself a
worthy man, not one hair of him is going to fall to the
earth, but if evil is found in him, then he shall die.”
53 And Sovereign Shelomoh sent, and they brought
him down from the altar. And he came and fell down
before Sovereign Shelomoh. And Shelomoh said to
him, “Go to your house.”

2 And the days of Dawiḏ drew near to die, and he
commanded Shelomoh his son, saying,
2 “I am going the way of all the earth. And you shall
be strong, and be a man.
3 “And guard the Charge of hWhY your Elohim: to
walk in His Ways, to guard His Laws, His
Commands, His Right-Rulings, and His Witnesses,
831

1 KINGS

as it is written in the Torah of Mosheh, so that you
do wisely all that you do and wherever you turn;
4 so that hWhY establishes His word which He
spoke concerning me, saying, ‘If your sons guard
their way, to walk before Me in truth with all their
heart and with all their being,’ saying, ‘there is not to
cease a man of yours on the throne of Yisra’ĕl.’
5 “And also, you know what Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah
did to me, and what he did to the two commanders
of the armies of Yisra’ĕl, to Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr and
Amasa son of Yether, that he slew them, and shed
the blood of battle in peace, and put the blood of
battle on his belt that was around his waist, and on
his sandals that were on his feet.
6 “So act according to your wisdom, and do not let
his grey hair go down to the grave in peace.
7 “But show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the
Gil’aḏite, and let them be among those who eat at
your table, for so they came to me when I fled from
Aḇshalom your brother.
8 “And see, with you is Shim’i son of Gĕra, the
Binyamite from Baḥurim, who cursed me with a
grievous cursing in the day when I went to
Maḥanayim. But he came down to meet me at the
Yardĕn, and I swore to him by hWhY, saying, ‘I shall
not put you to death with the sword.’
9 “And now, do not leave him unpunished, for you
are a wise man and know what you should do to him,
and shall bring his grey hair down to the grave with
blood.”
10 And Dawiḏ slept with his fathers, and was buried
in the City of Dawiḏ.
11 And the days that Dawiḏ reigned over Yisra’ĕl
was forty years. He reigned seven years in Ḥeḇron,
and in Yerushalayim he reigned thirty-three years.
832

MELAḴIM 1

And Shelomoh sat on the throne of his father
Dawiḏ. And his reign was firmly established.
13 And Aḏoniyahu son of Ḥaggith came to
Bathsheḇa the mother of Shelomoh, and she said,
“Do you come in peace? And he said, “Peace.”
14 And he said, “I have a word for you,” and she
said, “Speak.”
15 And he said, “You know that the reign was mine,
and all Yisra’ĕl had turned their faces toward me,
that I should reign. But the reign has been turned
around, and has become my brother’s, for it was his
from hWhY.
16 “And now, I am making one request of you, do
not refuse me.” And she said to him, “Say it.”
17 And he said, “Please speak to Sovereign
Shelomoh - for he would not refuse you - to give me
Aḇishaḡ the Shunammite as wife.”
18 And Bathsheḇa said, “Good, let me speak for you
to the sovereign.”
19 And Bathsheḇa came to Sovereign Shelomoh, to
speak to him for Aḏoniyahu. And the sovereign rose
up to meet her and bowed down to her, and sat
down on his throne and had a throne put for the
sovereign’s mother. So she sat at his right hand.
20 And she said, “I am making one small request of
you, do not refuse me.” And the sovereign said to
her, “Ask it, my mother, for I do not refuse you.”
21 Then she said, “Let Aḇishaḡ the Shunammite be
given to Aḏoniyahu your brother as wife.”
22 And Sovereign Shelomoh answered and said to
his mother, “Now why do you ask Aḇishaḡ the
Shunammite for Aḏoniyahu? Ask for him the reign
also - for he is my older brother - for him, and for
Eḇyathar the kohĕn, and for Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah.”
12

833

1 KINGS

And Sovereign Shelomoh swore by hWhY,
saying, “Elohim does so to me, and more also, if
Aḏoniyahu has not spoken this word against his own
life!
24 “And now, as hWhY lives, who established me
and put me on the throne of Dawiḏ my father, and
who has made me a house, as He promised,
Aḏoniyahu shall be put to death today!”
25 And Sovereign Shelomoh sent by the hand of
Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa, and he fell upon him,
and he died.
26 Then the sovereign said to Eḇyathar the kohĕn,
“Go to Anathoth, to your own fields, for you deserve
death. But I do not put you to death at this time,
because you bore the ark of the Aḏon hWhY before
my father Dawiḏ, and because you were afflicted in
all my father was afflicted in.”
27 So Shelomoh dismissed Eḇyathar from being
kohĕn to hWhY, to fill the word of hWhY which He
spoke concerning the house of Ĕli at Shiloh.
28 And news came to Yo’aḇ, for Yo’aḇ had turned
aside after Aḏoniyah, though he did not turn aside
after Aḇshalom. And Yo’aḇ fled to the Tent of hWhY,
and took hold of the horns of the altar.
29 And the report came to Sovereign Shelomoh that
Yo’aḇ had fled to the Tent of hWhY, and see, he is
by the altar. Then Shelomoh sent Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa, saying, “Go, fall on him.”
30 So Benayahu came to the Tent of hWhY and said
to him, “Thus said the sovereign, ‘Come out!’ ” And
he said, “No, for here I die.” And Benayahu brought
back word to the sovereign, saying, “Thus said
Yo’aḇ, and thus he answered me.”
31 And the sovereign said to him, “Do as he has
said, and fall upon him. And you shall bury him, so
23

834

MELAḴIM 1

that you take away from me and from the house of
my father the blood which Yo’aḇ shed without
cause.
32 “Thus hWhY shall return his blood on his head,
because he had fallen on two men more righteous
and better than he, and slew them with the sword,
while my father Dawiḏ did not know it: Aḇnĕr son of
Nĕr, commander of the army of Yisra’ĕl, and Amasa
son of Yether, commander of the army of Yahuḏah.
33 “So shall their blood return upon the head of
Yo’aḇ and upon the head of his seed forever. But
upon Dawiḏ and his seed, upon his house and his
throne, there is to be peace forever from hWhY.””
34 Then Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa went up and
fell upon him and put him to death. And he was
buried in his own house in the wilderness.
35 And the sovereign put Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa in his place over the army, and the
sovereign put Tsaḏoq the kohĕn in the place of
Eḇyathar.
36 And the sovereign sent and called for Shim’i, and
said to him, “Build yourself a house in Yerushalayim
and dwell there, and do not go out from there
anywhere.
37 “And it shall be, on the day you go out and pass
over the wadi Qiḏron, know for certain that you shall
die - your blood is on your own head.”
38 And Shim’i said to the sovereign, “The word is
good. As my master the sovereign has said, so your
servant does.” So Shim’i dwelt in Yerushalayim
many days.
39 And it came to be at the end of three years, that
two slaves of Shim’i fled to Aḵish son of Ma’aḵah,
sovereign of Gath. And they informed Shim’i,
saying, “See, your slaves are in Gath!”
835

1 KINGS

And Shim’i rose up, and saddled his donkey, and
went to Aḵish at Gath to look for his slaves. And
Shim’i went and brought his slaves from Gath.
41 And Shelomoh was told that Shim’i had gone
from Yerushalayim to Gath and had come back.
42 So the sovereign sent and called for Shim’i, and
said to him, “Did I not make you swear by hWhY, and
warn you, saying, ‘Know for certain that on the day
you leave to go anywhere, you shall certainly die’?
And you said to me, ‘The word I have heard is good.’
43 “And why have you not guarded the oath of hWhY
and the command that I gave you?”
44 The sovereign also said to Shim’i, “You shall
know all the evil that your heart has known, that you
did to my father Dawiḏ. And hWhY shall return your
evil on your own head.
45 “But Sovereign Shelomoh is baruḵ, and the
throne of Dawiḏ is established before hWhY forever.”
46 So the sovereign ordered Benayahu son of
Yahoyaḏa, and he went out and fell on him, and he
died. And the reign was established in the hand of
Shelomoh.
40

3 And Shelomoh joined in marriage with Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and took the daughter of
Pharaoh, and brought her to the City of Dawiḏ until
he had completed building his own house, and the
House of hWhY, and the wall all around
Yerushalayim.
2 Only, the people slaughtered at the high places,
for a House for the Name of hWhY had not been built
until those days.
3 And Shelomoh loved hWhY, walking in the Laws
of his father Dawiḏ, except that he slaughtered and
burned incense at the high places.
836

MELAḴIM 1

And the sovereign went to Giḇ’on to slaughter
there, for that was the great high place. Shelomoh
offered a thousand burnt offerings on that altar.
5 At Giḇ’on hWhY appeared to Shelomoh in a
dream by night, and Elohim said, “Ask what I should
give you.”
6 And Shelomoh said, “You have shown great
kindness to your servant Dawiḏ my father, as he
walked before You in truth, and in righteousness,
and in uprightness of heart with You. And You have
guarded for him this great kindness, and gave him a
son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.
7 “And now, O hWhY my Elohim, You have
appointed Your servant to reign instead of my father
Dawiḏ. But I am a little child, I do not know how to
go out or to come in.
8 “And Your servant is in the midst of Your people
whom You have chosen, a great people, too
numerous to be numbered or counted.
9 “Shall You then give to Your servant an
understanding heart to rule Your people, to discern
between good and evil? For who is able to rule this
great people of Yours?”
10 And the word was good in the eyes of hWhY, that
Shelomoh had asked this.
11 So Elohim said to him, “Because you have asked
this, and have not asked long life for yourself, nor
have asked riches for yourself, nor have asked the
life of your enemies, but have asked for yourself
discernment to understand right-ruling,
12 see, I shall do according to your words. See, I
shall give you a wise and understanding heart, so
that there was none like you before you, and none
like you shall arise after you.
4

837

1 KINGS

“And I shall also give you what you have not
asked: both riches and esteem, so that there shall
not be anyone like you among the sovereigns all
your days.
14 “And if you walk in My Ways, to guard My Laws
and My Commands, as your father Dawiḏ walked,
then I shall prolong your days.”
15 And Shelomoh awoke, and see, it was a dream!
And he came into Yerushalayim and stood before
the ark of the Covenant of hWhY, and offered up
burnt offerings and made peace offerings. And he
made a feast for all his servants.
16 Then two women, whores, came to the
sovereign, and stood before him.
17 And one woman said, “O my master, this woman
and I dwell in the same house. And I gave birth while
she was in the house.
18 “And it came to be, the third day after I had given
birth, that this woman also gave birth. And we were
together. There was no one else with us in the
house, only the two of us in the house.
19 “Then this woman’s son died in the night,
because she lay on him.
20 “And she rose up in the middle of the night and
took my son from my side, while your female servant
slept, and laid him in her bosom, and laid her dead
child in my bosom.
21 “And I rose up in the morning to nurse my son
and saw he was dead. But I looked at him closely in
the morning, and saw he was not my son whom I
had borne.”
22 And the other woman said, “No! But the living
one is my son, and the dead one is your son.” And
the first woman said, “No! For the dead one is your
13

838

MELAḴIM 1

son, and the living one is my son.” And they spoke
before the sovereign.
23 And the sovereign said, “The one says, ‘This is
my son, who lives, and your son is the dead one,’
while the other says, ‘No! For your son is the dead
one, and my son is the living one.’ ”
24 And the sovereign said, “Bring me a sword.” So
they brought a sword before the sovereign.
25 And the sovereign said, “Divide the living child in
two, and give half to one, and half to the other.”
26 And the woman whose son was living spoke to
the sovereign, for she was overcome with
compassion for her son. And she said, “O my
master, give her the living child, and by no means
kill him!” But the other said, “Let him be neither mine
nor yours, but divide him.”
27 And the sovereign answered and said, “Give the
first woman the living child, and by no means kill him
- she is his mother.”
28 And all Yisra’ĕl heard of the right-ruling which the
sovereign had rendered. And they revered the
sovereign, for they saw that the wisdom of Elohim
was in him to do right-ruling.

4 And it came to be that Sovereign Shelomoh was
sovereign over all Yisra’ĕl.
2 And these were his chief officials: Azaryahu son
of Tsaḏoq, the kohĕn;
3 Eliḥoreph and Aḥiyahu, sons of Shisha, scribes;
Yahoshaphat son of Aḥiluḏ, the recorder;
4 and Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa, over the army;
and Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar, the kohenim;
5 and Azaryahu son of Nathan, over the officers;
Zaḇuḏ son of Nathan, a kohĕn, friend of the
sovereign;
839

1 KINGS

and Aḥishar, over the household; and Aḏoniram
son of Aḇda, over the compulsory labour.
7 And Shelomoh had twelve governors over all
Yisra’ĕl, who provided food for the sovereign and his
household - each one made provision for one month
of the year 8 and these were their names: Ben-Ḥur, in the
mountains of Ephrayim;
9 Ben-Deqer, in Maqats and Sha’alḇim and Bĕyth
Shemesh and Ĕylon Bĕyth Ḥanan;
10 Ben-Ḥeseḏ in Arubboth, Soḵoh and all the land
of Ḥĕpher were his;
11 Ben-Aḇinaḏaḇ, all the height of Dor, Taphath the
daughter of Shelomoh became his wife;
12 Ba’ana son of Aḥiluḏ, in Ta’anaḵ and Meḡiddo,
and all Bĕyth She’an, which is beside Tsarethan
below Yizre’ĕl, from Bĕyth She’an to Aḇĕl Meḥolah,
as far as the other side of Yoqne’am;
13 Ben-Geḇer, in Ramoth Gil’aḏ, the towns of Ya’ir
son of Menashsheh in Gil’aḏ were his; the portion of
Argoḇ in Bashan, sixty large cities with walls and
bronze gate-bars, were his;
14 Aḥinaḏaḇ son of Iddo, in Maḥanayim;
15 Aḥima’ats in Naphtali; he also took Basemath the
daughter of Shelomoh as wife;
16 Ba’anah son of Ḥushai, in Ashĕr and in Aloth;
17 Yahoshaphat son of Paruwaḥ, in Yissasḵar;
18 Shim’i son of Ĕlah, in Binyamin;
19 Geḇer son of Uri, in the land of Gil’aḏ, in the land
of Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites and of Oḡ
sovereign of Bashan, and one governor was in the
land.
20 Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl were as numerous as the
sand by the sea, eating and drinking and rejoicing.
6

840

MELAḴIM 1

And Shelomoh was ruling over all reigns from the
River to the land of the Pelishtites, as far as the
border of Mitsrayim. They did taskwork and served
Shelomoh all the days of his life.
22 And Shelomoh’s food supply for one day was
thirty kors of fine flour, and sixty kors of meal,
23 ten fatted cattle and twenty cattle from the
pastures, and one hundred sheep, besides deer,
and gazelles, and roebucks, and fatted fowl.
24 For he was ruling over all on this side of the River
from Tiphsaḥ even to Azzah, over all the sovereigns
on this side of the River. And he had peace on all
sides round about him.
25 And Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl dwelt safely, each
man under his vine and his fig tree, from Dan as far
as Be’ĕrsheḇa, all the days of Shelomoh.
26 And Shelomoh had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen.
27 And these governors, each one in his month,
provided food for Sovereign Shelomoh and for all
who came to the table of Sovereign Shelomoh.
There was no lack in their supply.
28 They also brought barley and straw to the
appointed place, for the horses and steeds, each
one according to his right-ruling.
29 And Elohim gave Shelomoh exceeding great
wisdom and understanding, and largeness of heart
like the sand on the seashore.
30 And Shelomoh’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of
all the men of the East and all the wisdom of
Mitsrayim.
31 For he was wiser than all men, than Ĕythan the
Ezraḥite, and Hĕman, and Kalkol, and Darda, the
21

841

1 KINGS

sons of Maḥol. And his name was in all the nations
round about.
32 And he spoke three thousand proverbs, and his
songs were one thousand and five.
33 And he spoke of trees, from the cedar tree of
Leḇanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the
wall. And he spoke of beasts, and of birds, and of
creeping creatures, and of fish.
34 And there came from all peoples, from all the
sovereigns of the earth who had heard of his
wisdom, to hear the wisdom of Shelomoh.

5 And Ḥiram sovereign of Tsor sent his servants to
Shelomoh, because he heard that they had anointed
him sovereign in place of his father, for Ḥiram had
always loved Dawiḏ.
2 And Shelomoh sent to Ḥiram, saying,
3 “You know my father Dawiḏ was unable to build
a House for the Name of hWhY his Elohim because
of the battles which were all around him, until hWhY
put them under the soles of his feet.
4 “But now hWhY my Elohim has given me rest all
around, there is neither adversary nor evil incident.
5 “And see, I intend to build a House for the Name
of hWhY my Elohim, as hWhY spoke to my father
Dawiḏ, saying, ‘Your son, whom I put on your throne
in your place, he builds the House for My Name.’
6 “And now, command that they cut down cedars
for me from Leḇanon. And let my servants be with
your servants, and let me pay you wages for your
servants according to whatever you say. For you
know there is none among us who knows to cut
timber like the Tsiḏonians.”
7 And it came to be, when Ḥiram heard the words
of Shelomoh, that he rejoiced greatly and said,
842

MELAḴIM 1

“Baruḵ be hWhY this day, for He has given Dawiḏ a
wise son over this great people!”
8 And Ḥiram sent to Shelomoh, saying, “I have
heard that which you sent me. Let me do all you
desire concerning the cedar and cypress logs.
9 “Let my servants bring them down from Leḇanon
to the sea, then I put them in rafts by sea to the place
you direct me. And I shall spread them out there,
then you take them up, while you do my desire by
giving food for my household.”
10 And Ḥiram gave Shelomoh cedar and cypress
logs - all his desire.
11 And Shelomoh gave Ḥiram twenty thousand kors
of wheat as food for his household, and twenty kors
of pressed oil. Thus Shelomoh gave to Ḥiram year
by year.
12 And hWhY gave Shelomoh wisdom, as He
promised him. And there was peace between Ḥiram
and Shelomoh, and the two of them made a
covenant.
13 And Sovereign Shelomoh raised up compulsory
labour out of all Yisra’ĕl. And the compulsory labour
was thirty thousand men.
14 And he sent them to Leḇanon, ten thousand a
month by courses - they were one month in
Leḇanon, two months at home. And Aḏoniram was
over the compulsory labour.
15 And Shelomoh had seventy thousand bearing
burdens, and eighty thousand hewing in the
mountains,
16 besides three thousand three hundred from the
chiefs of Shelomoh’s deputies who were over the
work, those ruling over the people who laboured in
the work.
843

1 KINGS

And the sovereign commanded, and they
brought large stones, precious stones, to lay the
foundation of the House with hewn stones.
18 And Shelomoh’s builders, and Ḥiram’s builders,
and the men of Geḇal hewed, and prepared timber
and stones to build the House.
17

6 And it came to be, in the four hundred and
eightieth year after the children of Yisra’ĕl had come
out of the land of Mitsrayim, in the fourth year of the
reign of Shelomoh over Yisra’ĕl, in the month of Ziw,
which is the second month, that he began to build the
House of HWHY.
2 And the House which Sovereign Shelomoh built
for hWhY was sixty ammah long, and twenty wide,
and thirty ammah high.
3 And the porch at the front of the Hĕyḵal of the
House was twenty ammah long, according to the
breadth of the House, and its width ten ammah, from
the front of the House.
4 And he made for the House windows with
narrowed frames.
5 And against the wall of the House he built rooms
all around, the walls of the House, all around the
Hĕyḵal and the Speaking Place. Thus he made side
rooms all around.
6 The lowest side room was five ammah wide, and
the middle one was six ammah wide, and the third
one was seven ammah wide; for he made narrow
ledges around the outside of the House, so as not
to lay hold on the walls of the House.
7 And the House, when it was being built, was built
with finished stone made ready beforehand, so that
no hammer or chisel or any iron tool was heard in
the House while it was being built.
844

MELAḴIM 1

The doorway for the middle side room was on the
right side of the House. And they went up by stairs
to the middle side rooms, and from the middle to the
third.
9 So he built the House and completed it, and he
panelled the House with beams and boards of
cedar.
10 And he built the side rooms of the structure
against all the House, each five ammah high, and
they were fastened to the House with cedar beams.
11 And the word of HWHY came to Shelomoh,
saying,
12 “This House which you are building - if you walk
in My Laws, and do My Right-Rulings, and shall
guard all My Commands and walk in them, then I
shall confirm My Word with you, which I spoke to
your father Dawiḏ,
13 and shall dwell in the midst of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, and not forsake My people Yisra’ĕl.”
14 So Shelomoh built the House and completed it.
15 And he built the walls of the House inside with
cedar boards, from the floor of the House to the
ceiling he panelled them on the inside with wood,
and covered the floor of the House with planks of
cypress.
16 And he built twenty ammah at the rear of the
House, from floor to the walls, with cedar boards.
And he built it inside as the Speaking Place, as the
Most Qodesh Place.
17 And the House was forty ammah, it is the Hĕyḵal
before it.
18 And the cedar for the House inside was carved
with ornaments and open flowers; all was cedar, not
a stone was seen.
8

845

1 KINGS

And he prepared the Speaking Place in the midst
of the House, to place the ark of the Covenant of
HWHY there.
20 And the front of the Speaking Place was twenty
ammah long, and twenty ammah wide, and twenty
ammah high. And he overlaid it with refined gold,
and overlaid the altar of cedar.
21 And Shelomoh overlaid the inside of the House
with refined gold, and made gold chains pass over
the front of the Speaking Place, and overlaid it with
gold.
22 Thus he overlaid the entire House with gold, until
the entire House was completed. And the entire altar
that was by the Speaking Place he overlaid with
gold.
23 And inside the Speaking Place he made two
keruḇim of olive wood, ten ammah high.
24 And one wing of the keruḇ was five ammah, and
the other wing of the keruḇ five ammah - ten ammah
from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other.
25 And the other keruḇ was ten ammah. Both
keruḇim were of the same size and shape.
26 The height of one keruḇ was ten ammah, and so
was the other keruḇ.
27 And he placed the keruḇim in the midst of the
inner House. And they stretched out the wings of the
keruḇim so that the wing of the one touched one
wall, and the wing of the other keruḇ touched the
other wall. And their wings touched each other in the
middle of the room.
28 And he overlaid the keruḇim with gold.
29 And he carved all the walls of the House all
around, both inside and outside, with carved figures
of keruḇim, and palm trees, and open flowers.
19

846

MELAḴIM 1

And he overlaid the floor of the House with gold,
inside and outside.
31 And for the entrance of the Speaking Place he
made doors of olive wood: the lintel, doorposts, a
fifth.
32 And the two doors were of olive wood. And he
carved on them figures of keruḇim, and palm trees,
and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold. And
he spread the gold on the keruḇim and on the palm
trees.
33 And so he made doorposts for the door of the
Hĕyḵal of olive wood - a fourth part.
34 And the two doors were of cypress wood, the two
leaves of the one folded, and two leaves of the other
door folded.
35 And he carved keruḇim, and palm trees, and
open flowers, and overlaid them with gold laid
smoothly on the carved work.
36 And he built the inner courtyard with three rows
of hewn stone and a row of cedar beams.
37 In the fourth year the foundation of the House of
hWhY was laid, in the month Ziw.
38 And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, the
eighth month, the House was completed in all its
matters and according to all its plans. Thus he built
it for seven years.
30

7 And Shelomoh built his own house for thirteen
years, and he completed his entire house.
2 And he built the house of the forest of Leḇanon.
It was one hundred ammah long, and fifty ammah
wide, and thirty ammah high, with four rows of cedar
columns, and cedar beams on the columns.
3 And it was panelled with cedar above the beams
that were on forty-five columns, fifteen to a row.
847

1 KINGS

And there were windows with narrowed frames
in three rows, and window was opposite window,
three times.
5 And all the doorways and doorposts had square
frames. And window was opposite window, three
times.
6 And he made the porch of the columns, fifty
ammah long and thirty ammah wide. And the porch
was in front of them, and the columns and the roof
was in front of them.
7 And he made a hall for the throne, the Hall of
Right-Ruling, where he ruled. And it was panelled
with cedar from floor to floor.
8 And the house where he was to dwell, the other
courtyard, within the hall was of like workmanship.
And Shelomoh made a house like this hall for
Pharaoh’s daughter, whom he had taken.
9 All these were of precious stone hewn to size,
sawed with a saw, inside and out, from the
foundation to the coping, and also on the outside to
the great courtyard.
10 And the foundation was of precious stone, large
stones, stones of ten ammah and stones of eight
ammah.
11 And above were precious stones, hewn to size,
and cedar wood.
12 So the great courtyard all around had three rows
of hewn stones and a row of cedar beams, as was
the inner courtyard of the House of hWhY and the
porch of the House.
13 And Sovereign Shelomoh sent and brought
Ḥiram from Tsor.
14 He was the son of a widow from the tribe of
Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tsor, a bronze
worker. And he was filled with wisdom and
4

848

MELAḴIM 1

understanding and skill in working with all kinds of
bronze work. So he came to Sovereign Shelomoh
and did all his work.
15 And he cast two columns of bronze, each one
eighteen ammah high, and a line of twelve ammah
measured the circumference of each.
16 And he made two capitals of cast bronze, to put
on the tops of the columns - the height of one capital
was five ammah, and the height of the other capital
was five ammah 17 a lattice network, with wreaths of chainwork, for
the capitals which were on top of the columns,
seven chains for one capital and seven for the other
capital.
18 And he made the columns, and two rows of
pomegranates above the network all around to
cover the capitals that were on top, and so he did for
the other capital.
19 And the capitals that were on top of the columns
in the hall were in the shape of lilies, four ammah.
20 And there were capitals above also on the two
columns, by the bulge which was next to the
network. And the pomegranates were two hundred,
in rows on each of the capitals all around.
21 And he put up the columns by the porch of the
Hĕyḵal. And he put up the column on the right and
called its name Yaḵin, and he put up the column on
the left and called its name Bo’az.
22 And on the top of the columns was lily work. Thus
the work of the columns was completed.
23 And he made the sea of cast metal, ten ammah
from one rim to the other, round all about, and five
ammah high, and a line of thirty ammah measured
around it.
849

1 KINGS

And below its rim were ornaments all around, ten
to an ammah, all the way around the sea. The
ornaments were cast in two rows when it was cast.
25 It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, and
three facing west, and three facing south, and three
facing east. And the sea was put upon them, and all
their back parts were inward.
26 And it was a tophaḥ thick, and its rim was shaped
like the rim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It held two
thousand baths.
27 And he made ten stands of bronze, each stand
was four ammah long, and four ammah wide, and
three ammah high.
28 And this is how the stands were made: They had
side panels, and the side panels were between
frames,
29 and on the side panels that were between the
frames were lions, oxen, and keruḇim, and a
pedestal above on the frame. Below the lions and
oxen were wreaths of beaten work.
30 And each stand had four bronze wheels and
axles of bronze, and its four feet had supports.
Under the basin were cast supports beside each
wreath.
31 And its opening inside the crown at the top was
one ammah. And the opening was round, like the
work of the pedestal, one and a half ammah. And
also on the opening were engravings, but the side
panels were square, not round.
32 And the four wheels were under the side panels,
and the axles of the wheels were joined to the stand,
and the height of a wheel was one and a half
ammah.
24

850

MELAḴIM 1

And the wheels were made like chariot wheels.
Their axle pins, and their rims, and their spokes, and
their hubs were all cast.
34 And there were four supports at the four corners
of each stand, its supports were of the stand itself.
35 And on the top of the stand, half an ammah in
height - round all around. And on the top of the
stand, its flanges and its side panels were of the
same.
36 And on the plates of its flanges and on its side
panels he engraved keruḇim, lions, and palm trees,
according to the clear space on each, with wreaths
all around.
37 He made the ten stands like this: all of them were
of one mould, one measure, and one shape.
38 And he made ten basins of bronze; each basin
contained forty baths, and each basin was four
ammah, one basin on each of the ten stands.
39 And he put five stands on the right side of the
House, and five on the left side of the House, and
he put the sea on the right side of the House to the
east, facing the south.
40 And Ḥiram made the pots and the shovels and
the bowls. And Ḥiram completed doing all the work
that he was to do for Sovereign Shelomoh on the
House of HWHY:
41 the two columns, and the bowl-shaped capitals
that were on top of the columns, and the two
networks covering the two bowl-shaped capitals
which were on top of the columns;
42 and the four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, two rows of pomegranates for each
network to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that
were on top of the columns;
33

851

1 KINGS

and the ten stands, and the ten basins on the
stands;
44 and the one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;
45 and the pots, and the shovels, and the bowls.
And all these utensils which Ḥiram made for
Sovereign Shelomoh for the House of hWhY were of
polished bronze.
46 The sovereign had them cast in clay in the district
of Yardĕn between Sukkoth and Tsarethan.
47 And Shelomoh left out all the utensils, because
they were many, nor was the weight of the bronze
searched out.
48 So Shelomoh made all the utensils for the House
of hWhY: the altar of gold, and the table of gold on
which was the showbread;
49 and the lampstands of refined gold, five on the
right side and five on the left in front of the Speaking
Place, with the flowers and the lamps and the
snuffers of gold;
50 and the basins, and the snuffers, and the bowls,
and the ladles, and the fire holders of refined gold,
and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner
House, the Most Qodesh Place, and for the doors of
the House of the Hĕyḵal.
51 Thus all the work which Sovereign Shelomoh
had done for the House of hWhY was completed.
And Shelomoh brought in the qodesh items of his
father Dawiḏ: the silver and the gold and the
utensils, and he put them in the treasuries of the
House of HWHY.
43

8 Then Shelomoh assembled the elders of Yisra’ĕl
and all the heads of the tribes, the chief fathers of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, to Sovereign Shelomoh in
852

MELAḴIM 1

Yerushalayim, to bring up the ark of the Covenant of
hWhY from the City of Dawiḏ, which is Tsiyon.
2 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl assembled to
Sovereign Shelomoh at the Festival in the month of
Ĕythanim, which is the seventh month.
3 And all the elders of Yisra’ĕl came, and the
kohenim took up the ark,
4 and brought up the ark of hWhY, and the Tent of
Appointment, and all the qodesh utensils that were
in the Tent. And the kohenim and the Lĕwites
brought them up,
5 and
Sovereign Shelomoh, and all the
congregation of Yisra’ĕl who had assembled with
him, were with him before the ark, slaughtering so
many sheep and cattle, that they could not be
counted or numbered.
6 And the kohenim brought in the ark of the
Covenant of hWhY to its place, into the Speaking
Place of the House, to the Most Qodesh Place,
under the wings of the keruḇim,
7 for the keruḇim spread two wings over the place
of the ark, and the keruḇim covered over the ark and
its poles.
8 And the poles extended so that the ends of the
poles were seen from the qodesh place, in front of
the Speaking Place, but they were not seen from
outside. And they are there to this day.
9 There was naught in the ark, only the two tablets
of stone which Mosheh put there at Ḥorĕḇ, where
hWhY made a Covenant with the children of Yisra’ĕl,
when they came out of the land of Mitsrayim.
10 And it came to be, when the kohenim came out
of the qodesh place, that the cloud filled the House
of hWhY,
853

1 KINGS

so that the kohenim were unable to stand and
perform the service because of the cloud, for the
esteem of hWhY filled the House of HWHY.
12 And Shelomoh said, “hWhY has said He would
dwell in the dense cloud.
13 I have indeed built You an exalted House, an
established place for You to dwell in forever.”
14 And the sovereign turned around and baraḵ all
the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, while all the assembly of
Yisra’ĕl was standing.
15 And he said, “Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
who spoke with His mouth to my father Dawiḏ, and
with His hand has filled it, saying,
16 ‘Since the day I brought My people Yisra’ĕl out of
Mitsrayim, I have chosen no city from any tribe of
Yisra’ĕl in which to build a House for My Name to be
there, but I chose Dawiḏ to be over My people
Yisra’ĕl.’
17 “And it was in the heart of my father Dawiḏ to
build a House for the Name of hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
18 “But hWhY said to my father Dawiḏ, ‘Because it
has been in your heart to build a House for My
Name, you did well that it was in your heart.
19 ‘Only, you do not build the House, but your son,
who is coming from your loins, he builds the House
for My Name.’
20 “Now hWhY has established His word which He
spoke, and I have been raised up instead of my
father Dawiḏ, and sit on the throne of Yisra’ĕl, as
hWhY promised, and built a House for the Name of
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
21 and have appointed there a place for the ark,
wherein is the Covenant of hWhY which He made
11

854

MELAḴIM 1

with our fathers, when He brought them out of the
land of Mitsrayim.”
22 And Shelomoh stood before the altar of hWhY in
front of all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, and spread out
his hands toward the shamayim,
23 and said, “hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, there is no
Elohim in the shamayim above or on earth below
like You, guarding Your Covenant and kindness with
Your servants who walk before You with all their
heart,
24 who has guarded that which You promised Your
servant Dawiḏ my father. Indeed, You have both
spoken with Your mouth and have filled it with Your
hand, as it is this day.
25 “And now, hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, guard what
You promised Your servant Dawiḏ my father,
saying, ‘There is not to cease a man of yours before
Me, sitting on the throne of Yisra’ĕl - only, if your
sons guard their way, to walk before Me as you have
walked before Me.’
26 “And now, O Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, please let Your
word come true which You have spoken to Your
servant Dawiḏ my father.
27 “For is it true: Elohim dwells on the earth? See,
the shamayim and the shamayim of the shamayim
are unable to contain You, how much less this
House which I have built!
28 “Yet, shall You turn to the prayer of Your servant
and his supplication, O hWhY my Elohim, and listen
to the cry and the prayer which Your servant is
praying before You today?
29 “For Your eyes to be open toward this House
night and day, toward the place of which You said,
‘My Name is there,’ to listen to the prayer which Your
servant makes toward this place.
855

1 KINGS

“Then, shall You hear the supplication of Your
servant and of Your people Yisra’ĕl when they pray
toward this place, when You hear in Your dwelling
place, in the shamayim? And shall You hear, and
forgive?
31 “If anyone sins against his neighbour, and he has
lifted up an oath on him, to cause him to swear, and
comes and swears before Your altar in this House,
32 then hear in the shamayim, and act and rightly
rule Your servants, declaring the wicked wicked,
bringing his way on his head, and declaring the
righteous right by giving him according to his
righteousness.
33 “When Your people Yisra’ĕl are smitten before
an enemy, because they have sinned against You,
and they shall turn back to You and confess Your
Name, and pray and make supplication to You in
this House,
34 then hear in the shamayim, and forgive the sin of
Your people Yisra’ĕl, and bring them back to the
land which You gave to their fathers.
35 “When the shamayim are shut up and there is no
rain because they sin against You, when they pray
toward this place and confess Your Name, and turn
from their sin because You afflict them,
36 then hear in the shamayim, and forgive the sin of
Your servants, Your people Yisra’ĕl - for You teach
them the good way in which they should walk - and
shall give rain on Your land which You have given
to Your people as an inheritance.
37 “When there is scarcity of food in the land; when
there is pestilence, blight, mildew, locusts,
grasshoppers; when their enemy distresses them in
the land of their cities; any plague, any sickness,
30

856

MELAḴIM 1

whatever prayer, whatever supplication by
anyone of all Your people Yisra’ĕl, each knowing the
plague of his own heart, and shall spread but his
hands toward this House,
39 then hear in the shamayim, Your dwelling place,
and forgive, and act, and render unto everyone
according to all his ways, whose heart You know.
Because You - You alone - know the hearts of all the
sons of men,
40 so that they revere You all the days that they live
in the land which You gave to our fathers.
41 “Also, concerning a foreigner, who is not of Your
people Yisra’ĕl, but has come from a far land for
Your Name’s sake 42 since they hear of Your great Name and Your
strong hand and Your outstretched arm - and he
shall come and pray toward this House,
43 hear in the shamayim Your dwelling place, and
do according to all for which the foreigner calls to
You, so that all peoples of the earth know Your
Name and revere You, as do Your people Yisra’ĕl,
and know that this House which I have built is called
by Your Name.
44 “When Your people go out to battle against their
enemy, in the way that You send them, and they
shall pray to hWhY toward the city which You have
chosen and toward the House which I have built for
Your Name,
45 then shall You hear in the shamayim their prayer
and their supplication, and maintain their cause?
46 “When they sin against You - for there is no one
who does not sin - and You become enraged with
them and give them to the enemy, and they take
them captive to the land of the enemy, far or near;
38

857

1 KINGS

and they shall turn back unto their heart in the
land where they have been taken captive, and shall
turn, and make supplication to You in the land of
those who took them captive, saying, ‘We have
sinned and acted wickedly, we have committed
wickedness,’
48 and they shall turn back to You with all their heart
and with all their being in the land of their enemies
who led them away captive, and shall pray to You
toward their land which You gave to their fathers, the
city which You have chosen and the House which I
have built for Your Name,
49 then shall You hear in the shamayim Your
dwelling place their prayer and their supplication,
and maintain their cause,
50 and forgive Your people who have sinned
against You, and all their transgressions which they
have transgressed against You? And give them
compassion before those who took them captive,
and they shall have compassion on them.
51 ‘For they are Your people and Your inheritance,
whom You brought out of Mitsrayim, out of the iron
furnace.
52 “Let Your eyes be open to the supplication of
Your servant and the supplication of Your people
Yisra’ĕl, to listen to them whenever they call to You.
53 “For You have separated them unto Yourself for
an inheritance, out of all the peoples of the earth, as
You spoke by the hand of Your servant Mosheh,
when You brought our fathers out of Mitsrayim, O
Aḏonai hWhY.”
54 And it came to be, when Shelomoh had ended
praying all this prayer and supplication to hWhY, that
he rose up from before the altar of hWhY, from
47

858

MELAḴIM 1

kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to
the shamayim.
55 And he stood and baraḵ all the assembly of
Yisra’ĕl with a loud voice, saying,
56 “Baruḵ be hWhY, who has given rest to His
people Yisra’ĕl, according to all that He promised.
There has not failed one word of all His good Word,
which He promised through His servant Mosheh.
57 “hWhY our Elohim is with us as He was with our
fathers - He does not leave us nor forsake us 58 to incline our hearts to Himself, to walk in all His
Ways, and to guard His Commands and His Laws
and His Right-Rulings, which He commanded our
fathers.
59 “And let these words of mine, with which I have
made supplication before hWhY, be near hWhY our
Elohim day and night, to maintain the cause of His
servant and the cause of His people Yisra’ĕl, the
matter of each day in its day,
60 so that all the peoples of the earth might know
that hWhY is Elohim, there is no one else.
61 “Let your heart therefore be perfect to hWhY our
Elohim, to walk in His Laws and guard His
Commands, as at this day.”
62 And the sovereign and all Yisra’ĕl with him made
slaughterings before hWhY.
63 And Shelomoh brought peace offerings, which
he slaughtered to hWhY, twenty-two thousand bulls
and one hundred and twenty thousand sheep. Thus
the sovereign and all the children of Yisra’ĕl
dedicated the House of hWhY.
64 On that day the sovereign qadosh the middle of
the courtyard that was in front of the House of hWhY,
for there he made burnt offerings, and the grain
offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings,
859

1 KINGS

because the bronze altar that was before hWhY was
too small to contain the burnt offerings, and the grain
offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings.
65 And Shelomoh at that time observed the
Festival, and all Yisra’ĕl with him, a great assembly
from the entrance of Ḥamath to the wadi of
Mitsrayim, before hWhY our Elohim, seven days and
seven days - fourteen days.
66 On the eighth day he sent the people away. And
they baraḵ the sovereign, and went to their tents
rejoicing and glad of heart for all the goodness that
HWHY had done for his servant Dawiḏ, and for
Yisra’ĕl His people.

9 And it came to be, when Shelomoh had finished
building the House of hWhY and the house of the
sovereign, and all the desire of Shelomoh which he
was pleased to do,
2 that HWHY appeared to Shelomoh the second
time, as He had appeared to him at Giḇ’on.
3 And hWhY said to him, “I have heard your prayer
and your supplication that you have made before
Me. I have qadosh this House which you have built
to put My Name there forever, and My eyes and My
heart shall always be there.
4 “And you, if you walk before Me as your father
Dawiḏ walked, in integrity of heart and in
uprightness, to do according to all that I have
commanded you, if you guard My Laws and My
Right-Rulings,
5 then I shall establish the throne of your reign over
Yisra’ĕl forever, as I promised Dawiḏ your father,
saying, ‘There is not to cease a man of yours on the
throne of Yisra’ĕl.’
860

MELAḴIM 1

“If you at all turn back, you or your sons, from
following Me, and do not guard My Commands, My
Laws, which I have put before you, but shall go and
serve other mighty ones and bow yourselves to
them,
7 then I shall cut off Yisra’ĕl from the face of the
land which I have given them, and send away from
My presence this House which I have qadosh for My
Name. And Yisra’ĕl shall be a proverb and a
mockery among all the peoples.
8 “And this House, which has been exalted,
everyone who passes by it shall be astonished, and
hiss, and say, ‘Why has hWhY done thus to this land
and to this House?’
9 “Then they shall say, ‘Because they have
forsaken hWhY their Elohim, who brought their
fathers out of the land of Mitsrayim, and they
embraced other mighty ones, and bowed
themselves to them and served them. That is why
hWhY has brought all this evil on them.’ ”
10 And it came to be, at the end of twenty years, that
Shelomoh had built the two houses, the House of
hWhY and the house of the sovereign.
11 Ḥiram the sovereign of Tsor had supplied
Shelomoh with cedar and cypress and gold, as
much as he desired. Then Sovereign Shelomoh
gave Ḥiram twenty cities in the land of Galil.
12 And Ḥiram came from Tsor to see the cities
which Shelomoh had given him, but they were not
right in his eyes,
13 and he said, “What are these cities you have
given me, my brother?” And he called them the land
of Kaḇul, as they are to this day.
14 And Ḥiram sent the sovereign one hundred and
twenty kiḵars of gold.
6

861

1 KINGS

And this is the purpose of the compulsory labour
which Sovereign Shelomoh raised, to build the
House of hWhY, and his own house, and Millo, and
the wall of Yerushalayim, and Ḥatsor, and Meḡiddo,
and Gezer 16 Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim had gone up
and taken Gezer and burned it with fire, and had
slain the Kena’anites who dwelt in the city, and had
given it as a payment for the bride to his daughter,
Shelomoh’s wife 17 and Shelomoh built Gezer, and Lower Bĕyth
Ḥoron,
18 and Ba’alath, and Tamar in the wilderness, in the
land of Yahuḏah,
19 and all the storage cities that Shelomoh had, and
cities for his chariots and cities for his cavalry, and
whatever Shelomoh desired to build in
Yerushalayim, and in Leḇanon, and in all the land of
his rule.
20 All the people who were left of the Amorites, the
Ḥittites, the Perizzites, the Ḥiwwites, and the
Yeḇusites, who were not of the children of Yisra’ĕl 21 their descendants who were left in the land after
them, whom the children of Yisra’ĕl had not been
able to destroy completely - from these Shelomoh
raised compulsory labour, as it is to this day.
22 But Shelomoh did not make slaves of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, because they were men of
battle, and his servants, and his rulers, and his
officers, and commanders of his chariots, and his
cavalry.
23 These were the chiefs of the officials who were
over the work of Shelomoh: five hundred and fifty,
who ruled over the people who did the work.
15

862

MELAḴIM 1

And the daughter of Pharaoh came up from the
City of Dawiḏ to her house that he built for her. Then
he built Millo.
25 And three times a year Shelomoh brought burnt
offerings and peace offerings on the altar which he
had built for hWhY, and he burned incense with that
which was before hWhY - thus gave completeness
to the House.
26 And Sovereign Shelomoh built a fleet of ships at
Etsyon Geḇer, which is near Ĕyloth on the shore of
the Sea of Reeds, in the land of Eḏom.
27 And Ḥiram sent his servants with the fleet,
seamen who knew the sea, to work with the
servants of Shelomoh.
28 And they went to Ophir, and took four hundred
and twenty kiḵars of gold from there, and brought it
to Sovereign Shelomoh.
24

10 And the sovereigness of Sheḇa heard of the
report of Shelomoh concerning the Name of hWhY,
and came to try him with hard questions.
2 And she came to Yerushalayim with a very great
company, with camels that bore spices, very much
gold, and precious stones. And she came to
Shelomoh, and she spoke with him about all that
was in her heart.
3 And Shelomoh answered all her questions.
There was no matter hidden from the sovereign that
he did not make known to her.
4 And the sovereigness of Sheḇa saw all the
wisdom of Shelomoh, and the house that he had
built,
5 and the food on his table, and the seating of his
servants, and the service of his waiters and their
attire, and his cupbearers, and his burnt offerings
863

1 KINGS

which he offered in the House of hWhY, and there
was no more spirit in her.
6 Then she said to the sovereign, “The word I
heard in my own land about your words and your
wisdom was true.
7 “But I did not believe the words until I came and
saw with my own eyes. And see, I have not been
told the half! Your wisdom and prosperity exceed the
report which I heard.
8 “Baruḵ are your men and baruḵ are these your
servants, who stand continually before you, who are
hearing your wisdom!
9 “Baruḵ be hWhY your Elohim, who delighted in
you, to put you on the throne of Yisra’ĕl! Because
hWhY has loved Yisra’ĕl forever, therefore He made
you sovereign, to do right-ruling and righteousness.”
10 And she gave the sovereign one hundred and
twenty kiḵars of gold, and very many spices, and
precious stones. Never again did so many spices
come as the sovereigness of Sheḇa gave to
Sovereign Shelomoh.
11 And also, the ships of Ḥiram, which brought gold
from Ophir, brought almug wood, a great many, and
precious stones from Ophir.
12 And the sovereign made steps of the almug
wood for the House of hWhY and for the sovereign’s
house, also lyres and harps for singers. No such
almug wood has come or been seen to this day.
13 And Sovereign Shelomoh gave the sovereigness
of Sheḇa all she desired, whatever she asked,
besides what he gave her according to the hand of
Sovereign Shelomoh. And she turned and went to
her land, she and her servants.
14 And the weight of gold that came to Shelomoh
yearly was six hundred and sixty-six kiḵars of gold,
864

MELAḴIM 1

besides that from men of travel, and the profit
from traders, and from all the sovereigns of Araḇia,
and from the governors of the land.
16 And Sovereign Shelomoh made two hundred
large shields of beaten gold - six hundred pieces of
gold went into each shield;
17 and three hundred shields of beaten gold - three
minas of gold went into each shield. And the
sovereign put them in the House of the Forest of
Leḇanon.
18 And the sovereign made a great throne of ivory,
and overlaid it with refined gold.
19 The throne had six steps, and the top of the
throne was round at the back, and there were
armrests on either side of the place of the seat, and
two lions stood beside the armrests.
20 And twelve lions were standing there, one on
each side of the six steps. The like of it was never
made in any reign.
21 And all the drinking vessels of Sovereign
Shelomoh were of gold, and all the vessels of the
House of the Forest of Leḇanon were of refined gold
- not of silver, for this was reckoned of little value in
the days of Shelomoh.
22 For the sovereign had ships of Tarshish at sea
with the fleet of Ḥiram. Once every three years the
ships of Tarshish came bringing gold, and silver,
ivory, and apes, and baboons.
23 And Sovereign Shelomoh was greater than any
of the sovereigns of the earth in riches and wisdom.
24 And all the earth sought the presence of
Shelomoh to hear his wisdom, which Elohim had put
in his heart.
25 And they were each bringing his present: objects
of silver and objects of gold, and garments, and
15

865

1 KINGS

armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year
by year.
26 And Shelomoh gathered chariots and horsemen,
and he had one thousand four hundred chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen, whom he stationed in
the chariot cities and with the sovereign in
Yerushalayim.
27 And the sovereign made silver as common in
Yerushalayim as stones, and he made cedars as
plenty as the sycamores which are in the low
country.
28 And Shelomoh had horses brought out from
Mitsrayim and Quĕh; the sovereign’s merchants
brought them from Quĕh at a price.
29 And a chariot came up and went out from
Mitsrayim for six hundred pieces of silver, and a
horse one hundred and fifty. And so, by their hand,
they brought them out to all the sovereigns of the
Ḥittites, and the sovereigns of Aram.

11 And Sovereign Shelomoh loved many foreign
women in addition to the daughter of Pharaoh:
Mo’aḇite, Ammonite, Eḏomite, Tsiḏonian, and Ḥittite
women;
2 from the nations of whom hWhY had said to the
children of Yisra’ĕl, “You do not go into them, and
they do not go into you, for they shall certainly turn
away your hearts after their mighty ones.” Shelomoh
clung to these in love.
3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses,
and three hundred concubines. And his wives
turned away his heart.
4 And it came to be, when Shelomoh was old, that
his wives turned away his heart after other mighty
866

MELAḴIM 1

ones. And his heart was not perfect with hWhY his
Elohim, as was the heart of his father Dawiḏ.
5 And Shelomoh went after Ashtoreth the mighty
one of the Tsiḏonians, and after Milkom the
abomination of the Ammonites.
6 Thus Shelomoh did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and
did not follow hWhY completely, like his father
Dawiḏ.
7 Then Shelomoh built a high place for Kemosh the
abomination of Mo’aḇ, on the hill that is east of
Yerushalayim, and for Moleḵ the abomination of the
children of Ammon.
8 And so he did for all his foreign wives, who
burned incense and slaughtered to their mighty
ones.
9 Therefore hWhY was enraged with Shelomoh,
because his heart had turned away from hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, who had appeared to him twice,
10 and had commanded him concerning this word,
not to go after other mighty ones. But he did not
guard what hWhY had commanded.
11 And hWhY said to Shelomoh, “Because you have
done this, and have not guarded My Covenant and
My Laws, which I have commanded you, I shall
certainly tear the reign away from you and give it to
your servant.
12 “Only, I do not do it in your days, for the sake of
your father Dawiḏ. Out of the hand of your son I shall
tear it.
13 “Only, I shall not tear away all the reign but give
one tribe to your son for the sake of my servant
Dawiḏ, and for the sake of Yerushalayim which I
have chosen.”

867

1 KINGS

And hWhY raised up an adversary against
Shelomoh, Haḏaḏ the Eḏomite. He was of the seed
of the sovereign in Eḏom.
15 And it came to be, when Dawiḏ was in Eḏom, and
Yo’aḇ the commander of the army had gone up to
bury the slain, after he had smitten every male in
Eḏom 16 Yo’aḇ remained there with all Yisra’ĕl for six
months, until every male in Eḏom was cut off 17 that Aḏaḏ fled to go to Mitsrayim, he and certain
Eḏomites of his father’s servants with him, while
Haḏaḏ was still a little child.
18 And they arose from Miḏyan and came to Paran,
and took men with them from Paran and came to
Mitsrayim, to Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, who
gave him a house, and ordered food for him, and
gave him land.
19 And Haḏaḏ found much favour in the eyes of
Pharaoh, so that he gave him as wife the sister of
his own wife, the sister of Sovereigness Taḥpenĕs.
20 And the sister of Taḥpenĕs bore him Genuḇath
his son, whom Taḥpenĕs weaned in Pharaoh’s
house. And Genuḇath was in the house of Pharaoh
among the sons of Pharaoh.
21 And Haḏaḏ heard in Mitsrayim that Dawiḏ slept
with his fathers, and that Yo’aḇ the commander of
the army was dead, and Haḏaḏ said to Pharaoh,
“Let me go to my land.”
22 And Pharaoh said to him, “But what have you
lacked with me, that you are now seeking to go to
your own land?” And he answered, “No, but please
let me go.”
23 And Elohim raised up another adversary against
him, Rezon son of Elyaḏa who had fled from his
master, Haḏaḏezer sovereign of Tsoḇah,
14

868

MELAḴIM 1

and when Dawiḏ slew them he gathered men to
him and became commander over a raiding band.
And they went to Dammeseq and dwelt there, and
reigned in Dammeseq.
25 And he was an adversary of Yisra’ĕl all the days
of Shelomoh - besides the trouble that Haḏaḏ
caused - and he was hostile to Yisra’ĕl and reigned
over Aram.
26 And a servant of Shelomoh, Yaroḇ’am son of
Neḇat, an Ephrayimite from Tserĕḏah, whose
mother’s name was Tseru’ah, a widow, also lifted up
a hand against the sovereign.
27 And this is what caused him to lift up a hand
against the sovereign: Shelomoh had built Millo,
repairing the breaks in the City of Dawiḏ his father.
28 And the man Yaroḇ’am was a brave man. And
Shelomoh, seeing that the young man was doing his
work well, made him the officer over all the
compulsory labour of the house of Yosĕph.
29 And it came to be at that time, when Yaroḇ’am
went out of Yerushalayim, that the naḇi Aḥiyahu the
Shilonite met him on the way. And he was wearing
a new garment, and the two were alone in the field.
30 And Aḥiyahu took hold of the new garment that
was on him, and tore it into twelve pieces,
31 and said to Yaroḇ’am, “Take for yourself ten
pieces, for thus said hWhY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘See, I am tearing the reign out of the hand of
Shelomoh and shall give ten tribes to you,
32 but he shall have one tribe for the sake of My
servant Dawiḏ, and for the sake of Yerushalayim,
the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl.
33 ‘Because they have forsaken Me, and bow
themselves to Ashtoreth the mighty one of the
24

869

1 KINGS

Tsiḏonians, to Kemosh the mighty one of the
Mo’aḇites, and to Milkom the mighty one of the
children of Ammon, and have not walked in My
Ways - to do what is right in My eyes, and My Laws
and My Right-Rulings, as did his father Dawiḏ.
34 ‘But I do not take all the reign out of his hand,
because I have made him ruler all the days of his life
for the sake of My servant Dawiḏ, whom I chose
because he guarded My Commands and My Laws.
35 ‘And I shall take the reign out of his son’s hand
and give it to you, the ten tribes.
36 ‘And to his son I give one tribe, so that My
servant Dawiḏ shall always have a lamp before Me
in Yerushalayim, the city which I have chosen for
Myself, to put My Name there.
37 ‘So I take you, and you shall reign over all that
your being desires, and you shall be sovereign over
Yisra’ĕl.
38 ‘And it shall be, if you obey all that I command
you, and shall walk in My Ways, and do what is right
in My eyes, to guard My Laws and My Commands,
as My servant Dawiḏ did, then I shall be with you
and build for you a steadfast house, as I built for
Dawiḏ, and shall give Yisra’ĕl to you.
39 ‘And because of this I humble the seed of Dawiḏ,
but not forever.’ ”
40 And Shelomoh sought to kill Yaroḇ’am, but
Yaroḇ’am rose up and fled to Mitsrayim, to Shishaq
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and was in Mitsrayim until
the death of Shelomoh.
41 And the rest of the acts of Shelomoh, all that he
did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book
of the acts of Shelomoh?
42 And the days that Shelomoh reigned in
Yerushalayim over all Yisra’ĕl was forty years.
870

MELAḴIM 1

So Shelomoh slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the City of Dawiḏ his father, and Reḥaḇ’am
his son reigned in his place.

43

12 And Reḥaḇ’am went to Sheḵem, for all Yisra’ĕl
had gone to Sheḵem to appoint him to reign.
2 And it came to be, when Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat
heard this - he was still in Mitsrayim, for he had fled
from the presence of Sovereign Shelomoh and had
been dwelling in Mitsrayim 3 that they sent and called him. And Yaroḇ’am and
all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl came and spoke to
Reḥaḇ’am, saying,
4 “Your father made our yoke hard, and now,
lighten the hard service of your father, and his heavy
yoke which he put on us, then we serve you.”
5 And he said to them, “Go away for three days,
then come back to me.” And the people went.
6 Then Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am consulted the elders
who stood before his father Shelomoh while he still
lived, and he said, “What do you advise me to
answer these people?”
7 And they spoke to him, saying, “If you are a
servant to these people today, and shall serve them,
and shall answer them and speak good words to
them, then they shall be your servants all the days.”
8 But he ignored the advice the elders gave him,
and consulted the young men who had grown up
with him, who stood before him.
9 And he said to them, “What advice do you give?
How should we answer this people who have
spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke which your
father put on us’?”
10 And the young men who had grown up with him
spoke to him, saying, “Say this to this people who
871

1 KINGS

have spoken to you, saying, ‘Your father made our
yoke heavy, but you make it lighter on us.’ Say this
to them, ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s
waist!
11 ‘And now, my father laid a heavy yoke on you,
but I add to your yoke; my father flogged you with
whips, but I, I flog you with scourges!’ ”
12 So Yaroḇ’am and all the people came to
Reḥaḇ’am the third day, as the sovereign had
spoken, saying, “Come back to me the third day.”
13 But the sovereign answered the people harshly,
and ignored the advice which the elders had given
him,
14 and he spoke to them according to the advice of
the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke
heavy, but I add to your yoke; my father flogged you
with whips, but I, I flog you with scourges!”
15 So the sovereign did not listen to the people, for
the turn of events was from hWhY, in order to
establish His word, which hWhY had spoken by
Aḥiyahu the Shilonite to Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat.
16 And all Yisra’ĕl saw that the sovereign did not
listen to them. Then the people answered the
sovereign, saying, “What portion do we have in
Dawiḏ? And there is no inheritance in the son of
Yishai. To your tents, O Yisra’ĕl! Now, see to your
own house, O Dawiḏ!” So Yisra’ĕl went to their tents.
17 But as for the children of Yisra’ĕl who dwelt in the
cities of Yahuḏah, Reḥaḇ’am reigned over them.
18 And when Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am sent Aḏoram,
who was over the compulsory labour, all Yisra’ĕl
stoned him with stones, and he died. And Sovereign
Reḥaḇ’am hastily mounted his chariot to flee to
Yerushalayim.
872

MELAḴIM 1

Thus Yisra’ĕl revolted against the house of
Dawiḏ to this day.
20 And it came to be when all Yisra’ĕl heard that
Yaroḇ’am had come back, they sent for him and
called him to the congregation, and appointed him
to reign over all Yisra’ĕl. There was none who
followed the house of Dawiḏ, except the tribe of
Yahuḏah only.
21 And Reḥaḇ’am came to Yerushalayim, and he
assembled all the house of Yahuḏah with the tribe
of Binyamin, one hundred and eighty thousand
chosen men of battle, to fight against the house of
Yisra’ĕl, to bring back the reign to Reḥaḇ’am son of
Shelomoh.
22 But the word of Elohim came to Shemayah the
man of Elohim, saying,
23 “Speak
to Reḥaḇ’am son of Shelomoh,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, and to all the house of
Yahuḏah and Binyamin, and to the rest of the
people, saying,
24 ‘Thus said hWhY, “Do not go up or fight against
your brothers the children of Yisra’ĕl. Let every man
return to his house, for this matter is from Me.” ’ ” So
they obeyed the word of hWhY, and turned back,
according to the word of hWhY.
25 And Yaroḇ’am built Sheḵem in the mountains of
Ephrayim, and dwelt there. And he went out from
there and built Penu’ĕl.
26 And Yaroḇ’am said in his heart, “Now the reign,
shall return to the house of Dawiḏ.
27 “If these people go up to do slaughterings in the
House of hWhY at Yerushalayim, then the heart of
this people shall turn back to their master,
Reḥaḇ’am sovereign of Yahuḏah, and they shall
19

873

1 KINGS

slay me and go back to Reḥaḇ’am sovereign of
Yahuḏah.”
28 So the sovereign took counsel and made two
calves of gold, and said to the people, “It is too much
for you to go up to Yerushalayim. See, your mighty
ones, O Yisra’ĕl, which brought you up from the land
of Mitsrayim!”
29 And he put up one in Bĕyth Ĕl, and the other he
put in Dan.
30 And this matter became a sin, for the people
went before the one as far as Dan.
31 And he made the house of high places, and
made priests from all sorts of people, who were not
of the sons of Lĕwi.
32 And Yaroḇ’am performed a festival on the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, like the Festival
that was in Yahuḏah, and he offered on the altar. So
he did at Bĕyth Ĕl, slaughtering to the calves that he
had made. And at Bĕyth Ĕl he appointed the priests
of the high places which he had made.
33 And he made offerings on the altar which he had
made at Bĕyth Ĕl on the fifteenth day of the eighth
month, in the month which he had devised in his
own heart. And he performed a festival for the
children of Yisra’ĕl, and offered on the altar and
burned incense.

13 And see, a man of Elohim went from Yahuḏah
to Bĕyth Ĕl by the word of hWhY, while Yaroḇ’am was
standing by the altar to burn incense.
2 And he cried out against the altar by the word of
hWhY, and said, “O altar, altar! Thus said hWhY,
‘See, a son is to be born to the house of Dawiḏ,
Yoshiyahu is his name. And on you he shall offer the
874

MELAḴIM 1

priests of the high places who burn incense on you,
and men’s bones be burned on you.’ ”
3 And he gave a sign the same day, saying, “This
is the sign which hWhY has spoken: See, the altar is
split apart, and the ashes on it are poured out.”
4 And it came to be when Sovereign Yaroḇ’am
heard the saying of the man of Elohim, who cried out
against the altar in Bĕyth Ĕl, that he stretched out
his hand from the altar, saying, “Seize him!” Then
his hand, which he stretched out toward him, dried
up, so that he was unable to bring it back to him.
5 And the altar was split apart, and the ashes
poured out from the altar, according to the sign
which the man of Elohim had given by the word of
hWhY.
6 And the sovereign answered and said to the man
of Elohim, “Please appease the face of hWhY your
Elohim, and pray for me, that my hand might be
restored to me.” And the man of Elohim appeased
the face of HWHY, and the sovereign’s hand was
restored to him, and became as it was before.
7 The sovereign then said to the man of Elohim,
“Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I
give you a gift.”
8 But the man of Elohim said to the sovereign, “If
you were to give me half your house, I do not go in
with you, nor do I eat bread nor drink water in this
place.
9 “For so He commanded me by the word of hWhY,
saying, ‘Do not eat bread, nor drink water, nor return
by the same way you came.’ ”
10 So he went another way and did not return by the
way he came to Bĕyth Ĕl.
11 And a certain old naḇi was dwelling in Bĕyth Ĕl,
and his sons came and told him all the works that
875

1 KINGS

the man of Elohim had done that day in Bĕyth Ĕl, the
words which he had spoken to the sovereign.
12 And their father said to them, “Which way did he
go?” And his sons had seen which way the man of
Elohim went who came from Yahuḏah.
13 And he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for
me.” And they saddled the donkey for him, and he
rode on it,
14 and went after the man of Elohim, and found him
sitting under a terebinth. And he said to him, “Are
you the man of Elohim who came from Yahuḏah?”
And he said, “I am.”
15 And he said to him, “Come home with me and
eat bread.”
16 And he said, “I am not able to return with you or
to go in with you, nor am I to eat bread or drink water
with you in this place.
17 “For word came to me by the word of hWhY, ‘Do
not eat bread nor drink water there, nor return by
going the way you came.’ ”
18 And he said to him, “I too am a naḇi like you, and
a messenger spoke to me by the word of hWhY,
saying, ‘Bring him back with you to your house, and
let him eat bread and drink water.’ ” But he lied to
him.
19 So he turned back with him, and ate bread in his
house, and drank water.
20 And it came to be, as they sat at the table, that
the word of hWhY came to the naḇi who had brought
him back,
21 and he cried out to the man of Elohim who came
from Yahuḏah, saying, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Because
you have rebelled against the mouth of hWhY, and
have not guarded the command which hWhY your
Elohim commanded you,
876

MELAḴIM 1

and turned back, and ate bread, and drank water
in the place of which He said to you, “Do not eat
bread nor drink water,” your body shall not enter the
burying-place of your fathers.’ ”
23 And it came to be, after he had eaten bread and
after he had drunk, that he saddled the donkey for
him, for the naḇi whom he had brought back.
24 And he went, and a lion met him on the way and
killed him. And his body was thrown on the way. And
the donkey was standing by it, and the lion was
standing by the body.
25 And see, men were passing by and saw the body
thrown on the way, while the lion was standing by
the body. And they went and reported it in the city
where the old naḇi dwelt.
26 And the naḇi who had brought him back from the
way heard it, and said, “It is the man of Elohim who
rebelled against the word of hWhY, and hWhY gave
him to the lion, and it tore him apart and killed him,
according to the word of hWhY which He spoke to
him.”
27 And he spoke to his sons, saying, “Saddle the
donkey for me.” And they saddled it.
28 So he went and found his body thrown on the
way, and the donkey and the lion standing by the
body. The lion had not eaten the body nor mauled
the donkey.
29 And the naḇi lifted up the body of the man of
Elohim, and placed it on the donkey, and brought it
back. And the old naḇi came to the city to mourn,
and to bury him,
30 and he placed his body in his own tomb. And they
lamented over him, saying, “Oh, my brother!”
31 And it came to be, after he had buried him, that
he spoke to his sons, saying, “When I am dead, then
22

877

1 KINGS

you shall bury me in the tomb where the man of
Elohim is buried. Lay my bones beside his bones.
32 “For the word which he cried out, by the word of
hWhY, against the altar in Bĕyth Ĕl, and against all
the houses of the high places which are in the cities
of Shomeron, shall certainly come to be.”
33 After this event Yaroḇ’am did not turn from his
evil way, but again he made priests from all sorts of
people for the high places. Whoever desired, he
ordained, to become one of the priests of the high
places.
34 And this matter was the sin of the house of
Yaroḇ’am, even to cut it off and destroy it from the
face of the earth.

14 At that time Aḇiyah the son of Yaroḇ’am
became sick.
2 And Yaroḇ’am said to his wife, “Please arise, and
disguise yourself, so they do not know that you are
the wife of Yaroḇ’am, and go to Shiloh. See,
Aḥiyahu the naḇi is there, who spoke that I would be
sovereign over this people.
3 “And you shall take with you ten loaves, and
cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him. Let him
declare to you what becomes of the child.”
4 And Yaroḇ’am’s wife did so, and rose up and
went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Aḥiyahu.
But Aḥiyahu was unable to see, for his eyes had
dimmed because of his age.
5 And hWhY had said to Aḥiyahu, “See, the wife of
Yaroḇ’am is coming to ask you a word about her
son, for he is sick. Speak to her thus and thus. For
it shall be, when she comes in, that she makes
herself strange.”
878

MELAḴIM 1

And it came to be, when Aḥiyahu heard the
sound of her footsteps as she came through the
door, he said, “Come in, wife of Yaroḇ’am. Why are
you making yourself strange? And I have been sent
to you with heaviness.
7 Go, say to Yaroḇ’am, ‘Thus said hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “Because I exalted you from among the
people, and made you ruler over My people Yisra’ĕl,
8 and tore the reign away from the house of Dawiḏ,
and gave it to you - and you have not been as My
servant Dawiḏ, who guarded My Commands and
who followed Me with all his heart, to do only what
was right in My eyes,
9 but you have done more evil than all who were
before you, for you have gone and made for yourself
other mighty ones and moulded images to provoke
Me, and have cast Me behind your back 10 therefore, see, I am bringing evil to the house of
Yaroḇ’am, and shall cut off from Yaroḇ’am every
male in Yisra’ĕl, whether shut up or left at large, and
sweep away the remnant of the house of Yaroḇ’am,
as one sweeps away dung until it is all gone.
11 Those of Yaroḇ’am who die in the city the dogs
eat, and those who die in the field the birds of the
shamayim eat, for hWhY has spoken it!” ’
12 “And you, arise, go to your house. When your
feet enter the city, the child shall die.
13 “And all Yisra’ĕl shall mourn for him and bury
him, for he is the only one of Yaroḇ’am who shall
come to the grave, because in him there is found a
good report toward hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, in the
house of Yaroḇ’am.
14 “And hWhY shall raise up for Himself a sovereign
over Yisra’ĕl who cuts off the house of Yaroḇ’am,
this day, and even now!
6

879

1 KINGS

“And hWhY shall smite Yisra’ĕl, as a reed is
shaken in the water, and shall pluck Yisra’ĕl from
this good land which He gave to their fathers, and
shall scatter them beyond the River, because they
made their Ashĕrim, provoking hWhY,
16 and He shall give Yisra’ĕl up, because of the sins
of Yaroḇ’am, who sinned and who made Yisra’ĕl
sin.”
17 And the wife of Yaroḇ’am rose up and went, and
came to Tirtsah. When she came to the threshold of
the house, the child died.
18 And they buried him, and all Yisra’ĕl lamented for
him, according to the word of hWhY which He spoke
through His servant Aḥiyahu the naḇi.
19 And the rest of the acts of Yaroḇ’am, how he
fought and how he reigned, see, they are written in
the book of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
20 And the days that Yaroḇ’am reigned was twentytwo years. So he slept with his fathers, and Naḏaḇ
his son reigned in his place.
21 Meanwhile Reḥaḇ’am son of Shelomoh reigned
in Yahuḏah. Reḥaḇ’am was forty-one years old
when he became sovereign, and he reigned
seventeen years in Yerushalayim, the city which
hWhY had chosen out of all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, to
put His Name there. And his mother’s name was
Na’amah the Ammonitess.
22 And Yahuḏah did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and
they provoked Him to jealousy with their sins which
they committed, more than all that their fathers had
done.
23 For they also built for themselves high places,
and pillars, and Ashĕrim on every high hill and under
every green tree.
15

880

MELAḴIM 1

And there were also cult prostitutes in the land.
They did according to all the abominations of the
gentiles which hWhY dispossessed before the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
25 And it came to be, in the fifth year of Sovereign
Reḥaḇ’am, that Shishaq sovereign of Mitsrayim
came up against Yerushalayim.
26 And he took away the treasures of the House of
hWhY and the treasures of the sovereign’s house, he
even took away all. And he took away all the shields
of gold which Shelomoh had made.
27 And Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am made shields of
bronze to replace them, and entrusted them into the
hands of the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the
entrance of the sovereign’s house.
28 And it came to be, whenever the sovereign went
into the House of hWhY, the guards would bring
them, then take them back into the guardroom.
29 And the rest of the acts of Reḥaḇ’am, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
30 And there was fighting between Reḥaḇ’am and
Yaroḇ’am all the days.
31 So Reḥaḇ’am slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ. And the
name of his mother was Na’amah the Ammonitess.
And Aḇiyam his son reigned in his place.
24

15 And in the eighteenth year of Sovereign
Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, Aḇiyam became sovereign
over Yahuḏah.
2 He reigned three years in Yerushalayim, and his
mother’s name was Ma’aḵah the granddaughter of
Aḇishalom.
881

1 KINGS

And he walked in all the sins of his father, which
he had done before him, and his heart was not
perfect to hWhY his Elohim, as was the heart of his
father Dawiḏ.
4 But for Dawiḏ’s sake hWhY his Elohim gave him
a lamp in Yerushalayim, to raise up his son after him
and by establishing Yerushalayim,
5 for Dawiḏ did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
and did not turn aside from all that He commanded
him all the days of his life, except in the matter of
Uriyah the Ḥittite.
6 And there was fighting between Reḥaḇ’am and
Yaroḇ’am all the days of his life.
7 And the rest of the acts of Aḇiyam, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah? And there was
fighting between Aḇiyam and Yaroḇ’am.
8 So Aḇiyam slept with his fathers, and they buried
him in the City of Dawiḏ. And Asa his son reigned in
his place.
9 And in the twentieth year of Yaroḇ’am sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl, Asa became sovereign over Yahuḏah.
10 And he reigned forty-one years in Yerushalayim,
and his grandmother’s name was Ma’aḵah the
granddaughter of Aḇishalom.
11 And Asa did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
as his father Dawiḏ had done,
12 and put away the cult prostitutes from the land,
and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
13 And he also removed Ma’aḵah his grandmother
from being sovereigness mother, because she had
made an abominable image for Ashĕrah. And Asa
cut down her abominable image and burned it by the
wadi Qiḏron.
3

882

MELAḴIM 1

But the high places were not removed. However,
Asa’s heart was perfect with hWhY all his days.
15 And he brought into the House of hWhY the
qodesh items of his father, and his own qodesh
items: silver and gold and utensils.
16 And there was fighting between Asa and Ba’asha
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl all their days.
17 And Ba’asha sovereign of Yisra’ĕl came up
against Yahuḏah, and built Ramah, to keep anyone
from going out or coming in to Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah.
18 And Asa took all the silver and gold that was left
in the treasuries of the House of hWhY and the
treasuries of the sovereign’s house, and gave them
into the hand of his servants. And Sovereign Asa
sent them to Ben-Haḏaḏ son of Taḇrimmon, son of
Ḥezyon, sovereign of Aram, who dwelt in
Dammeseq, saying,
19 “Let there be a covenant between you and me,
as there was between my father and your father.
Look, I have sent you a present of silver and gold.
Come, break your covenant with Ba’asha sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl, so that he withdraws from me.”
20 And Ben-Haḏaḏ listened to Sovereign Asa, and
sent the commanders of his armies against the cities
of Yisra’ĕl, and smote Iyon, and Dan, and Aḇĕl
Bĕyth Ma’aḵah, and all Kinneroth, with all the land
of Naphtali.
21 And it came to be, when Ba’asha heard it, that he
stopped building Ramah, and remained in Tirtsah.
22 Then Sovereign Asa summoned all Yahuḏah none was exempted - and they took away the stones
and timber of Ramah, which Ba’asha had used for
building. And with them Sovereign Asa built Geḇa of
Binyamin, and Mitspah.
14

883

1 KINGS

And the rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his
might, and all that he did, and the cities which he
built, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah? But in the time of his
old age he was diseased in his feet.
24 So Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with
his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ his father. And
Yahoshaphat his son reigned in his place.
25 And Naḏaḇ son of Yaroḇ’am became sovereign
over Yisra’ĕl in the second year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, and he reigned over Yisra’ĕl two years.
26 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and walked
in the way of his father, and in his sin by which he
had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
27 Then Ba’asha son of Aḥiyahu, of the house of
Yissasḵar, conspired against him. And Ba’asha
smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the
Pelishtites, for Naḏaḇ and all Yisra’ĕl had laid siege
to Gibbethon.
28 And Ba’asha killed him in the third year of Asa
sovereign of Yahuḏah, and reigned in his place.
29 And it came to be, when he became sovereign,
that he smote all the house of Yaroḇ’am. He did not
leave to Yaroḇ’am anyone breathing, until he had
destroyed him, according to the word of hWhY which
He had spoken by His servant Aḥiyahu the Shilonite,
30 because of the sins of Yaroḇ’am, which he had
sinned and by which he had made Yisra’ĕl sin,
because of his provocation with which he had
provoked hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
31 And the rest of the acts of Naḏaḇ, and all that he
did, are they not written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
32 And there was fighting between Asa and Ba’asha
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl all their days.
23

884

MELAḴIM 1

In the third year of Asa sovereign of Yahuḏah,
Ba’asha son of Aḥiyahu became sovereign over all
Yisra’ĕl in Tirtsah, and reigned twenty-four years.
34 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and walked
in the way of Yaroḇ’am, and in his sin by which he
had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
33

16 Then the word of hWhY came to Yahu son of
Ḥanani, against Ba’asha, saying,
2 “Because I raised you up out of the dust and
made you ruler over My people Yisra’ĕl, but you
walked in the way of Yaroḇ’am, and made My
people Yisra’ĕl sin, to provoke Me with their sins,
3 see, I am going to sweep away Ba’asha and his
house, and shall make your house like the house of
Yaroḇ’am the son of Neḇat.
4 “Anyone belonging to Ba’asha who dies in a city
the dogs eat, and anyone belonging to him who dies
in a field the birds of the shamayim eat.”
5 And the rest of the acts of Ba’asha, what he did,
and his might, are they not written in the book of the
annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
6 So Ba’asha slept with his fathers and was buried
in Tirtsah. And his son Ĕlah reigned in his place.
7 Moreover, the word of hWhY came by the naḇi
Yahu son of Ḥanani against Ba’asha and his house,
because of all the evil that he did in the eyes of hWhY
in provoking Him with the work of his hands, in being
like the house of Yaroḇ’am, and because he smote
them.
8 In the twenty-sixth year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Ĕlah son of Ba’asha began to reign over
Yisra’ĕl in Tirtsah, two years.
9 And his servant Zimri, commander of half his
chariots, conspired against him as he was in Tirtsah
885

1 KINGS

drinking himself drunk in the house of Artsa, who
was over his house in Tirtsah.
10 Then Zimri came in and smote him and killed him
in the twenty-seventh year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, and reigned in his place.
11 And it came to be, when he began to reign, as
soon as he was seated on his throne, that he smote
all the household of Ba’asha. He did not leave him
one male, neither of his relatives nor of his friends.
12 So Zimri destroyed the entire house of Ba’asha,
according to the word of hWhY, which He spoke
against Ba’asha by Yahu the naḇi,
13 for all the sins of Ba’asha and the sins of Ĕlah his
son, by which they had sinned and by which they
had made Yisra’ĕl sin, in provoking hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl with their worthlessnesses.
14 And the rest of the acts of Ĕlah, and all that he
did, are they not written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
15 In the twenty-seventh year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Zimri reigned seven days in Tirtsah. And
the people were encamped against Gibbethon,
which belonged to the Pelishtites.
16 And the people encamped heard and said, “Zimri
has conspired and also smote the sovereign.” So all
Yisra’ĕl appointed Omri, the commander of the
army, to reign over Yisra’ĕl that day in the camp.
17 And Omri went up, and all Yisra’ĕl with him, from
Gibbethon, and they besieged Tirtsah.
18 And it came to be, when Zimri saw that the city
was captured, that he went into a high place of the
sovereign’s house and burned the sovereign’s
house down upon himself with fire, and died,
19 because of the sins which he had sinned in doing
evil in the eyes of hWhY, in walking in the way of
886

MELAḴIM 1

Yaroḇ’am, and in his sin which he had committed to
make Yisra’ĕl sin.
20 And the rest of the acts of Zimri, and the
conspiracy he made, are they not written in the book
of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
21 Then the people of Yisra’ĕl were divided into two
parts: half of the people followed Tiḇni son of Ginath,
to make him reign, and half followed Omri.
22 But the people who followed Omri were stronger
than the people who followed Tiḇni son of Ginath.
And Tiḇni died and Omri reigned.
23 In the thirty-first year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Omri became sovereign over Yisra’ĕl,
and reigned twelve years. He reigned six years in
Tirtsah.
24 And he bought the hill of Shomeron from Shemer
for two kiḵars of silver, and built on the hill, and
called the name of the city which he built,
Shomeron, after the name of Shemer, owner of the
hill.
25 And Omri did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and did
evil more than all those before him,
26 and walked in all the ways of Yaroḇ’am son of
Neḇat, and in his sin by which he had made Yisra’ĕl
sin, provoking hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl with their
worthlessnesses.
27 And the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and
the might that he attained, are they not written in the
book of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
28 So Omri slept with his fathers and was buried in
Shomeron. And Aḥaḇ his son reigned in his place.
29 In the thirty-eighth year of Asa sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Aḥaḇ son of Omri became sovereign over
Yisra’ĕl. And Aḥaḇ son of Omri reigned over Yisra’ĕl
in Shomeron twenty-two years.
887

1 KINGS

And Aḥaḇ son of Omri did evil in the eyes of
hWhY, more than all those before him.
31 And it came to be, as though it had been a light
matter for him to walk in the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of
Neḇat, that he took as wife Izeḇel the daughter of
Ethba’al, sovereign of the Tsiḏonians. And he went
and served Ba’al and bowed himself to it,
32 and raised up an altar for Ba’al in the house of
Ba’al, which he had built in Shomeron.
33 And Aḥaḇ made an Ashĕrah. And Aḥaḇ did more
to provoke hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl than all the
sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl before him.
34 In his days Ḥi’ĕl of Bĕyth ha’Ĕli built Yeriḥo. He
laid its foundation at the cost of Aḇiram his first-born,
and at the cost of his youngest son Seḡuḇ he put up
its gates, according to the word of hWhY, which He
had spoken through Yahoshua son of Nun.
30

17 And Ĕliyahu the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of
Gil’aḏ, said to Aḥaḇ, “As hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
lives, before whom I stand, there shall be no dew or
rain these years, except at my word.”
2 And the word of hWhY came to him, saying,
3 “Go away from here and turn eastward, and hide
by the wadi Kerith, which flows into the Yardĕn.
4 “And it shall be that you drink from the stream,
and I shall command the ravens to feed you there.”
5 And he went and did according to the word of
hWhY, for he went and dwelt by the wadi Kerith,
which flows into the Yardĕn.
6 And the ravens brought him bread and meat in
the morning, and bread and meat in the evening,
and he drank from the stream.

888

MELAḴIM 1

And it came to be after a while that the stream
dried up, because there had been no rain in the
land.
8 Then the word of hWhY came to him, saying,
9 “Rise up, go to Tsarephath, which belongs to
Tsiḏon, and dwell there. See, I have commanded a
widow there to sustain you.”
10 And he rose up and went to Tsarephath, and
came to the gate of the city and saw a widow there
gathering sticks. And he called and said to her,
“Please bring me a little water in a vessel to drink.”
11 And as she was going to get it, he called and said
to her, “Please bring me a piece of bread in your
hand.”
12 And she said, “As hWhY your Elohim lives, I do
not have bread, only a handful of flour in a bin, and
a little oil in a jar. And see, I am gathering a couple
of sticks and shall go in and prepare it for myself and
my son, and we shall eat it, and die.”
13 And Ĕliyahu said to her, “Do not fear, go and do
as you have said, but make me a small cake from it
first, and bring to me. And afterward make some for
yourself and your son.
14 “For thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘The bin
of flour shall not be used up, nor the jar of oil run dry,
until the day hWhY sends rain on the earth.’ ”
15 So she went and did according to the word of
Ĕliyahu, and she and he and her household ate for
many days.
16 The bin of flour was not used up, nor did the jar
of oil run dry, according to the word of hWhY which
He spoke by Ĕliyahu.
17 And after these events it came to be that the son
of the woman who owned the house became sick.
7

889

1 KINGS

And his sickness was very severe until there was no
breath left in him.
18 And she said to Ĕliyahu, “What have I to do with
you, O man of Elohim? Have you come to me to
bring my wickedness to be remembered, and to kill
my son?”
19 And he said to her, “Give me your son.” So he
took him from her arms and took him to the upper
room where he was dwelling, and laid him on his
own bed,
20 and cried out to hWhY and said, “O hWhY my
Elohim, have You also brought evil on the widow
with whom I am sojourning, to kill her son?”
21 And he stretched himself out on the child three
times, and cried out to hWhY and said, “O hWhY my
Elohim, I pray, let the life of this child come back to
him.”
22 And hWhY heard the voice of Ĕliyahu, and the life
of the child came back to him, and he lived.
23 And Ĕliyahu took the child and brought him down
from the upper room into the house, and gave him
to his mother. And Ĕliyahu said, “See, your son
lives!”
24 And the woman said to Ĕliyahu, “Now by this I
know that you are a man of Elohim, and that the
word of hWhY in your mouth is truth.”

18 And after many days it came to be that the word
of hWhY came to Ĕliyahu, in the third year, saying,
“Go, present yourself to Aḥaḇ, and I give rain on the
earth.”
2 Thereupon Ĕliyahu went to present himself to
Aḥaḇ. And the scarcity of food in Shomeron was
severe.
890

MELAḴIM 1

And Aḥaḇ had called Oḇaḏyahu, who was over
his house. Now Oḇaḏyahu revered hWhY
exceedingly.
4 And it came to be, while Izeḇel cut down the
neḇi’im of hWhY, that Oḇaḏyahu had taken one
hundred neḇi’im and hidden them, fifty to a cave,
and had fed them with bread and water.
5 And Aḥaḇ had said to Oḇaḏyahu, “Go into the
land to all the springs of water and to all the wadis,
it could be that we find grass to keep the horses and
mules alive, and not have any livestock cut off.”
6 And they divided the land between them to pass
over it, Aḥaḇ went one way by himself, and
Oḇaḏyahu went another way by himself.
7 And as Oḇaḏyahu was on his way, then see,
Ĕliyahu met him. And he recognised him, and fell on
his face, and said, “Is that you, my master Ĕliyahu?”
8 And he answered him, “It is I. Go, say to your
master, ‘Ĕliyahu is here.’ ”
9 And he said, “What have I sinned, that you are
giving your servant into the hand of Aḥaḇ, to kill me?
10 “As hWhY your Elohim lives, there is no nation or
reign where my master has not sent to look for you.
And when they said, ‘He is not here,’ he made the
reign or nation swear that they could not find you.
11 “And now you say, ‘Go, say to your master,
“Ĕliyahu is here” ’!
12 “And it shall be, as soon as I am gone from you,
that the Ruaḥ of hWhY takes you away to a place I
do not know. And I shall come to report to Aḥaḇ, and
when he does not find you, he shall kill me. But I
your servant have revered hWhY from my youth.
13 “Was it not reported to my master what I did
when Izeḇel slew the neḇi’im of hWhY, how I hid one
3

891

1 KINGS

hundred men of the neḇi’im of hWhY, fifty to a cave,
and fed them with bread and water?
14 “And now you say, ‘Go, say to your master,
“Ĕliyahu is here!” ’ Then he shall slay me.”
15 And Ĕliyahu said, “As hWhY of hosts lives, before
whom I stand, I shall indeed show myself to him
today.”
16 Oḇaḏyahu then went to meet Aḥaḇ and informed
him, and Aḥaḇ went to meet Ĕliyahu.
17 And it came to be, when Aḥaḇ saw Ĕliyahu, that
Aḥaḇ said to him, “Is that you, O disturber of
Yisra’ĕl?”
18 And he answered, “I have not disturbed Yisra’ĕl,
but you and your father’s house, in that you have
forsaken the Commands of hWhY, and you have
followed the Ba’als.
19 “And now, send and gather all Yisra’ĕl to me on
Mount Karmel, the four hundred and fifty prophets
of Ba’al, and the four hundred prophets of Ashĕrah,
who eat at Izeḇel’s table.”
20 Aḥaḇ then sent for all the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
gathered the prophets on Mount Karmel.
21 And Ĕliyahu came to all the people, and said,
“How long would you keep hopping between two
opinions? If hWhY is Elohim, follow Him; and if Ba’al,
follow him.” But the people answered him not a
word.
22 And Ĕliyahu said to the people, “I alone am left a
naḇi of hWhY, but the prophets of Ba’al are four
hundred and fifty men.
23 “Now let them give us two bulls. And let them
choose one bull for themselves, and cut it in pieces,
and lay it on the wood, but light no fire. And I, I
prepare the other bull, and shall lay it on the wood,
but light no fire.
892

MELAḴIM 1

“And you shall call on the name of your mighty
one, and I, I call on the Name of hWhY. And the
Elohim who answers by fire, He is Elohim.” So all
the people answered and said, “The word is good.”
25 And Ĕliyahu said to the prophets of Ba’al,
“Choose one bull for yourselves and prepare it first,
for you are many. And call on the name of your
mighty one, but light no fire.”
26 So they took the bull which was given them, and
prepared it, and called on the name of Ba’al from
morning even until noon, saying, “O Ba’al, answer
us!” But there was no voice and no one answered.
And they leaped about the altar which they had
made.
27 And it came to be at noon, that Ĕliyahu taunted
them and said, “Cry aloud, for he is a mighty one; he
is meditating, or he is busy, or he is on a journey, or
it could be that he is asleep and has to be
awakened!”
28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves,
according to their ruling, with knives and spears,
until the blood gushed out on them.
29 And it came to be when midday was past, that
they naḇu until the time of bringing the offering. But
there was no voice and no one answered, and no
one paying attention.
30 Then Ĕliyahu said to all the people, “Come closer
to me.” And all the people came closer to him. And
he repaired the altar of hWhY that was broken down.
31 And Ĕliyahu took twelve stones, according to the
number of the tribes of the sons of Ya’aqoḇ, to
whom the word of hWhY had come, saying, “Yisra’ĕl
is your name.”
24

893

1 KINGS

And with the stones he built an altar in the Name
of hWhY. And he made a trench around the altar
large enough to hold two se’im of seed.
33 And he arranged the wood, and cut the bull in
pieces, and laid it on the wood, and said, “Fill four
jars with water, and pour it on the burnt offering and
on the wood.”
34 Then he said, “Do it a second time,” and they did
it a second time. And he said, “Do it a third time,”
and they did it a third time.
35 And the water flowed around the altar, and he
filled the trench with water too.
36 And it came to be, at the time of bringing the
offering, that Ĕliyahu the naḇi came near and said,
“hWhY Elohim of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Yisra’ĕl, let
it be known today: You are Elohim in Yisra’ĕl, and I
Your servant, have done all these matters by Your
word.
37 “Answer me, O hWhY, answer me, and let this
people know that You are hWhY Elohim, and You
shall turn their hearts back to You again.”
38 Then the fire of hWhY fell and consumed the
burnt offering, and the wood and the stones and the
dust, and it licked up the water that was in the
trench.
39 And all the people saw, and fell on their faces,
and said, “hWhY, He is the Elohim! hWhY, He is the
Elohim!”
40 And Ĕliyahu said to them, “Seize the prophets of
Ba’al! Do not let one of them escape!” So they
seized them, and Ĕliyahu brought them down to the
wadi Qishon and slew them there.
41 And Ĕliyahu said to Aḥaḇ, “Go up, eat and drink,
because of the sound of the noise of rain.”
32

894

MELAḴIM 1

And Aḥaḇ went up to eat and to drink. And
Ĕliyahu went up to the top of Karmel, and he bowed
down on the ground, and put his face between his
knees,
43 and said to his servant, “Go up, please, look
closely toward the sea.” So he went up and looked
closely, and said, “Not a speck.” And seven times he
said, “Go again.”
44 And it came to be the seventh time, that he said,
“See, a little cloud as small as a man’s hand is
coming out of the sea!” And he said, “Go up, say to
Aḥaḇ, ‘Hitch up, and go down before the rain stops
you.’ ”
45 And in the meantime, it came to be that the
shamayim became black with clouds and wind, and
there was a heavy rain, while Aḥaḇ rode and went
to Yizre’ĕl.
46 And the hand of hWhY was on Ĕliyahu. And he
girded up his loins and ran ahead of Aḥaḇ to the
entrance of Yizre’ĕl.
42

19 And when Aḥaḇ reported to Izeḇel all that
Ĕliyahu had done, also how he slew all the prophets
with the sword,
2 Izeḇel sent a messenger to Ĕliyahu, saying, “So
let the mighty ones do to me, and more also, if I do
not make your life as the life of one of them by
tomorrow about this time.”
3 And he feared, and rose up and ran for his life,
and went to Be’ĕrsheḇa, which belongs to Yahuḏah,
and left his servant there.
4 But he himself went a day’s journey into the
wilderness, and came and sat down under a broom
tree, and prayed that he might die, and said, “It is
895

1 KINGS

enough! Now, hWhY, take my life, for I am no better
than my fathers!”
5 And he lay and slept under a broom tree, and
see, a messenger touched him, and said to him,
“Rise, eat.”
6 And he looked and saw by his head a cake baked
on coals, and a jar of water. So he ate and drank,
and turned and lay down.
7 And the messenger of hWhY came back the
second time, and touched him, and said, “Rise, eat,
for the journey is too much for you.”
8 And he rose up and ate and drank, and went in
the strength of that food forty days and forty nights
as far as Ḥorĕḇ, the mountain of Elohim.
9 And there he went into a cave and spent the night
there. And see, the word of hWhY came to him, and
said to him, “What are you doing here, Ĕliyahu?”
10 And he said, “I have been very ardent for hWhY
Elohim of hosts, for the children of Yisra’ĕl have
forsaken Your Covenant. They have thrown down
Your altars, and they have slain Your neḇi’im with
the sword, and I am left, I alone, and they seek my
life, to take it.”
11 And He said, “Go out, and stand on the mountain
before hWhY.” And see, hWhY passed by, and a
great and strong wind tearing the mountains and
breaking the rocks in pieces before hWhY - HWHY
was not in the wind. And after the wind an
earthquake - hWhY was not in the earthquake,
12 and after the earthquake a fire - hWhY was not in
the fire, and after the fire a still small voice.
13 And it came to be, when Ĕliyahu heard it, that he
wrapped his face in his robe and went out and stood
at the cave opening. And see, a voice came to him,
and said, “What are you doing here, Ĕliyahu?”
896

MELAḴIM 1

And he said, “I have been very ardent for hWhY
Elohim of hosts, for the children of Yisra’ĕl have
forsaken Your Covenant. They have thrown down
Your altars, and they have slain Your neḇi’im with
the sword, and I am left, I alone, and they seek my
life, to take it.”
15 And hWhY said to him, “Go, return on your way
to the Wilderness of Dammeseq. And you shall go
in and anoint Ḥaza’ĕl as sovereign over Aram.
16 “And anoint Yahu son of Nimshi as sovereign
over Yisra’ĕl. And anoint Elisha son of Shaphat of
Aḇĕl Meḥolah as naḇi in your place.
17 “And it shall be that whoever escapes the sword
of Ḥaza’ĕl, Yahu kills. And whoever escapes from
the sword of Yahu, Elisha kills.
18 “And I shall leave seven thousand in Yisra’ĕl, all
whose knees have not bowed to Ba’al, and every
mouth that has not kissed him.”
19 And he went from there, and found Elisha son of
Shaphat, who was ploughing with twelve yokes
before him, and he was with the twelfth. And Ĕliyahu
passed by him and threw his robe on him.
20 And he left the oxen and ran after Ĕliyahu, and
said, “Please let me kiss my father and my mother,
and then I follow you.” And he said to him, “Go, turn
back, for what have I done to you?”
21 And he turned back from him, and took a yoke of
oxen and slaughtered them and cooked their flesh,
using the implements of the oxen, and gave it to the
people, and they ate. Then he rose up and followed
Ĕliyahu, and became his servant.
14

20 And Ben-Haḏaḏ the sovereign of Aram
gathered all his army, and there were thirty-two
sovereigns with him, with horses and chariots. And
897

1 KINGS

he went up and besieged Shomeron, and fought
against it.
2 And he sent messengers into the city to Aḥaḇ
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, and said to him, “Thus said
Ben-Haḏaḏ,
3 ‘Your silver and your gold are mine, and your
wives and children, the best, are mine.’ ”
4 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl answered and said,
“As you say, my master, O sovereign, I am yours,
and all that I have.”
5 And the messengers came back and said, “Thus
speaks Ben-Haḏaḏ, saying, ‘Indeed I have sent to
you, saying, “Give me your silver and your gold, your
wives and your children,”
6 but about this time tomorrow I shall send my
servants to you, and they shall search your house
and the houses of your servants. And it shall be, that
whatever is pleasing in your eyes they shall lay hold
of and take it.’ ”
7 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl called all the elders
of the land, and said, “Please know and see the evil
this one is seeking, for he sent to me for my wives,
and for my children, and for my silver, and for my
gold, and I did not refuse him.”
8 And all the elders and all the people said to him,
“Do not listen nor agree.”
9 So he said to the messengers of Ben-Haḏaḏ,
“Say to my master the sovereign, ‘All that you sent
for to your servant the first time I shall do, but this I
am unable to do.’ ” And the messengers went and
brought back word to him.
10 And Ben-Haḏaḏ sent to him and said, “The
mighty ones do so to me, and more also, if enough
dust is left of Shomeron for a handful for each of the
people who follow me.”
898

MELAḴIM 1

And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl answered and said,
“Speak, ‘Him who girds on should not boast like him
who lays it down.’ ”
12 And it came to be when this word was heard, as
he and the sovereigns were drinking in the booths,
that he said to his servants, “Ready yourselves.” So
they turned themselves against the city.
13 And see, a naḇi came near to Aḥaḇ sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, saying, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Have you seen
all this great company? See, I am giving it into your
hand today, and you shall know that I am HWHY.’ ”
14 And Aḥaḇ said, “By whom?” And he said, “Thus
said hWhY, ‘By the young rulers of the provinces.’ ”
And he said, “Who opens the attack?” Then he
answered, “You.”
15 And he mustered the young rulers of the
provinces, and there were two hundred and thirtytwo. And after them he mustered all the people, all
the children of Yisra’ĕl, seven thousand.
16 And they went out at noon, while Ben-Haḏaḏ and
the thirty-two sovereigns helping him were getting
drunk in the booths.
17 And the young rulers of the provinces went out
first. And Ben-Haḏaḏ sent out, and they reported to
him, saying, “Men have come out of Shomeron!”
18 Then he said, “If they have come out for peace,
seize them alive. And if they have come out for
battle, seize them alive.”
19 So these young rulers of the provinces went out
of the city with the army which followed them.
20 And each smote his man, so the Arameans fled,
and Yisra’ĕl pursued them. And Ben-Haḏaḏ the
sovereign of Aram escaped on a horse with the
horsemen.
11

899

1 KINGS

And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl went out and smote
the horses and chariots, and smote the Arameans,
a great smiting.
22 And the naḇi came to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
and said to him, “Go, strengthen yourself. And know
and see what you should do, for at the turn of the
year the sovereign of Aram is coming up against
you.”
23 And the servants of the sovereign of Aram said
to him, “Their mighty ones are mighty ones of the
hills. That is why they were stronger than we. But let
us fight against them in the plain - are we not
stronger than they?
24 “Now do this: Take away the sovereigns, each
from his position, and put officers in their places,
25 and number an army like the army that you have
lost, horse for horse and chariot for chariot, and let
us fight against them in the plain - are we not
stronger than they?” And he listened to their voice
and did so.
26 And it came to be, at the turn of the year, that
Ben-Haḏaḏ mustered the Arameans and went up to
Aphĕq to fight against Yisra’ĕl.
27 And the children of Yisra’ĕl were mustered and
were fed, and they went against them. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl encamped before them like two
little flocks of goats, while the Arameans filled the
land.
28 And there came near a man of Elohim and spoke
to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, and said, “Thus said
hWhY, ‘Because the Arameans have said, “hWhY is
Elohim of the hills, but He is not Elohim of the
valleys,” therefore I shall give all this great company
into your hand, and you shall know that I am HWHY.’
”
21

900

MELAḴIM 1

And they encamped opposite each other for
seven days. And it came to be that on the seventh
day the battle was joined. And the children of
Yisra’ĕl smote one hundred thousand foot soldiers
of the Arameans in one day.
30 And those that were left fled to Aphĕq, into the
city, and a wall fell on twenty-seven thousand of the
men who were left. And Ben-Haḏaḏ fled and went
into the city, into an inner room.
31 And his servants said to him, “See now, we have
heard that the sovereigns of the house of Yisra’ĕl
are kind sovereigns. Please, let us put sackcloth
around our waists and ropes around our heads, and
go out to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl. It could be that
he spares your life.”
32 So they girded sackcloth on their loins and put
ropes around their heads, and came to the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and said, “Your servant BenHaḏaḏ said, ‘Please let me live.’ ” And he said, “Is
he still alive? He is my brother.”
33 And the men divined and they quickly grasped it
and said, “Your brother Ben-Haḏaḏ.” And he said,
“Go, bring him.” So Ben-Haḏaḏ came out to him,
and he let him come up on the chariot.
34 And Ben-Haḏaḏ said to him, “The cities which my
father took from your father I return. And put up
marketplaces for yourself in Dammeseq, as my
father did in Shomeron.” And Aḥaḇ said, “I send you
away with this covenant.” And he made a covenant
with him and sent him away.
35 And a certain man of the sons of the neḇi’im said
to his neighbour by the word of hWhY, “Strike me,
please.” But the man refused to smite him.
36 Then he said to him, “Because you have not
obeyed the voice of hWhY, see, as soon as you
29

901

1 KINGS

leave me a lion shall smite you.” And when he left
him, a lion found him and smote him.
37 And he found another man, and said, “Strike me,
please.” So the man struck him, striking and
wounding.
38 Then the naḇi went and waited for the sovereign
by the way, and disguised himself with ashes on his
eyes.
39 And as the sovereign passed by, he cried out to
the sovereign and said, “Your servant went out into
the midst of the battle. And see, a man came over
and brought a man to me, and said, ‘Guard this man.
If he should in any way be missing, your life shall be
for his life, or else you shall pay a kiḵar of silver.’
40 “And it came to be, while your servant was busy
here and there, he was gone.” And the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl said to him, “Your judgment is right, you
yourself have decided it.”
41 Then he quickly removed the ashes from his
eyes. And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl recognised him
as one of the neḇi’im.
42 And he said to him, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Because
you have let slip out of your hand a man whom I put
under the ban, therefore your life shall go for his life,
and your people for his people.’ ”
43 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl went to his house
embittered and displeased, and came to Shomeron.

21 And it came to be, after these events, that
Naḇoth the Yizre’ĕlite had a vineyard which was in
Yizre’ĕl, near the palace of Aḥaḇ the sovereign of
Shomeron.
2 And Aḥaḇ spoke to Naḇoth, saying, “Give me
your vineyard, and it shall be a vegetable garden for
me, since it adjoins my house. And let me give you
902

MELAḴIM 1

a better vineyard for it. If it is good in your eyes, let
me give you its worth in silver.”
3 And Naḇoth said to Aḥaḇ, “Far be it from me, by
hWhY, that I should give the inheritance of my
fathers to you!”
4 And Aḥaḇ went into his house embittered and
displeased because of the word which Naḇoth the
Yizre’ĕlite had spoken to him when he said, “I do not
give you the inheritance of my fathers.” And he lay
down on his bed, and turned away his face, and did
not eat food.
5 And Izeḇel his wife came to him, and said to him,
“Why is your spirit so embittered that you are not
eating food?”
6 And he said to her, “Because I spoke to Naḇoth
the Yizre’ĕlite, and said to him, ‘Give me your
vineyard for silver, or if you prefer, I give you another
vineyard for it.’ But he answered, ‘I do not give you
my vineyard.’ ”
7 So Izeḇel his wife said to him, “Do you now rule
over Yisra’ĕl? Rise up, eat food, and let your heart
be glad. Let me give you the vineyard of Naḇoth the
Yizre’ĕlite!”
8 Then she wrote letters in Aḥaḇ’s name, and
sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters to the
elders and the nobles who were dwelling in the city
with Naḇoth.
9 And she wrote in the letters, saying, “Proclaim a
fast, and seat Naḇoth at the head of the people,
10 and seat two men, sons of Beliya’al before him
to bear witness against him, saying, ‘You have
blasphemed Elohim and the sovereign.’ Then you
shall take him out, and stone him to death.”
11 And the men of his city, the elders and nobles
who were inhabitants of his city, did as Izeḇel had
903

1 KINGS

sent to them, as it was written in the letters which
she had sent to them.
12 They proclaimed a fast, and seated Naḇoth at the
head of the people.
13 And the men, sons of Beliya’al, came in and sat
before him. And the men of Beliya’al witnessed
against him, against Naḇoth, in the presence of the
people, saying, “Naḇoth has blasphemed Elohim
and the sovereign!” So they took him outside the city
and stoned him with stones, and he died.
14 And they sent to Izeḇel, saying, “Naḇoth has
been stoned and is dead.”
15 And it came to be, when Izeḇel heard that Naḇoth
had been stoned and was dead, that Izeḇel said to
Aḥaḇ, “Arise, take possession of the vineyard of
Naḇoth the Yizre’ĕlite, which he refused to give you
for silver, for Naḇoth is not alive but dead.”
16 And it came to be, when Aḥaḇ heard that Naḇoth
was dead, that Aḥaḇ rose to go down to take
possession of the vineyard of Naḇoth the Yizre’ĕlite.
17 And the word of hWhY came to Ĕliyahu the
Tishbite, saying,
18 “Rise up, go down to meet Aḥaḇ sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, who lives in Shomeron. See, he is in the
vineyard of Naḇoth, where he has gone down to
take possession of it.
19 “And you shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “Have you murdered and also taken
possession?” ’ And you shall speak to him, saying,
‘Thus said hWhY, “In the place where dogs licked the
blood of Naḇoth, the dogs are going to lick your
blood, even yours.” ’ ”
20 And Aḥaḇ said to Ĕliyahu, “Have you found me,
O my enemy?” And he answered, “I have found you,
904

MELAḴIM 1

because you have sold yourself to do evil in the eyes
of HWHY:
21 ‘See, I am bringing evil on you, and shall
consume your descendants, and cut off from Aḥaḇ
every male in Yisra’ĕl, both those shut up and those
left at large,
22 and make your house like the house of Yaroḇ’am
son of Neḇat, and like the house of Ba’asha son of
Aḥiyahu, because of the provocation with which you
have provoked Me, and made Yisra’ĕl sin.’
23 “And also of Izeḇel hWhY has spoken, saying,
‘The dogs are going to eat Izeḇel by the wall of
Yizre’ĕl.’
24 “The dogs are going to eat whoever belongs to
Aḥaḇ and dies in the city, and the birds of the
shamayim are going to eat whoever dies in the
field.”
25 Indeed, there never was anyone like Aḥaḇ who
sold himself to do evil in the eyes of hWhY, because
Izeḇel his wife stirred him up.
26 And he acted very abominably in following idols,
according to all that the Amorites had done, whom
hWhY dispossessed from before the children of
Yisra’ĕl.
27 And it came to be, when Aḥaḇ heard those
words, that he tore his garments and put sackcloth
on his body, and fasted and lay in sackcloth, and
went softly.
28 And the word of hWhY came to Ĕliyahu the
Tishbite, saying,
29 “See how Aḥaḇ has humbled himself before Me?
Because he has humbled himself before Me, I do
not bring the evil in his days, but in the days of his
son I bring the evil on his house.”
905

1 KINGS

22 And they continued three years without fighting
between Aram and Yisra’ĕl.
2 And it came to be, in the third year, that
Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah came down to
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
3 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to his servants,
“Do you know that Ramoth in Gil’aḏ is ours, and we
are keeping silent from taking it out of the hand of
the sovereign of Aram!”
4 And he said to Yahoshaphat, “Do you go with me
to battle at Ramoth Gil’aḏ?” And Yahoshaphat said
to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, “I am as you are, my
people as your people, my horses as your horses.”
5 And Yahoshaphat said to the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, “Please, first inquire for the word of hWhY.”
6 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl gathered the
prophets, about four hundred men, and said to
them, “Do I go against Ramoth Gil’aḏ to battle, or do
I refrain?” And they said, “Go up, for hWhY gives it
into the hand of the sovereign.”
7 And Yahoshaphat said, “Is there not here a naḇi
of hWhY besides, that we might inquire of him?”
8 And
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to
Yahoshaphat, “There is still one man, Miḵayahu son
of Yimlah, to inquire of hWhY by him. But I hate him,
because he does not naḇa good concerning me, but
evil.” And Yahoshaphat said, “Let not the sovereign
say so!”
9 So the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl called an officer and
said, “Bring Miḵayahu son of Yimlah at once!”
10 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and Yahoshaphat
sovereign of Yahuḏah were sitting, each on his
throne, dressed in their robes, at a threshing-floor at
906

MELAḴIM 1

the entrance of the gate of Shomeron. And all the
prophets were naḇa before them.
11 And Tsiḏqiyahu son of Kena’anah had made
horns of iron for himself, and said, “Thus said hWhY,
‘With these you push the Arameans until they are
destroyed.’ ”
12 And all the prophets were naḇa so, saying, “Go
up to Ramoth Gil’aḏ and prosper, for hWhY shall give
it into the hand of the sovereign.”
13 And the messenger who had gone to call
Miḵayahu spoke to him, saying, “See now, the
words of the prophets with one mouth are good
towards the sovereign. Please, let your word be like
the word of one of them, and you shall speak good.”
14 And Miḵayahu said, “As hWhY lives, whatever
hWhY says to me, that I speak.”
15 And he came to the sovereign, and the sovereign
said to him, “Miḵayahu, do we go against Ramoth
Gil’aḏ to battle, or do we refrain?” And he answered
him, “Go and prosper, for hWhY shall give it into the
hand of the sovereign!”
16 And the sovereign said to him, “How many times
have I made you swear that you do not speak to me,
except the truth, in the Name of hWhY?”
17 So he said, “I saw all Yisra’ĕl scattered on the
mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And
hWhY said, ‘These have no master. Let everyone
return to his house in peace.’ ”
18 And
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to
Yahoshaphat, “Have I not said to you that he would
not naḇa good concerning me, but evil?”
19 Then he said, “Therefore hear the word of hWhY:
I saw hWhY sitting on His throne, and all the host of
the shamayim standing by Him, on His right and on
His left.
907

1 KINGS

“And hWhY said, ‘Who shall entice Aḥaḇ to go up
and fall at Ramoth Gil’aḏ?’ And this one said this,
and another said that.
21 “And a spirit came forward and stood before
hWhY, and said, ‘Let me entice him.’
22 “And hWhY said to him, ‘In what way?’ And he
said, ‘I shall go out and be a spirit of falsehood in the
mouth of all his prophets.’ And He said, ‘Entice him,
and also prevail. Go out and do so.’
23 “And now, see, hWhY has put a spirit of falsehood
in the mouth of all these prophets of yours, and
hWhY has spoken evil concerning you.”
24 And Tsiḏqiyahu son of Kena’anah came near
and struck Miḵayahu on the cheek, and said,
“Where did the spirit of hWhY pass over from me to
speak to you?”
25 And Miḵayahu said, “Look, you shall see on that
day when you go into an inner room to hide!”
26 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said, “Take
Miḵayahu, and return him to Amon the governor of
the city, and to Yo’ash son of the sovereign,
27 and say, ‘Thus said the sovereign, “Put this one
in prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and
water of affliction until I come in peace.” ’ ”
28 And Miḵayahu said, “If you ever return in peace,
hWhY has not spoken by me.” And he said, “Hear,
all you people!”
29 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and Yahoshaphat
the sovereign of Yahuḏah went up to Ramoth Gil’aḏ.
30 And
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to
Yahoshaphat, “Let me disguise myself and go into
battle, but you put on your robes.” So the sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl disguised himself and went into battle.
31 And the sovereign of Aram had commanded the
thirty-two commanders of his chariots, saying, “Fight
20

908

MELAḴIM 1

with no one small or great, but only with the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.”
32 And it came to be, when the commanders of the
chariots saw Yahoshaphat, that they said, “Indeed,
it is the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl!” So they turned aside
to fight against him, and Yahoshaphat cried out.
33 And it came to be, when the commanders of the
chariots saw that it was not the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl,
that they turned back from pursuing him.
34 And a man drew a bow in his simplicity, and
smote the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl between the joints of
his armour. And he said to the driver of his chariot,
“Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I am
wounded.”
35 And the battle increased that day. And the
sovereign was propped up in his chariot, facing the
Arameans, and died at evening, and the blood ran
out from the wound onto the floor of the chariot.
36 And as the sun was going down, a shout passed
through the camp, saying, “Each to his city, and
each to his land!”
37 So the sovereign died and was brought to
Shomeron, and they buried the sovereign in
Shomeron.
38 And when the chariot was washed at a pool in
Shomeron, the dogs licked up his blood, where the
whores bathed, according to the word of HWHY which
He had spoken.
39 And the rest of the acts of Aḥaḇ and all that he
did, and the ivory house which he built and all the
cities that he built, are they not written in the book of
the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
40 So Aḥaḇ slept with his fathers, and Aḥazyahu his
son reigned in his place.
909

1 KINGS

And Yahoshaphat son of Asa began to reign over
Yahuḏah in the fourth year of Aḥaḇ sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl.
42 Yahoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he
became sovereign, and he reigned twenty-five
years in Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was
Azuḇah the daughter of Shilḥi.
43 And he walked in all the ways of his father Asa.
He did not turn aside from them, doing what was
right in the eyes of hWhY. Only, the high places were
not taken away, for the people slaughtered and
burned incense on the high places.
44 And Yahoshaphat made peace with the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
45 And the rest of the acts of Yahoshaphat, and the
might that he showed, and how he fought, are they
not written in the Book of the Annals of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
46 And the rest of the cult prostitutes, who remained
in the days of his father Asa, he cleared out from the
land.
47 And there was then no sovereign in Eḏom, a
deputy was sovereign.
48 Yahoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to
Ophir for gold. However, they did not go, for the
ships were wrecked at Etsyon Geḇer.
49 Then
Aḥazyahu son of Aḥaḇ said to
Yahoshaphat, “Let my servants go with your
servants in the ships.” But Yahoshaphat would not.
50 So Yahoshaphat slept with fathers, and was
buried with fathers in the City of Dawiḏ his father.
And Yahoram his son reigned in his place.
51 Aḥazyahu son of Aḥaḇ began to reign over
Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron in the seventeenth year of
41

910

MELAḴIM 1

Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah, and reigned
two years over Yisra’ĕl,
52 and did evil in the eyes of HWHY, and walked in
the way of his father and in the way of his mother
and in the way of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who had
made Yisra’ĕl sin,
53 and served Ba’al and bowed himself to it, and
provoked hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, according to all
that his father had done.

911

2 KINGS

MELAḴIM 2
‫ מלכים ב‬B ּmYKLm

1 And Mo’aḇ revolted against Yisra’ĕl after the death
of Aḥaḇ.
2 And Aḥazyahu fell through the lattice of his upper
room in Shomeron, and was injured, and sent
messengers and said to them, “Go, inquire of Ba’alZeḇuḇ, the mighty one of Eqron, if I shall recover from
this injury.”
3 But a messenger of hWhY spoke to Ĕliyah the
Tishbite, “Rise up, go up to meet the messengers of
the sovereign of Shomeron, and say to them, ‘Is it
because there is no Elohim in Yisra’ĕl that you are
going to inquire of Ba’al-Zeḇuḇ, the mighty one of
Eqron?’
4 “So therefore, thus said hWhY, ‘You are not going
to get out of the bed to which you have gone up, for
you shall certainly die.’ ” And Ĕliyahu went.
5 And the messengers returned to him, and he said
to them, “Why have you come back?”
6 And they said to him, “A man came up to meet us,
and said to us, ‘Go, return to the sovereign who sent
you, and say to him, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Is it because
there is no Elohim in Yisra’ĕl that you are sending to
Ba’al-Zeḇuḇ, the mighty one of Eqron? Therefore you
are not going to get out of the bed to which you have
gone up, for you shall certainly die.’ ” ’ ”
7 And he said to them, “What was the man like who
came up to meet you and spoke to you these words?”
8 And they answered him, “He was a hairy man, and
wore a leather girdle around his waist.” And he said,
“It is Ĕliyahu the Tishbite.”
912

MELAḴIM 2

He then sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty
men. And he went up to him, and see, he was sitting
on the top of a hill. And he spoke to him, “Man of
Elohim, the sovereign has said, ‘Come down!’ ”
10 And Ĕliyahu answered and said to the captain of
fifty, “And if I am a man of Elohim, let fire come down
from the shamayim and consume you and your fifty
men.” And fire came down from the shamayim and
consumed him and his fifty.
11 He then sent another captain of fifty with his fifty
men to him. And he answered and said to him, “Man
of Elohim, this is what the sovereign said, ‘Come
down at once!’ ”
12 And Ĕliyahu answered and said to them, “If I am a
man of Elohim, let fire come down from the shamayim
and consume you and your fifty men.” And a fire of
Elohim came down from the shamayim and
consumed him and his fifty.
13 And again he sent a third captain of fifty with his
fifty men. And the third captain of fifty went up, and
came and fell on his knees before Ĕliyahu, and
pleaded with him, and said to him, “Man of Elohim,
please let my life and the life of these fifty servants of
yours be precious in your eyes.
14 “See, fire has come down from the shamayim and
burned up the first two captains of fifties with their
fifties. But let my life be precious in your eyes.”
15 And the Messenger of hWhY said to Ĕliyahu, “Go
down with him; do not be afraid of him.” So he rose
up and went down with him to the sovereign,
16 and spoke to him, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Because you
have sent messengers to inquire of Ba’al-Zeḇuḇ, the
mighty one of Eqron, is it because there is no Elohim
in Yisra’ĕl to inquire of His word? Therefore you are
9

913

2 KINGS

not going to get out of the bed to which you have gone
up, for you shall certainly die.’ ”
17 And he died, according to the word of hWhY which
Ĕliyahu had spoken. And Yahoram reigned in his
place, in the second year of Yahoram son of
Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah, for he had no
son.
18 And the rest of the acts of Aḥazyahu which he did,
are they not written in the book of the annals of the
sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?

2 And it came to be, when hWhY was to take up
Ĕliyahu to the shamayim by a whirlwind, that Ĕliyahu
went with Elisha from Gilgal.
2 And Ĕliyahu said to Elisha, “Please remain here,
for HWHY has sent me on to Bĕyth Ĕl.” And Elisha
said, “As HWHY lives, and as your being lives, I do not
leave you!” And they went down to Bĕyth Ĕl.
3 And the sons of the neḇi’im who were at Bĕyth Ĕl
came out to Elisha, and said to him, “Do you know
that HWHY is taking away your master from your
head?” And he said, “I also know, be silent!”
4 And Ĕliyahu said to him, “Elisha, please remain
here, for HWHY has sent me on to Yeriḥo.” And he
said, “As HWHY lives, and as your being lives, I do not
leave you!” And they came into Yeriḥo.
5 And the sons of the neḇi’im who were at Yeriḥo
came to Elisha and said to him, “Do you know that
HWHY is taking away your master from over you
today?” And he said, “I also know, be silent!”
6 And Ĕliyahu said to him, “Please remain here, for
HWHY has sent me on to the Yardĕn.” And he said,
“As HWHY lives, and as your being lives, I do not leave
you!” And the two of them went on.
914

MELAḴIM 2

And fifty men of the sons of the neḇi’im went and
stood facing them at a distance, while the two of them
stood by the Yardĕn.
8 And Ĕliyahu took his mantle, and rolled it up, and
struck the water. And it was divided this way and that,
so that the two of them passed over on dry ground.
9 And it came to be, when they had passed over,
that Ĕliyahu said to Elisha, “Ask what I am to do for
you, before I am taken away from you!” And Elisha
said, “Please let a double portion of your spirit be
upon me.”
10 And he said, “You have made it hard to ask, yet if
you see me when I am taken from you, it is yours; but
if not, it is not.”
11 And it came to be, as they continued on and
spoke, that see, a chariot of fire with horses of fire
which separated the two of them. And Ĕliyahu went
up by a whirlwind into the shamayim.
12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried out, “My father, my
father, the chariot of Yisra’ĕl and its horsemen!” And
he saw him no more. Then he took hold of his own
garments and tore them into two pieces.
13 And he took up the mantle of Ĕliyahu that had
fallen from him, and went back and stood by the bank
of the Yardĕn.
14 And he took the mantle of Ĕliyahu that had fallen
from him, and struck the water, and said, “Where is
HWHY Elohim of Ĕliyahu?” And he struck the water,
and it was divided this way and that, and Elisha
passed over.
15 And when the sons of the neḇi’im who were from
Yeriḥo saw him, they said, “The spirit of Ĕliyahu rests
on Elisha.” And they came to meet him, and bowed to
the ground before him.
7

915

2 KINGS

And they said to him, “Look, there are fifty strong
men with your servants. Please let them go and
search for your master, lest the Ruaḥ of HWHY has
taken him up and cast him upon some mountain or
into some valley.” And he said, “Send no one.”
17 But they pressed upon him till he was ashamed,
and he said, “Send.” So they sent fifty men, and they
searched for three days but did not find him.
18 And they returned to him, for he remained in
Yeriḥo, and he said to them, “Did I not say to you, ‘Do
not go’?”
19 And the men of the city said to Elisha, “Look, the
site of this city is good, as my master sees, but the
waters are spoilt, and the land barren.”
20 And he said, “Bring me a new bowl, and put salt in
it.” And they brought it to him.
21 And he went out to the source of the water, and
threw salt in there, and said, “Thus said HWHY, ‘I have
healed this water - no longer shall death or
barrenness come from it.’ ”
22 And the waters were healed, to this day, according
to the word of Elisha which he spoke.
23 And he went up from there to Bĕyth Ĕl. And as he
was going up the way, some youths came from the
city and mocked him, and said to him, “Go up,
baldhead! Go up, baldhead!”
24 And he turned around and looked at them, and
pronounced a curse on them in the Name of HWHY.
And two female bears came out of the forest and tore
to pieces forty-two of the youths.
25 And from there he went to Mount Karmel, and from
there he returned to Shomeron.
16

3 And Yahoram son of Aḥaḇ began to reign over
Yisra’ĕl at Shomeron in the eighteenth year of
916

MELAḴIM 2

Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah, and reigned
twelve years.
2 And he did evil in the eyes of HWHY, but not like his
father and mother; for he removed the statue of Ba’al
which his father had made.
3 But he clung to the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat,
who had made Yisra’ĕl sin. He did not turn away from
them.
4 And Mĕysha sovereign of Mo’aḇ was a sheepbreeder, and he paid the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl one
hundred thousand lambs and the wool of one
hundred thousand rams.
5 And it came to be, when Aḥaḇ died, that the
sovereign of Mo’aḇ revolted against the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl.
6 And Sovereign Yahoram went out of Shomeron at
that time and mustered all Yisra’ĕl.
7 And he went and sent to Yahoshaphat sovereign
of Yahuḏah, saying, “The sovereign of Mo’aḇ has
revolted against me. Do you go with me to fight
against Mo’aḇ?” And he said, “I go up. I am as you
are, my people as your people, my horses as your
horses.”
8 And he said, “Which way do we go up?” And he
said, “By way of the Wilderness of Eḏom.”
9 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl went, and the
sovereign of Yahuḏah and the sovereign of Eḏom,
and went round a journey of seven days. And there
was no water for the army, nor for the cattle that
followed them.
10 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said, “What? Has
hWhY called these three sovereigns to give them into
the hand of Mo’aḇ?”
11 And Yahoshaphat said, “Is there no naḇi of hWhY
here? Then let us inquire of hWhY through him.” One
917

2 KINGS

of the servants of the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl then
answered and said, “Elisha son of Shaphat is here,
who poured water out on the hands of Ĕliyahu.”
12 And Yahoshaphat said, “The word of hWhY is with
him.” And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and Yahoshaphat
and the sovereign of Eḏom went down to him.
13 And Elisha said to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, “What
have I to do with you? Go to the prophets of your
father and the prophets of your mother.” And the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to him, “No, for hWhY has
called these three sovereigns to give them into the
hand of Mo’aḇ.”
14 And Elisha said, “As hWhY of hosts lives, before
whom I stand, if it were not that I regard the presence
of Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah, I would not
look at you nor see you.
15 “And now, bring me a harpist.” And it came to be,
when the harpist played, that the hand of hWhY came
upon him.
16 And he said, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Make this wadi
ditches - ditches.’
17 “For thus said hWhY, ‘You are not going to see
wind, nor rain. Yet that wadi is to be filled with water,
so that you, your cattle, and your beasts shall drink.’
18 “And this shall be but a light matter in the eyes of
hWhY. And He shall give Mo’aḇ into your hand.
19 “And you shall smite every walled city and every
choice city, and shall cut down every good tree, and
stop up every fountain of water, and ruin every good
piece of land with stones.”
20 And it came to be in the morning, when the grain
offering was offered, that see, water came by way of
Eḏom, and the land was filled with water.
21 And when all Mo’aḇ heard that the sovereigns had
come up to fight against them, all who were able to
918

MELAḴIM 2

bear arms and older were gathered, and they stood
at the border.
22 And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun
was shining on the water. And the Mo’aḇites saw the
water on the other side as red as blood.
23 And they said, “This is blood. The sovereigns have
indeed struck swords and have killed one another.
And now, Mo’aḇ, to the spoil!”
24 And they came to the camp of Yisra’ĕl, and
Yisra’ĕl rose up and smote the Mo’aḇites, so that they
fled before them. And they entered their land, and
smote the Mo’aḇites.
25 And they broke down the cities, and each man
threw a stone on every good piece of land and filled
it. And they stopped up all the fountains of water and
cut down all the good trees, until the stones of Qir
Ḥaraseth were left. And the slingers went round and
smote it.
26 And when the sovereign of Mo’aḇ saw that the
battle was too strong for him, he took with him seven
hundred men who drew swords, to break through to
the sovereign of Eḏom, but they could not,
27 then took his eldest son who would have reigned
in his place, and offered him as a burnt offering upon
the wall. And there was great wrath against Yisra’ĕl.
And they left him and returned to the land.

4 And a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the
neḇi’im cried out to Elisha, saying, “Your servant my
husband is dead, and you know that your servant
revered HWHY. And the lender has come to take my two
sons to be his slaves.”
2 And Elisha said to her, “What should I do for you?
Inform me, what do you have in the house?” And she
919

2 KINGS

said, “Your female servant has none at all in the
house except a pot of oil.”
3 And
he said, “Go, borrow vessels from
everywhere, from all your neighbours, empty vessels,
do not get a few.
4 “And when you have come in, you shall shut the
door behind you and your sons. Then pour it into all
those vessels, and put aside the filled ones.”
5 So she went from him and shut the door behind
her and her sons, who brought to her, and she poured
it out.
6 And it came to be, when the vessels were filled,
that she said to her son, “Bring me another vessel.”
But he said to her, “There is not another vessel.” And
the oil ceased.
7 So she went and informed the man of Elohim, and
he said, “Go, sell the oil and pay your debt. And you
and your sons live on the rest.”
8 And it came to be on a day that Elisha went to
Shunĕm, where there was a prominent woman, and
she urged him to eat some food. And it came to be,
as often as he passed by, that he turned in there to
eat some food.
9 And she said to her husband, “Look, I know that
this is a qodesh man of Elohim, who passes by us
continually.
10 “Please, let us make a small upper room on the
wall, and let us put a bed for him there, and a table
and a chair and a lampstand. And it shall be,
whenever he comes to us, let him turn in there.”
11 And it came to be on a day that he came there,
and he turned in to the upper room and lay down
there.

920

MELAḴIM 2

And he said to Gĕḥazi his servant, “Call this
Shunammite woman.” So he called her, and she
stood before him.
13 And he said to him, “Please say to her, ‘Look, you
have gone to all this trouble for us. What is there to
be done for you? Should I speak on your behalf to the
sovereign or to the commander of the army?’ ” And
she answered, “I am dwelling among my own people.”
14 And he said, “What then is to be done for her?”
And Gĕḥazi answered, “Well, she has no son, and her
husband is old.”
15 And he said, “Call her.” So he called her, and she
stood in the doorway.
16 And he said, “About this time next year you shall
embrace a son.” And she said, “No, my master, man
of Elohim, do not lie to your female servant!”
17 And the woman conceived, and bore a son when
the appointed time had come, of which Elisha had
spoken to her.
18 And the child grew. And it came to be on a day that
he went out to his father, to the reapers,
19 and he said to his father, “My head, my head!” And
he said to a servant, “Take him to his mother.”
20 So he took him and brought him to his mother, and
he sat on her knees till noon, and died.
21 And she went up and laid him on the bed of the
man of Elohim, and shut him in, and went out.
22 And she called to her husband, and said, “Please
send me one of the young men and one of the
donkeys, so that I hurry to the man of Elohim and
return.”
23 And he said, “Why are you going to him today? It
is neither the New Moon nor the Shabbath.” And she
said, “It is well!”
12

921

2 KINGS

And she saddled the donkey and said to her
servant, “Drive and go, do not slow down, except I
speak to you.”
25 And she went, and came to the man of Elohim at
Mount Karmel. And it came to be, when the man of
Elohim saw her at a distance, that he said to his
servant Gĕḥazi, “See, the Shunammite woman.
26 “Please run now to meet her, and say to her, ‘Is it
well with you? Is it well with your husband? Is it well
with the child?’ ” And she answered, “It is well.”
27 And she came to the man of Elohim at the hill, and
she caught him by the feet, but Gĕḥazi came near to
push her away. But the man of Elohim said, “Leave
her alone, for her being is bitter in her, and hWhY has
hidden it from me, and has not revealed it to me.”
28 And she said, “Did I ask a son of my master? Did
I not say, ‘Do not deceive me’?”
29 And he said to Gĕḥazi, “Gird up your loins, and
take my staff in your hand, and go. When you meet
anyone, do not greet him, and when anyone greets
you, do not answer him. And you shall lay my staff on
the face of the child.”
30 And the mother of the child said, “As hWhY lives,
and as your being lives, I do not leave you.” And he
rose and followed her.
31 And Gĕḥazi went on ahead of them, and laid the
staff on the face of the child. But there was no voice
and there was no hearing, so he went back to meet
him, and reported to him, saying, “The child has not
awakened.”
32 And Elisha came into the house and saw the child
was dead, lying on his bed,
33 and he went in, and shut the door behind the two
of them, and prayed to HWHY.
24

922

MELAḴIM 2

And he went up and lay on the child, and put his
mouth on his mouth, and his eyes on his eyes, and
his hands on his hands, and stretched himself out on
the child, and the flesh of the child became warm.
35 And he returned and walked back and forth in the
house, then went up and stretched himself out on
him. And the child sneezed seven times, and the child
opened his eyes.
36 And he called Gĕḥazi and said, “Call this
Shunammite.” So he called her and she came in to
him, and he said, “Pick up your son.”
37 Then she went in and fell at his feet, and bowed
herself to the ground, and picked up her son and went
out.
38 And Elisha returned to Gilgal. And the scarcity of
food was in the land, and the sons of the neḇi’im were
sitting before him. And he said to his servant, “Put on
the large pot, and cook stew for the sons of the
neḇi’im.”
39 And one went out to the field to gather plants, and
found a wild vine, and gathered wild cucumbers from
it, filling the skirt of his garment, and came and sliced
them into the pot of stew, though they did not know
what they were.
40 They then served it to the men to eat. And it came
to be, as they were eating the stew, that they cried out
and said, “O man of Elohim, there is death in the pot!”
And they were unable to eat it.
41 And he said, “Then bring some flour.” And he put
it into the pot, and said, “Serve it to the people to eat.”
And there was no evil matter in the pot.
42 Now a man came from Ba’al Shalishah, and
brought the man of Elohim bread of the first-fruits,
twenty loaves of barley bread, and newly ripened
34

923

2 KINGS

grain in his knapsack. And he said, “Give it to the
people to eat.”
43 And his servant said, “What? Do I put this before
one hundred men?” And he said, “Give it to the
people to eat. For thus said hWhY, ‘Eat and have
some left over.’ ”
44 And he put it before them, and they ate and had
some left over, according to the word of HWHY.

5 And Na’aman, commander of the army of the
sovereign of Aram, was a great man in the eyes of his
master, and highly respected, because by him hWhY
had given deliverance to Aram. And though a brave
man, was leprous.
2 And the Arameans had gone out on raids, and had
brought back captive a young girl from the land of
Yisra’ĕl, and she served the wife of Na’aman.
3 And she said to her mistress, “If only my master
were with the naḇi who is in Shomeron! Then he
would recover him of his leprosy.”
4 And Na’aman went in and reported to his master,
saying, “Thus and thus spoke the girl who is from the
land of Yisra’ĕl.”
5 And the sovereign of Aram said, “Go, enter, and
let me send a letter to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.” And
he went and took with him ten kiḵars of silver, and six
thousand gold, and ten changes of garments.
6 And he brought the letter to the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, which said, “And now, when this letter comes
to you, see I have sent Na’aman my servant to you,
so that you shall recover him of his leprosy.”
7 And it came to be, when the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
read the letter, that he tore his garments and said,
“Am I Elohim, to kill and keep alive, that this man
sends a man to me to recover him of his leprosy? For
924

MELAḴIM 2

consider now, and see how he is seeking an occasion
with me!”
8 And it came to be, when Elisha the man of Elohim
heard that the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl had torn his
garments, that he sent to sovereign, saying, “Why
have you torn your garments? Please let him come to
me, so that he knows that there is a naḇi in Yisra’ĕl.”
9 So Na’aman came with his horses and chariot,
and he stood at the entrance of the house of Elisha.
10 And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, “Go,
and you shall wash seven times in the Yardĕn, that
your flesh might be restored to you, and be clean.”
11 But Na’aman became wroth, and went away and
said, “See, I said to myself, ‘He would certainly come
out to me, and stand and call on the Name of hWhY
his Elohim, and wave his hand over the place, and
recover, the leprosy.’
12 “Are not the Aḇanah and the Pharpar, the rivers of
Dammeseq, better than all the waters of Yisra’ĕl?
Could I not wash in them and be clean?” And he
turned and went away in a rage.
13 And his servants came near and spoke to him, and
said, “My father, if the naḇi had spoken to you a great
matter, would you not have done it? How much more
then, when he says to you, ‘Wash, and be clean’?”
14 Then he went down and dipped seven times in the
Yardĕn, according to the word of the man of Elohim.
And his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little
child, and he was clean.
15 And he returned to the man of Elohim, he and all
his company, and came and stood before him and
said, “See, now I know that there is no Elohim in all
the earth, except in Yisra’ĕl. And now, please take a
gift from your servant.”
925

2 KINGS

But he said, “As hWhY lives, before whom I stand,
I do not accept it.” And he pressed on him to accept
it, but he refused.
17 Then Na’aman said, “If not, please let your servant
be given two mule-loads of earth, for no longer is your
servant going to make a burnt offering and
slaughtering to other mighty ones, but to HWHY.
18 “HWHY grant forgiveness to your servant in this
matter: when my master goes into the house of
Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand,
and I bow down in the house of Rimmon; when I bow
down in the house of Rimmon, hWhY, please grant
forgiveness to your servant in this matter.”
19 Then he said to him, “Go in peace.” And he walked
from him some distance.
20 But Gĕḥazi, the servant of Elisha the man of
Elohim, said, “Look, my master has spared Na’aman
this Aramean, while not receiving from his hands what
he brought. But as hWhY lives, I shall run after him
and take whatever from him.”
21 And Gĕḥazi pursued Na’aman. And when
Na’aman saw him running after him, he came down
from the chariot to meet him, and said, “Is there
peace?”
22 And he said, “Peace. My master has sent me,
saying, ‘Look, even now two young men of the sons
of the neḇi’im have come to me from the mountains
of Ephrayim. Please give them a kiḵar of silver and
two changes of garments.’ ”
23 And Na’aman said, “Please accept two kiḵars.”
And he urged him, and bound two kiḵars of silver in
two bags, with two changes of garments, and handed
them to two of his servants. And they bore them
ahead of him.
16

926

MELAḴIM 2

And when he came to the high place, he took them
from their hand, and stored them away in the house,
and let the men go, and they went.
25 And he went in and stood before his master, and
Elisha said to him, “Where did you go, Gĕḥazi?” And
he said, “Your servant did not go anywhere.”
26 But he said to him, “Did not my heart go with you
when the man turned back from his chariot to meet
you? Is it time to accept silver and to accept
garments, and olive trees and vineyards, and sheep
and cattle, and male and female servants?
27 “So let the leprosy of Na’aman cling to you and
your descendants forever.” And he went out from him
as leprous as snow.
24

6 And the sons of the neḇi’im said to Elisha, “See, the
place where we dwell with you is too small for us.
2 “Please, let us go to the Yardĕn, and let every man
take a log from there, and let us make there a place
to dwell.” And he answered, “Go.”
3 Then the one said, “Please undertake to go with
your servants.” And he answered, “I shall go.”
4 And he went with them, and they came to the
Yardĕn, and they cut down trees.
5 And it came to be, as one was cutting down a tree,
that the iron axe head fell into the water. And he cried
out and said, “Oh my master!” For it was borrowed.
6 And the man of Elohim said, “Where did it fall?”
And he showed him the place. And he cut off a stick,
and threw it in there, and made the iron float.
7 And he said, “Pick it up.” And he reached out his
hand and took it.
8 And the sovereign of Aram was fighting against
Yisra’ĕl, and took counsel with his servants, saying,
“My camp is in such and such a place.”
927

2 KINGS

And the man of Elohim sent to the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl, saying, “Be on guard, do not pass this place,
for the Arameans are coming down there.”
10 The sovereign of Yisra’ĕl then sent to the place of
which the man of Elohim had spoken to him, and
warned him, so that he was on his guard there, not
once, and not twice.
11 And this greatly troubled the heart of the sovereign
of Aram. And he called his servants and said to them,
“Declare to me! Who of us is for the sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl?”
12 And one of his servants said, “None, my master,
O sovereign, for Elisha, the naḇi who is in Yisra’ĕl,
declares to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl the words that
you speak in your bedroom.”
13 And he said, “Go and see where he is, so that I
send and get him.” And it was reported to him, saying,
“See, he is in Dothan.”
14 And he sent horses and chariots and a great army
there, and they came by night and surrounded the
city.
15 And the servant of the man of Elohim rose early
and went out, and saw an army, surrounding the city
with horses and chariots. And his servant said to him,
“Oh, my master! What do we do?”
16 And he answered, “Do not fear, for those who are
with us are more than those who are with them.”
17 And Elisha prayed, and said, “hWhY, I pray, open
his eyes and let him see.” And hWhY opened the eyes
of the young man, and he looked and saw the
mountain covered with horses and chariots of fire all
around Elisha.
18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed
to hWhY, and said, “Strike this nation with blindness, I
9

928

MELAḴIM 2

pray.” And He struck them with blindness according
to the word of Elisha.
19 And Elisha said to them, “This is not the way, nor
is this the city. Follow me, and let me bring you to the
man whom you seek.” But he led them to Shomeron.
20 And it came to be, when they had come to
Shomeron, that Elisha said, “hWhY, open the eyes of
these men so that they see.” And hWhY opened their
eyes, and they looked and saw they were in the midst
of Shomeron!
21 And when the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl saw them, he
said to Elisha, “My father, should I smite? Should I
smite?”
22 But he said, “Do not smite. Do you smite those
whom you have taken captive with your sword and
your bow? Put food and water before them and let
them eat and drink and go to their master.”
23 And he made a great feast for them. And after they
ate and drank, he let them go, and they went to their
master. And the bands of Aramean raiders came no
more into the land of Yisra’ĕl.
24 And after this it came to be that Ben-Haḏaḏ the
sovereign of Aram mustered all his army, and went
up and besieged Shomeron.
25 And there was a great scarcity of food in
Shomeron. And see, they besieged it until a donkey’s
head went at eighty pieces of silver, and one-fourth of
a kab of dove droppings for five pieces of silver.
26 And it came to be, as the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl was
passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him,
saying, “Help, my master, O sovereign!”
27 And he said, “If hWhY does not help you, where do
I find help for you? From the threshing-floor or from
the winepress?”
929

2 KINGS

And the sovereign said to her, “What is troubling
you?” And she answered, “This woman said to me,
‘Give your son and let us eat him today, and tomorrow
we eat my son.’
29 “So we cooked my son, and ate him. And I said to
her on the next day, ‘Give your son and let us eat him.’
But she has hidden her son.”
30 And it came to be, when the sovereign heard the
words of the woman, that he tore his garments. And
as he passed by on the wall, the people looked and
saw the sackcloth on his body, underneath.
31 And he said, “Elohim do so to me and more also,
if the head of Elisha son of Shaphat remains on him
today.”
32 And Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders
were sitting with him. And the sovereign sent a man
ahead of him, but before the messenger came to him,
he said to the elders, “Do you see how this son of a
murderer has sent someone to take away my head?
Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door, and
hold him fast at the door. Is not the sound of his
master’s feet behind him?”
33 While he was still speaking with them, then see,
the messenger came down to him, and he said,
“Look, this evil is from hWhY, why should I wait for
hWhY any longer?”
28

7 And Elisha said, “Hear the word of hWhY. Thus said
hWhY, ‘About this time tomorrow a se’ah of fine flour
for a sheqel, and two se’im of barley for a sheqel, at
the gate of Shomeron.’ ”
2 And an officer on whose hand the sovereign
leaned answered the man of Elohim and said, “Look,
if hWhY is making windows in the shamayim, shall this
930

MELAḴIM 2

word come true?” And he said, “Look, you are about
to see it with your eyes, but not eat of it.”
3 And there were four leprous men at the entrance
of the gate. And they said to each other, “Why are we
sitting here until we are dead?
4 “If we shall say, ‘Let us go into the city,’ the scarcity
of food is in the city, and we shall die there. And if we
sit here, we shall die. And now, come, let us surrender
to the army of the Arameans. If they keep us alive, we
live. And if they kill us, we shall die.”
5 So at twilight they rose up to go to the camp of the
Arameans. And when they had come to the outskirts
of the Aramean camp, look, no one was there.
6 For hWhY had caused the army of the Arameans
to hear the noise of chariots and the noise of horses,
the noise of a great army, and they said to each other,
“Look, the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl has hired against us
the sovereigns of the Ḥittites and the sovereigns of
the Mitsrites to come against us!”
7 So they rose up and fled at twilight, and left the
camp as it is - their tents, and their horses, and their
donkeys - and they fled for their lives.
8 And when these lepers came to the outskirts of the
camp, they went into one tent and ate and drank, and
took from there silver and gold and garments, and
went and hid them. And they came back and went into
another tent, and took from there and went and hid it.
9 Then they said to each other, “We are not doing
right. This day is a day of good news, and we are
keeping silent. And if we wait until morning light, then
wickedness shall come upon us. And now, come, let
us go and inform the house of the sovereign.”
10 And they came and called to the gatekeepers of
the city, and informed them, saying, “We went to the
camp of Aram, and look, there is not a man or a voice
931

2 KINGS

of man, only horses tied and donkeys tied, and the
tents as they were.”
11 And the gatekeepers called, and they informed the
house of the sovereign inside.
12 So the sovereign rose up in the night and said to
his servants, “Let me now inform you what the
Arameans have done to us. They know that we are
starving, so they have gone out of the camp to hide
themselves in the field, saying, ‘When they come out
of the city, we shall catch them alive, and enter into
the city.’ ”
13 And one of his servants answered and said,
“Please, let some take five of the horses that are left
in the city. Look, they are like the entire crowd of
Yisra’ĕl that are left in it, look, they are like the entire
crowd of Yisra’ĕl left from those who are consumed.
So let us send and see.”
14 They then took two chariots with horses. And the
sovereign sent them in the direction of the camp of
Aram, saying, “Go and see.”
15 And they went after them to the Yardĕn. And look,
all the way was littered with garments and weapons
which the Arameans had thrown away in their haste.
And the messengers returned and reported to the
sovereign.
16 Then the people went out and plundered the camp
of Aram. So a se’ah of fine flour was for a sheqel, and
two se’im of barley for a sheqel, according to the word
of hWhY.
17 And the sovereign had appointed the officer on
whose hand he leaned to be in charge of the gate.
But the people trampled him in the gate, and he died,
as the man of Elohim had said, who spoke when the
sovereign came down to him.
932

MELAḴIM 2

And it came to be, as the man of Elohim had
spoken to the sovereign, saying, “Two se’im of barley
for a sheqel, and a se’ah of fine flour for a sheqel, at
this time tomorrow in the gate of Shomeron,”
19 that officer answered the man of Elohim, and said,
“Now look, if hWhY is making windows in the
shamayim, is it according to this word?” And he had
said, “Look, you are about to see it with your eyes, but
not eat of it.”
20 And so it came to be for him, for the people
trampled him in the gate, and he died.
18

8 And Elisha spoke to the woman whose son he had
restored to life, saying, “Rise up and go, you and your
household, and sojourn wherever you do sojourn, for
HWHY has called for a scarcity of food, and also, it is
coming upon the land for seven years.”
2 And the woman rose up and did according to the
word of the man of Elohim, and she went with her
household and sojourned in the land of the
Pelishtites, seven years.
3 And it came to be, at the end of seven years, that
the woman returned from the land of the Pelishtites.
And she went to cry out to the sovereign for her house
and for her land.
4 And the sovereign was speaking to Gĕḥazi, the
servant of the man of Elohim, saying, “Please relate
to me all the great matters Elisha has done.”
5 And it came to be, as he was relating to the
sovereign how he had restored the dead to life, that
see, the woman whose son he had restored to life,
was crying out to the sovereign for her house and for
her land. And Gĕḥazi said, “My master, O sovereign,
this is the woman, and this is her son whom Elisha
restored to life.”
933

2 KINGS

So the sovereign asked the woman, and she
related to him. And the sovereign appointed a certain
eunuch for her, saying, “Return all that was hers, and
all the increase of the field from the day that she left
the land until now.”
7 And Elisha came to Dammeseq, and Ben-Haḏaḏ
sovereign of Aram was sick. And it was reported to
him, saying, “The man of Elohim has come here.”
8 And the sovereign said to Ḥaza’ĕl, “Take a present
in your hand, and go to meet the man of Elohim, and
inquire of hWhY by him, saying, ‘Do I recover from this
sickness?’ ”
9 And Ḥaza’ĕl went to meet him and took a present
with him, of all the goods of Dammeseq, forty camelloads. And he came and stood before him, and said,
“Your son Ben-Haḏaḏ sovereign of Aram has sent me
to you, saying, ‘Do I recover from this sickness?’ ”
10 And Elisha said to him, “Go, say to him, ‘You shall
certainly recover.’ But hWhY has shown me that he
shall certainly die.”
11 And he looked steadily until he was ashamed.
Then the man of Elohim wept.
12 And Ḥaza’ĕl said, “Why is my master weeping?”
And he answered, “Because I know the evil that you
are going to do to the children of Yisra’ĕl: Lighting
their strongholds on fire, and slaying their young men
with the sword, and dashing their children, and ripping
open their women with child.”
13 And Ḥaza’ĕl said, “But what is your servant - a
dog, that he should perform this great matter?” And
Elisha answered, “hWhY has shown that you are to be
sovereign over Aram!”
14 And he left Elisha, and came to his master, who
said to him, “What did Elisha say to you?” And he
6

934

MELAḴIM 2

answered, “He said to me that you shall certainly
recover.”
15 And on the next day it came to be that he took a
thick cloth and dipped it in water, and spread it over
his face so that he died. And Ḥaza’ĕl reigned in his
place.
16 And in the fifth year of Yahoram son of Aḥaḇ
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl - Yahoshaphat was sovereign of
Yahuḏah - Yahoram son of Yahoshaphat began to
reign as sovereign of Yahuḏah.
17 He was thirty-two years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned eight years in Yerushalayim.
18 And he walked in the way of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl, as the house of Aḥaḇ had done, for the
daughter of Aḥaḇ was his wife. And he did evil in the
eyes of HWHY.
19 However, HWHY would not destroy Yahuḏah, for
the sake of Dawiḏ His servant, as He promised him
to give a lamp to him and his sons forever.
20 In his days Eḏom revolted from under the hand of
Yahuḏah, and made a sovereign over themselves.
21 And Yoram passed over to Tsa’ir, and all his
chariots with him. And he rose by night and smote the
Eḏomites who had surrounded him and the
commanders of the chariots, but his people fled to
their tents.
22 Yet Eḏom has been in revolt from under the hand
of Yahuḏah to this day. Then Liḇnah revolted at the
same time.
23 And the rest of the acts of Yoram, and all that he
did, are they not written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
24 So Yoram slept with his fathers, and was buried
with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ. And Aḥazyahu
his son reigned in his place.
935

2 KINGS

In the twelfth year of Yoram son of Aḥaḇ sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl, Aḥazyahu son of Yahoram sovereign of
Yahuḏah began to reign.
26 Aḥazyahu was twenty-two years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned one year in
Yerushalayim. And the name of his mother was
Athalyahu, the granddaughter of Omri, sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl.
27 And he walked in the way of the house of Aḥaḇ,
and did evil in the eyes of hWhY, as the house of Aḥaḇ
had done, for he was the son-in-law of the house of
Aḥaḇ.
28 And he went with Yoram son of Aḥaḇ to battle
against Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram at Ramoth Gil’aḏ,
and the Arameans struck Yoram.
29 And Sovereign Yoram went back to Yizre’ĕl to
recover from the wounds with which the Arameans
had struck him at Ramah, when he fought against
Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram. Then Aḥazyahu son of
Yahoram, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, went down to
see Yoram son of Aḥaḇ in Yizre’ĕl, for he was sick.
25

9 And Elisha the naḇi called one of the sons of the
neḇi’im, and said to him, “Gird your loins and take this
flask of oil in your hand, and go to Ramoth Gil’aḏ.
2 “And you shall go there and look there for Yahu
son of Yahoshaphat, son of Nimshi, and go in and
make him rise up from among his brothers, and take
him to an inner room,
3 “and take the flask of oil, and pour it on his head,
and say, ‘Thus said HWHY, “I have anointed you
sovereign over Yisra’ĕl.” ’ Then you shall open the
door and flee, and do not wait.”
4 So the young man - the young man the naḇi - went
to Ramoth Gil’aḏ,
936

MELAḴIM 2

and came in and saw the commanders of the army
sitting. And he said, “I have a message for you, O
commander.” And Yahu said, “For which one of us?”
And he said, “For you, commander.”
6 And he rose up and went into the house. And he
poured the oil on his head, and said to him, “Thus said
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I anointed you sovereign
over people of hWhY, over Yisra’ĕl.
7 ‘And you shall smite the house of Aḥaḇ your
master, and I shall avenge the blood of My servants
the neḇi’im, and the blood of all the servants of hWhY,
at the hand of Izeḇel.
8 ‘And all the house of Aḥaḇ shall perish. And I shall
cut off from Aḥaḇ all the males in Yisra’ĕl, both those
shut up and those left at large.
9 ‘And I shall give up the house of Aḥaḇ like the
house of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, and like the house
of Ba’asha son of Aḥiyahu.
10 ‘And the dogs are going to eat Izeḇel in the portion
of Yizre’ĕl, with none to bury her.’ ” Then he opened
the door and fled.
11 And Yahu came out to the servants of his master,
and one said to him, “Is there peace? Why did this
madman come to you?” And he said to them, “You
know the man and his talk.”
12 And they said, “A lie! Reveal it to us now.” So he
said, “Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying, ‘Thus
said hWhY, “I have anointed you sovereign over
Yisra’ĕl.” ’ ”
13 And they hurried, and each one took his garment
and put it under him on the top of the steps. And they
blew a ram’s horn, saying, “Yahu reigns!”
14 Thus Yahu son of Yahoshaphat, son of Nimshi,
conspired against Yoram - now Yoram had been
5

937

2 KINGS

guarding Ramoth Gil’aḏ, he and all Yisra’ĕl, against
Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram.
15 But Sovereign Yahoram had returned to Yizre’ĕl to
recover from the wounds with which the Arameans
had smitten him when he fought with Ḥaza’ĕl
sovereign of Aram - Yahu now said, “If this is your
desire, let no one leave or escape from the city to go
and make it known in Yizre’ĕl!”
16 And Yahu rode in a chariot and went to Yizre’ĕl,
for Yoram was laid up there. And Aḥazyahu sovereign
of Yahuḏah had come down to see Yoram.
17 And a watchman stood on the tower in Yizre’ĕl,
and he saw the company of Yahu as he came, and
said, “I see a company of men.” And Yahoram said,
“Get a horseman and send him to meet them, and let
him say, ‘Is there peace?’ ”
18 And the horseman went to meet him, and said,
“Thus said the sovereign, ‘Is there peace?’ ” And
Yahu said, “What have you to do with peace? Turn
around and follow me.” And the watchman spoke,
saying, “The messenger went to them, but is not
coming back.”
19 Then he sent out a second horseman who came
to them, and said, “Thus said the sovereign, ‘Is there
peace?’ ” And Yahu answered, “What have you to do
with peace? Turn around and follow me.”
20 And the watchman spoke, saying, “He went up to
them and is not coming back. And the driving is like
the driving of Yahu son of Nimshi, for he drives
madly!”
21 Then Yahoram said, “Hitch up.” And his chariot
was hitched up. And Yahoram sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
and Aḥazyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah went out, each
in his chariot. And they went out to meet Yahu, and
met him on the portion of Naḇoth the Yizre’ĕlite.
938

MELAḴIM 2

And it came to be, when Yahoram saw Yahu, that
he said, “Is there peace, Yahu?” But he answered,
“What peace, as long as the whorings of your mother
Izeḇel and her witchcraft are so many?”
23 Thereupon Yahoram turned his hands around and
fled, and said to Aḥazyahu, “Treachery, O Aḥazyahu!”
24 And Yahu drew his bow and shot Yahoram
between his arms. And the arrow came out at his
heart, and he sank down in his chariot.
25 And said to Biḏqar his officer, “Take him up, and
throw him into the portion of the field of Naḇoth the
Yizre’ĕlite. Remember how you and I were riding
together behind Aḥaḇ his father, and hWhY lifted up
this pronouncement against him:
26 ‘Have I not seen the blood of Naḇoth and the blood
of his sons last night?’ declares hWhY. ‘And I shall
repay you in this portion,’ declares hWhY. And now,
take up, throw him on the portion, according to the
word of HWHY.”
27 And Aḥazyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah saw this and
fled up the way to Bĕyth ha’Gan. And Yahu pursued
him, and said, “Smite him, him too, in the chariot,” at
the ascent to Gur, which is by Yiḇle’am. And he fled
to Meḡiddo, and died there.
28 Then his servants conveyed him in the chariot to
Yerushalayim, and buried him in his tomb with his
fathers in the City of Dawiḏ.
29 And in the eleventh year of Yoram son of Aḥaḇ,
Aḥazyahu began to reign over Yahuḏah.
30 And Yahu came to Yizre’ĕl, and Izeḇel heard of it.
And she put paint on her eyes and adorned her head,
and looked through a window.
31 And as Yahu came to the gate, she said, “Is it
peace, Zimri, slayer of your master?”
22

939

2 KINGS

And he lifted up his face to the window and said,
“Who is with me? Who?” And two, three eunuchs
looked down to him.
33 And he said, “Throw her down.” And they threw
her down, and some of her blood spattered on the
wall and on the horses, and he trampled her under
foot.
34 And he went in, and he ate and drank, and said,
“Go now, see to this cursed one, and bury her, for she
was a sovereign’s daughter.”
35 So they went to bury her, but all they found of her
was the skull and the feet and the palms of the hands.
36 And they came back and informed him. And he
said, “This is the word of hWhY, which He spoke by
His servant Ĕliyahu the Tishbite, saying, ‘In the
portion of Yizre’ĕl dogs are going to eat the flesh of
Izeḇel,
37 and the corpse of Izeḇel shall be as dung on the
surface of the field, in the portion of Yizre’ĕl, so that
they do not say, “This is Izeḇel.” ’ ”
32

10 And Aḥaḇ had seventy sons in Shomeron. And
Yahu wrote letters and sent to Shomeron, to the rulers
of Yizre’ĕl, to the elders, and to the guardians of Aḥaḇ,
saying,
2 “And now, when this letter comes to you, since
your master’s sons are with you, and you have
chariots and horses, and a walled city, and weapons,
3 choose the best and most upright of your master’s
sons, and appoint him on his father’s throne, and fight
for your master’s house.”
4 And they were greatly afraid, and said, “Look, two
sovereigns have not stood before him, how do we
stand, we?”
940

MELAḴIM 2

And he who was over the house, and he who was
over the city, the elders also, and the guardians, sent
to Yahu, saying, “We are your servants, and all that
you say to us we do. We do not appoint anyone to
reign. Do what is good in your eyes.”
6 And he wrote a second letter to them, saying, “If
you are for me, and if you obey my voice, take the
heads of the men, your master’s sons, and come to
me at Yizre’ĕl by this time tomorrow.” Now the
sovereign’s sons, seventy beings, were with the great
men of the city, who brought them up.
7 And it came to be, when the letter came to them,
that they took the sovereign’s sons and slew them,
seventy men, and put their heads in baskets and sent
them to him at Yizre’ĕl.
8 Then a messenger came and informed him,
saying, “They have brought the heads of the
sovereign’s sons.” And he said, “Make them two
heaps at the entrance of the gate until morning.”
9 And it came to be, in the morning, that he went out
and stood, and said to all the people, “You are
righteous. Look, I conspired against my master and
slew him, but who smote all these?
10 “Know now that not one word of hWhY which hWhY
spoke concerning the house of Aḥaḇ falls to the
ground, for hWhY has done what He spoke by His
servant Ĕliyahu.”
11 And Yahu smote all those left of the house of Aḥaḇ
in Yizre’ĕl, and all his great men and his friends and
his priests, until he left him without a survivor.
12 And he rose up to go, and went to Shomeron. On
the way, at Bĕyth Ĕqeḏ of the Shepherds,
13 Yahu met the brothers of Aḥazyahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, and said, “Who are you?” And they
answered, “We are brothers of Aḥazyahu, and we
5

941

2 KINGS

have come down to greet the sons of the sovereign
and the sons of the sovereigness mother.”
14 And he said, “Take them alive!” So they took them
alive, and slew them at the well of Bĕyth Ĕqeḏ, fortytwo men, and he left none of them.
15 And he left there and met Yahonaḏaḇ son of
Rĕḵaḇ, coming to meet him, and baraḵ him and said
to him, “Is your heart right, as my heart is toward your
heart?” And Yahonaḏaḇ answered, “It is.” “If it is, give
me your hand.” And he gave him his hand, and he
took him up to him into the chariot.
16 And he said, “Come with me, and see my ardour
for hWhY.” And they made him ride in his chariot.
17 And he came to Shomeron, and smote all those
left of Aḥaḇ in Shomeron, till he had destroyed them,
according to the word of hWhY which He spoke to
Ĕliyahu.
18 And Yahu gathered all the people and said to
them, “Aḥaḇ served Ba’al a little; Yahu serves him
much.
19 “And now, call to me all the prophets of Ba’al, all
his servants, and all his priests. Let no one be
missing, for I have a great slaughtering to make to
Ba’al. Anyone who is lacking shall not live!” But Yahu
did this deceptively, in order to destroy the servants
of Ba’al.
20 And Yahu said, “Proclaim an assembly for Ba’al.”
So they proclaimed it.
21 And Yahu sent throughout all Yisra’ĕl, and all the
servants of Ba’al came, so that there was not a man
left who did not come. And they came into the house
of Ba’al, and the house of Ba’al was filled from end to
end.

942

MELAḴIM 2

And he said to him who was over the wardrobe,
“Bring out garments for all the servants of Ba’al.” And
he brought out garments for them.
23 And Yahu and Yahonaḏaḇ son of Rĕḵaḇ went into
the house of Ba’al, and said to the servants of Ba’al,
“Search and see that no servants of hWhY are here
with you, but only the servants of Ba’al.”
24 So they went in to make offerings and burnt
offerings. Now Yahu had appointed for himself eighty
men on the outside, and had said, “The man who lets
escape of the men whom I have brought into your
hands - his life for his life!”
25 And it came to be, when he had finished making
the burnt offering, Yahu said to the guard and to the
officers, “Go in, smite them, let no one come out!” And
they smote them with the edge of the sword, and the
guards and the officers threw them out, and went into
the inner room of the house of Ba’al,
26 and brought out the pillars of the house of Ba’al
and burned them,
27 and broke down the statue of Ba’al, and broke
down the house of Ba’al and made it a latrine to this
day.
28 Thus Yahu destroyed Ba’al out of Yisra’ĕl.
29 However, Yahu did not turn away from the sins of
Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who had made Yisra’ĕl sin,
from the golden calves that were at Bĕyth Ĕl and Dan.
30 And hWhY said to Yahu, “Because you have done
well by doing what is right in My eyes, and have done
to the house of Aḥaḇ all that was in My heart, your
sons are going to sit on the throne of Yisra’ĕl to the
fourth generation.”
31 But Yahu did not guard to walk in the Torah of
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl with all his heart. For he did
22

943

2 KINGS

not turn away from the sins of Yaroḇ’am, who had
made Yisra’ĕl sin.
32 In those days hWhY began to cut off some in
Yisra’ĕl. And Ḥaza’ĕl smote them throughout all the
border of Yisra’ĕl,
33 from the Yardĕn to the sun-rising: all the land of
Gil’aḏ - the Gaḏites, and the Re’uḇĕnites, and the
Menashshites - from Aro’ĕr, which is by the wadi
Arnon, including Gil’aḏ and Bashan.
34 And the rest of the acts of Yahu, and all that he
did, and all his might, are they not written in the book
of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
35 So Yahu slept with his fathers, and they buried him
in Shomeron. And Yaho’aḥaz his son reigned in his
place.
36 And the days that Yahu reigned over Yisra’ĕl in
Shomeron were twenty-eight years.

11 And Athalyahu was the mother of Aḥazyahu. And
when she saw that her son was dead, she arose and
destroyed all the offspring of the reign.
2 But Yahosheḇa, the daughter of Sovereign
Yoram, sister of Aḥazyahu, took Yo’ash son of
Aḥazyahu, and stole him away from among the sons
of the sovereign’s sons who were put to death. So
they hid him and his nurse in the bedroom, from
Athalyahu, and he was not put to death.
3 And he remained with her in hiding in the House
of HWHY for six years, while Athalyahu was reigning
over the land.
4 And in the seventh year Yahoyaḏa sent and
brought the commanders of hundreds, with the
Karites and the runners, and brought them into the
House of hWhY to him. And he made a covenant with
944

MELAḴIM 2

them and took an oath from them in the House of
hWhY, and showed them the son of the sovereign.
5 And he commanded them, saying, “This is what
you are to do: One-third of you who come in on the
Shabbath are to be on guard in the sovereign’s
house,
6 and one-third at the gate of Sur, and one-third at
the gate behind the runners. And you shall be on
guard in the house, lest it be broken down.
7 “And the two detachments of you who are going
out on the Shabbath shall be on guard in the House
of hWhY for the sovereign.
8 “And you shall surround the sovereign on all sides,
every man with his weapons in his hand. And
whoever comes within the ranks, let him be put to
death. And be with the sovereign as he goes out and
as he comes in.”
9 So the commanders of the hundreds did according
to all that Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn commanded. And
each of them took his men who were going in on the
Shabbath, with those who were going out on the
Shabbath, and came to Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn.
10 And the kohĕn gave the commanders of hundreds
the spears and shields which had belonged to
Sovereign Dawiḏ, that were in the House of HWHY.
11 And the runners stood, every man with his
weapons in his hand, all around the sovereign, from
the right side of the House to the left side of the
House, by the altar and the House.
12 And he brought out the son of the sovereign and
put on him the diadem and the Witness. And they
appointed him to reign and anointed him, and they
clapped their hands and said, “Let the sovereign live!”

945

2 KINGS

And Athalyahu heard the noise of the runners, the
people, and she came to the people, into the House
of HWHY,
14 and looked and saw the sovereign standing by a
column, according to the ruling, and the chiefs and
the trumpeters were beside the sovereign, and all the
people of the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets.
And Athalyahu tore her garments and cried out,
“Treason! Treason!”
15 And Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn commanded the
commanders of the hundreds, the officers of the
army, and said to them, “Take her outside the ranks,
and slay with the sword whoever follows her.” For the
kohĕn had said, “Do not let her be killed in the House
of HWHY.”
16 So they took hold of her, and she went by way of
the horses’ entrance to the sovereign’s house, and
was put to death there.
17 And Yahoyaḏa made a covenant between HWHY
and the sovereign and the people, to be the people of
HWHY - also between the sovereign and the people.
18 And all the people of the land went to the house of
Ba’al, and broke it down. They completely broke up
its altars and images, and slew Mattan the priest of
Ba’al before the altars. And the kohĕn appointed
inspectors over the House of HWHY,
19 and took the commanders of hundreds, and the
Karites, and the runners, and all the people of the
land. And they brought the sovereign down from the
House of hWhY, and went by way of the gate of the
runners to the sovereign’s house. And he sat on the
throne of the sovereigns.
20 And all the people of the land rejoiced. And the city
had rest, for they had slain Athalyahu with the sword
in the sovereign’s house.
13

946

MELAḴIM 2

Yaho’ash was seven years old when he began to
reign.

21

12 Yaho’ash began to reign in the seventh year of
Yahu, and he reigned forty years in Yerushalayim. And
his mother’s name was Tsiḇyah of Be’ĕrsheḇa.
2 And Yaho’ash did what was right in the eyes of
hWhY all the days in which Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn
instructed him.
3 However, the high places were not taken away;
the people still slaughtered and burned incense on
the high places.
4 And Yaho’ash said to the kohenim, “All the silver
of the qodesh gifts that are brought into the House of
hWhY, the silver coming over, each man’s
assessment silver, all the silver that a man purposes
in his heart to bring into the House of hWhY,
5 let the kohenim take for themselves, each from his
friend. And let them repair the damages of the House,
wherever there is damage.”
6 And it came to be, by the twenty-third year of
Sovereign Yaho’ash, that the kohenim had not
repaired the damages of the House,
7 and Sovereign Yaho’ash called Yahoyaḏa the
kohĕn and the other kohenim, and said to them, “Why
have you not repaired the damages of the House?
And now, do not take any more silver from your
friends, but give it for repairing the damages of the
House.”
8 And the kohenim agreed that they would neither
receive any more silver from the people, nor repair
the damages of the House.
9 And Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn took a chest, and bored
a hole in its lid, and put it beside the altar, on the right
side as one comes into the House of hWhY. And the
947

2 KINGS

kohenim who guarded the door put there all the silver
that was brought into the House of HWHY.
10 And it came to be, whenever they saw that there
was much silver in the chest, that the sovereign’s
scribe and the kohĕn ha’gadol came up and put it in
bags, and counted the silver that was found in the
House of HWHY,
11 and gave the silver, weighed out, into the hands of
those who did the work, who had the oversight of the
House of hWhY. And they paid it out to the carpenters
and builders who worked on the House of HWHY,
12 and to stonemasons and stone-cutters, and for
buying timber and hewn stone to repair the damage
of the House of HWHY, and for all that was paid out to
repair the House.
13 However there were not made for the House of
hWhY basins of silver, snuffers, sprinkling-bowls,
trumpets, any objects of gold, or objects of silver, from
the silver that was brought into the House of hWhY,
14 for they gave that to the workmen, and they
repaired the House of hWhY with it.
15 And they did not reckon with the men into whose
hand they gave the silver to be paid to workmen, for
they acted trustworthily.
16 The silver from the trespass offerings and the
silver from the sin offerings were not brought into the
House of HWHY. It belonged to the kohenim.
17 And Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram went up and
fought against Gath, and captured it. And Ḥaza’ĕl
turned his face to go up to Yerushalayim.
18 And Yaho’ash sovereign of Yahuḏah took all the
qodesh gifts that his fathers, Yahoshaphat and
Yahoram and Aḥazyahu, sovereigns of Yahuḏah, had
qadosh, and his own qodesh gifts, and all the gold
found in the treasuries of the House of hWhY and in
948

MELAḴIM 2

the sovereign’s house, and sent them to Ḥaza’ĕl
sovereign of Aram. Then he went away from
Yerushalayim.
19 And the rest of the acts of Yo’ash, and all that he
did, are they not written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
20 And his servants rose up and made a conspiracy,
and smote Yo’ash in the house of Millo, which goes
down to Silla.
21 For Yozaḵar son of Shim’ath and Yahozaḇaḏ son
of Shomer, his servants, smote him. So he died, and
they buried him with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ.
And Amatsyah his son reigned in his place.

13 In the twenty-third year of Yo’ash son of
Aḥazyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, Yaho’aḥaz son of
Yahu began to reign over Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron, and
reigned seventeen years.
2 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, and followed
the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who had made
Yisra’ĕl sin. He did not turn away from them.
3 And the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Yisra’ĕl, and He gave them into the hand of Ḥaza’ĕl
sovereign of Aram, and into the hand of Ben-Haḏaḏ
son of Ḥaza’ĕl, all the days.
4 Then Yaho’aḥaz sought the face of hWhY. And
hWhY listened to him, for He saw the oppression of
Yisra’ĕl, because the sovereign of Aram oppressed
them.
5 And hWhY gave Yisra’ĕl a saviour, so that they
came out from under the hand of Aram. And the
children of Yisra’ĕl dwelt in their tents as before.
6 However, they did not turn away from the sins of
the house of Yaroḇ’am, who had made Yisra’ĕl sin,
949

2 KINGS

but walked in them. Moreover, the Ashĕrah also
remained in Shomeron.
7 For He left of the army of Yaho’aḥaz only fifty
horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand
footmen, for the sovereign of Aram had destroyed
them and made them like the dust at threshing.
8 And the rest of the acts of Yaho’aḥaz, and all that
he did, and his might, are they not written in the book
of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
9 So Yaho’aḥaz slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in Shomeron. And Yo’ash his son reigned
in his place.
10 In the thirty-seventh year of Yo’ash sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Yaho’ash son of Yaho’aḥaz began to reign
over Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron, sixteen years.
11 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY. He did not turn
away from all the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who
had made Yisra’ĕl sin - he walked in it.
12 And the rest of the acts of Yo’ash, and all that he
did, and his might with which he fought against
Amatsyah sovereign of Yahuḏah, are they not written
in the book of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
13 So Yo’ash slept with his fathers. And Yaroḇ’am sat
on his throne. And Yo’ash was buried in Shomeron
with the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
14 And Elisha had become sick with the sickness in
which he died. And Yo’ash the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
came down to him, and wept over his face, and said,
“O my father, my father, the chariots of Yisra’ĕl and
their horsemen!”
15 And Elisha said to him, “Take a bow and some
arrows.” And he took a bow and some arrows.
16 And he said to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, “Place
your hand on the bow.” So he placed his hand, and
950

MELAḴIM 2

Elisha placed his hands on the hands of the
sovereign,
17 and said, “Open the east window.” And he opened
it and Elisha said, “Shoot.” And he shot. Then he said,
“The arrow of deliverance of hWhY and the arrow of
deliverance from Aram, for you shall smite Aram at
Aphĕq until it is finished.”
18 Then he said, “Take the arrows,” and he took
them. And he said to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, “Strike
the ground,” and he struck three times, and stopped.
19 And the man of Elohim was wroth with him and
said, “You should have smitten five or six times, then
you would have smitten Aram till its utter destruction.
But now you shall smite Aram only three times.”
20 And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the
raiding bands from Mo’aḇ came into the land in the
spring of the year.
21 And it came to be, they were burying a man, and
there they saw a raiding band, and cast the man in
the tomb of Elisha. And the man fell and touched the
bones of Elisha, and came to life and stood on his
feet.
22 And Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram oppressed Yisra’ĕl
all the days of Yaho’aḥaz.
23 But hWhY showed favour to them, and had
compassion on them, and turned toward them, for the
sake of His Covenant with Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Ya’aqoḇ, and would not destroy them or cast them
from His presence as yet.
24 And Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram died. And BenHaḏaḏ his son reigned in his place.
25 And Yaho’ash son of Yaho’aḥaz recovered from
the hand of Ben-Haḏaḏ, son of Ḥaza’ĕl, the cities
which he had taken out of the hand of Yaho’aḥaz his
951

2 KINGS

father in battle. Yo’ash smote him three times, and he
recovered the cities of Yisra’ĕl.

14 In the second year of Yo’ash son of Yo’aḥaz,
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, Amatsyahu son of Yo’ash,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, began to reign.
2 He was twenty-five years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was
Yaho’addin of Yerushalayim.
3 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY, but
not like his father Dawiḏ. He did according to all his
father Yo’ash did.
4 However, the high places were not taken away.
The people still slaughtered and burned incense on
the high places.
5 And it came to be, as soon as the reign was strong
in his hand, that he smote his servants who had
smitten his father the sovereign.
6 But he did not put to death the children of the
murderers, according to what is written in the Book of
the Torah of Mosheh, in which hWhY commanded,
saying, “Fathers are not put to death for the children,
and children are not put to death for the fathers, but
each one is put to death for his own sin.”
7 He smote Eḏom in the Valley of Salt, ten
thousand, and took Sela in battle, and called its name
Yoqthe’ĕl to this day.
8 Amatsyah then sent messengers to Yaho’ash son
of Yaho’aḥaz, son of Yahu, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, “Come, let us look each other in the face!”
9 And Yaho’ash sovereign of Yisra’ĕl sent to
Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, saying, “The
thistle that was in Leḇanon sent to the cedar that was
in Leḇanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as
952

MELAḴIM 2

wife.’ And a wild beast that was in Leḇanon passed
by and trampled the thistle.
10 “You have certainly smitten Eḏom, and your heart
has lifted you up. Be esteemed and stay in your
house. But why do you stir up yourself to evil, that you
should fall - you and Yahuḏah with you?”
11 But Amatsyahu did not listen, so Yaho’ash
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl went up, and he and Amatsyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah faced one another at Bĕyth
Shemesh, which belongs to Yahuḏah.
12 And Yahuḏah was smitten before Yisra’ĕl, and
they each fled to his tent.
13 And Yaho’ash sovereign of Yisra’ĕl caught
Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, son of Yaho’ash,
son of Aḥazyahu, at Bĕyth Shemesh. And they came
to Yerushalayim and he broke through the wall of
Yerushalayim from the Gate of Ephrayim to the
Corner Gate, four hundred ammah,
14 and took all the gold and silver, and all the objects
that were found in the House of hWhY and in the
treasuries of the sovereign’s house, and hostages,
and returned to Shomeron.
15 And the rest of the acts of Yaho’ash which he did,
and his might, and how he fought with Amatsyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah, are they not written in the book
of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
16 So Yaho’ash slept with his fathers, and was buried
in Shomeron with the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl. And
Yaroḇ’am his son reigned in his place.
17 And Amatsyahu son of Yo’ash, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, lived fifteen years after the death of
Yaho’ash son of Yaho’aḥaz, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
18 And the rest of the acts of Amatsyahu, are they not
written in the book of the annals of the sovereigns of
Yahuḏah?
953

2 KINGS

And they made a conspiracy against him in
Yerushalayim, and he fled to Laḵish. And they sent
after him to Laḵish and killed him there,
20 and brought him on horses, and he was buried at
Yerushalayim with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ.
21 And all the people of Yahuḏah took Azaryahu, who
was sixteen years old, and appointed him to reign
instead of his father Amatsyahu.
22 He built Ĕylath and restored it to Yahuḏah, after
the sovereign slept with his fathers.
23 In the fifteenth year of Amatsyahu son of Yo’ash,
the sovereign of Yahuḏah, Yaroḇ’am son of Yo’ash,
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, began to reign in Shomeron,
and reigned forty-one years.
24 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY. He did not turn
away from all the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who
had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
25 He restored the border of Yisra’ĕl from the
entrance of Ḥamath to the Sea of the Araḇah,
according to the word of hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
which He had spoken through His servant Yonah son
of Amittai, the naḇi who was from Gath Ḥĕpher.
26 For hWhY saw that the affliction of Yisra’ĕl was
very bitter. And there was no one, neither shut up nor
left at large, to help Yisra’ĕl.
27 And hWhY had not said that He would blot out the
name of Yisra’ĕl from under the shamayim, but saved
them by the hand of Yaroḇ’am son of Yo’ash.
28 And the rest of the acts of Yaroḇ’am, and all that
he did, and his might, how he fought, and how he
recovered Dammeseq and Ḥamath for Yahuḏah in
Yisra’ĕl, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
29 So Yaroḇ’am slept with his fathers, the sovereigns
of Yisra’ĕl. And Zeḵaryah his son reigned in his place.
19

954

MELAḴIM 2

15 In the twenty-seventh year of Yaroḇ’am
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, Azaryahu son of Amatsyah,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, began to reign.
2 He was sixteen years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned fifty-two years in Yerushalayim. And
his mother’s name was Yeḵolyahu of Yerushalayim.
3 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
according to all that his father Amatsyahu did,
4 however, the high places were not taken away.
The people still slaughtered and burned incense on
the high places.
5 And hWhY smote the sovereign, so that he was a
leper until the day of his death, and he dwelt in a
separate house. And Yotham son of the sovereign
was over the house, ruling the people of the land.
6 And the rest of the acts of Azaryahu, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
7 So Azaryahu slept with his fathers, and they buried
him with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ. And Yotham
his son reigned in his place.
8 In the thirty-eighth year of Azaryahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Zeḵaryahu son of Yaroḇ’am began to reign
over Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron, for six months.
9 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, as his fathers
had done. He did not turn away from the sins of
Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
10 And Shallum son of Yaḇĕsh conspired against
him, and smote him in front of the people, and killed
him, and reigned in his place.
11 And the rest of the acts of Zeḵaryah, see, they are
written in the book of the annals of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl.
955

2 KINGS

This was the word of hWhY which He spoke to
Yahu, saying, “Your sons to the fourth generation are
going to sit on the throne of Yisra’ĕl.” And it came to
be so.
13 Shallum son of Yaḇĕsh began to reign in the thirtyninth year of Uzziyah, the sovereign of Yahuḏah. And
he reigned a month of days in Shomeron.
14 And Menaḥĕm son of Gaḏi went up from Tirtsah,
and came to Shomeron, and smote Shallum son of
Yaḇĕsh in Shomeron and killed him, and reigned in
his place.
15 And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and the
conspiracy which he led, see, they are written in the
book of the annals of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
16 And Menaḥĕm smote Tiphsaḥ, and all who were
there, and its borders, from Tirtsah. Because they did
not open it to him, therefore he smote it. And he
ripped open all the pregnant women.
17 In the thirty-ninth year of Azaryahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Menaḥĕm son of Gaḏi began to reign over
Yisra’ĕl, ten years in Shomeron.
18 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY. He did not turn
away from the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who
had made Yisra’ĕl sin, all his days.
19 Pul the sovereign of Ashshur came against the
land. And Menaḥĕm gave Pul a thousand kiḵars of
silver, for his hand to be with him to strengthen the
reign in his hand.
20 And Menaḥĕm exacted the silver of Yisra’ĕl, of all
the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty sheqels
of silver, to give to the sovereign of Ashshur. And the
sovereign of Ashshur turned back, and did not stay
there in the land.
12

956

MELAḴIM 2

And the rest of the acts of Menaḥĕm, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl?
22 So Menaḥĕm slept with his fathers. And Peqaḥyah
his son reigned in his place.
23 In the fiftieth year of Azaryahu the sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Peqaḥyah the son of Menaḥĕm began to
reign over Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron, for two years.
24 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY. He did not turn
away from the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who
had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
25 And Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu, a chief officer of
his, conspired against him and smote him in
Shomeron, in the high place of the sovereign’s house,
along with Argoḇ and Aryĕh, and with him were fifty
men of Gil’aḏ. So he killed him and reigned in his
place.
26 And the rest of the acts of Peqaḥyah, and all that
he did, see, they are written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
27 In the fifty-second year of Azaryahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu began to reign
over Yisra’ĕl in Shomeron, for twenty years.
28 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY. He did not turn
away from the sins of Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, who
had made Yisra’ĕl sin.
29 In the days of Peqaḥ sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, TiḡlathPileser sovereign of Ashshur came and took Iyon,
and Aḇĕl Bĕyth Ma’aḵah, and Yanowaḥ, and Qeḏesh,
and Ḥatsor, and Gil’aḏ, and Galil, all the land of
Naphtali, and took them into exile to Ashshur.
30 And Hoshĕa son of Ĕlah led a conspiracy against
Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu, and smote him, and killed
him, and reigned in his place in the twentieth year of
Yotham son of Uzziyah.
21

957

2 KINGS

And the rest of the acts of Peqaḥ, and all that he
did, see, they are written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
32 In the second year of Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu,
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, Yotham son of Uzziyahu,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, began to reign.
33 He was twenty-five years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Yerushalayim.
And his mother’s name was Yerusha the daughter of
Tsaḏoq.
34 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY. He
did according to all that his father Uzziyahu did.
35 However, the high places were not taken away.
The people still slaughtered and burned incense on
the high places. He built the Upper Gate of the House
of HWHY.
36 And the rest of the acts of Yotham, and all that he
did, are they not written in the book of the annals of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
37 In those days hWhY began to send Retsin
sovereign of Aram and Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu
against Yahuḏah.
38 So Yotham slept with his fathers, and was buried
with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ his father. And
Aḥaz his son reigned in his place.
31

16 In the seventeenth year of Peqaḥ son of
Remalyahu, Aḥaz son of Yotham, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, began to reign.
2 Aḥaz was twenty years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Yerushalayim.
And he did not do what was right in the eyes of HWHY
his Elohim, as his father Dawiḏ had done.
3 But he walked in the way of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl, and he also made his son pass through the
958

MELAḴIM 2

fire, according to the abominations of the gentiles
whom hWhY had dispossessed from before the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And he slaughtered and burned incense on the
high places, and on the hills, and under every green
tree.
5 Then Retsin sovereign of Aram and Peqaḥ son of
Remalyahu, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, came up to
Yerushalayim, to battle. And they besieged Aḥaz but
were unable to overcome him.
6 At that time Retsin sovereign of Aram recovered
Ĕylath for Aram, and drove the men of Yahuḏah from
Ĕylath. And the Eḏomites went to Ĕylath, and have
dwelt there to this day.
7 And Aḥaz sent messengers to Tiḡlath-Pileser
sovereign of Ashshur, saying, “I am your servant and
your son. Come up and save me from the hand of the
sovereign of Aram and from the hand of the sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl, who are rising up against me.”
8 And Aḥaz took the silver and gold that was found
in the House of hWhY, and in the treasuries of the
house of the sovereign, and sent it as a present to the
sovereign of Ashshur.
9 And the sovereign of Ashshur listened to him. And
the sovereign of Ashshur went up against Dammeseq
and captured it, and exiled it to Qir, and he killed
Retsin.
10 And Sovereign Aḥaz went to meet Tiḡlath-Pileser
sovereign of Ashshur at Dammeseq, and saw an altar
that was at Dammeseq. And Sovereign Aḥaz sent to
Uriyah the kohĕn a sketch of the altar and its pattern,
according to all its workmanship.
11 And Uriyah the kohĕn built an altar according to all
that Sovereign Aḥaz had sent from Dammeseq. And
959

2 KINGS

Uriyah the kohĕn made it before Sovereign Aḥaz
came from Dammeseq.
12 And when the sovereign came from Dammeseq,
the sovereign saw the altar, and the sovereign
approached the altar and made offerings on it.
13 And he burned his burnt offering and his grain
offering. And he poured his drink offering and
sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings on the altar.
14 And the bronze altar which was before hWhY he
brought from the front of the House, from between the
new altar and the House of hWhY, and put it on the
north side of the altar.
15 And Sovereign Aḥaz commanded Uriyah the
kohĕn, saying, “On the great altar burn the morning
burnt offering, and the evening grain offering, and the
sovereign’s burnt offering, and his grain offering, with
the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and
their grain offering, and their drink offerings. And
sprinkle on it all the blood of the burnt offering and all
the blood of the slaughtering. And the bronze altar is
for me to inquire by.”
16 And Uriyah the kohĕn did according to all that
Sovereign Aḥaz commanded.
17 And Sovereign Aḥaz cut off the side panels of the
stands, and removed the basins from them. And he
took down the sea from the bronze oxen that were
under it, and put it on a pavement of stones.
18 And the covered way which they had built in the
House for the Shabbath, and the sovereign’s outer
entrance, he took from the House of hWhY, because
of the sovereign of Ashshur.
19 And the rest of the acts of Aḥaz which he did, are
they not written in the book of the annals of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
960

MELAḴIM 2

So Aḥaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with
his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ. And Ḥizqiyahu his son
reigned in his place.

20

17 In the twelfth year of Aḥaz sovereign of Yahuḏah,
Hoshĕa son of Ĕlah began to reign over Yisra’ĕl in
Shomeron, for nine years.
2 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, but not as the
sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl who were before him.
3 Shalmaneser sovereign of Ashshur came up
against him. And Hoshĕa became his servant, and
rendered him a present.
4 But the sovereign of Ashshur found a conspiracy
in Hoshĕa, for he had sent messengers to So,
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and had not brought a
present to the sovereign of Ashshur, as year by year.
And the sovereign of Ashshur shut him up, and bound
him in prison.
5 And the sovereign of Ashshur went through all the
land, and went up to Shomeron and besieged it for
three years.
6 In the ninth year of Hoshĕa, the sovereign of
Ashshur captured Shomeron and exiled Yisra’ĕl to
Ashshur, and settled them in Ḥalaḥ and Ḥaḇor, the
River of Gozan, and in the cities of the Maḏites.
7 Now this came to be because the children of
Yisra’ĕl had sinned against hWhY their Elohim - who
had brought them up out of the land of Mitsrayim,
from under the hand of Pharaoh sovereign of
Mitsrayim - and revered other mighty ones,
8 and walked in the laws of the gentiles whom hWhY
had dispossessed from before the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl that they had made.
9 And the children of Yisra’ĕl secretly did matters
against hWhY their Elohim that were not right, and
961

2 KINGS

they built for themselves high places in all their cities,
from watchtower unto the walled city,
10 and put up for themselves pillars and Ashĕrim on
every high hill and under every green tree,
11 and burned incense there on all the high places,
like the gentiles whom hWhY had removed from their
presence. And they did evil matters to provoke hWhY,
12 and served the idols, of which hWhY had said to
them, “Do not do this.”
13 And hWhY warned Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah, through
all of His neḇi’im, and every seer, saying, “Turn back
from your evil ways, and guard My Commands and
My Laws, according to all the Torah which I
commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by
My servants the neḇi’im.”
14 But they did not listen and hardened their necks,
like the necks of their fathers, who did not put their
trust in hWhY their Elohim,
15 and rejected His Laws and His Covenant that He
had made with their fathers, and His Witnesses which
He had witnessed against them, and went after
worthlessness, and became worthless, and after the
gentiles who were all around them, of whom hWhY
had commanded them not to do like them.
16 And they left all the Commands of hWhY their
Elohim, and made for themselves a moulded image,
two calves, and made an Ashĕrah and bowed
themselves to all the host of the shamayim, and
served Ba’al,
17 and caused their sons and daughters to pass
through the fire, and practised divination and sorcery,
and sold themselves to do evil in the eyes of hWhY, to
provoke Him.

962

MELAḴIM 2

So hWhY was very enraged with Yisra’ĕl, and
removed them from His presence - none was left but
the tribe of Yahuḏah alone.
19 Yahuḏah, also, did not guard the Commands of
hWhY their Elohim, but walked in the laws of Yisra’ĕl
which they made.
20 And hWhY rejected all the seed of Yisra’ĕl, and
afflicted them, and gave them into the hand of
plunderers, until He had cast them out from His
presence.
21 For He tore Yisra’ĕl from the house of Dawiḏ, and
they made Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat sovereign. And
Yaroḇ’am drove Yisra’ĕl from following hWhY, and
made them commit a great sin.
22 And the children of Yisra’ĕl walked in all the sins
of Yaroḇ’am which he did. They did not turn away
from them,
23 until hWhY removed Yisra’ĕl from His presence, as
He spoke by all His servants the neḇi’im. So Yisra’ĕl
was exiled from their land to Ashshur, as it is to this
day.
24 And the sovereign of Ashshur brought people from
Baḇel, and from Kuthah, and from Awwa, and from
Ḥamath, and Sepharwayim, and placed them in the
cities of Shomeron instead of the children of Yisra’ĕl.
And they took possession of Shomeron and dwelt in
its cities.
25 And it came to be, at the beginning of their
dwelling there, that they did not revere hWhY, and
hWhY sent lions among them, which kept on slaying
among them.
26 And they spoke to the sovereign of Ashshur,
saying, “The nations whom you have removed and
placed in the cities of Shomeron do not know the
Right-Ruling of the Elohim of the land. And He has
18

963

2 KINGS

sent lions among them, and see, they are slaying
among them because they do not know the RightRuling of the Elohim of the land.”
27 And the sovereign of Ashshur commanded,
saying, “Send one of the kohenim whom you exiled
from there, to go there. Let him go and dwell there,
and let him teach them the Right-Ruling of the Elohim
of the land.”
28 And one of the kohenim whom they had exiled
from Shomeron came and dwelt in Bĕyth Ĕl, and
taught them how to revere HWHY.
29 But every nation was making mighty ones of its
own, and put them in the houses of the high places
which the Shomeronites had made, every nation in
the cities where they dwelt.
30 And the men of Baḇel made Sukkoth Benoth, and
the men of Kuth made Nĕrḡal, and the men of
Ḥamath made Ashima,
31 and the Awwites made Niḇḥaz and Tartaq. And
the Sepharwites burned their children in fire to
Aḏrammeleḵ and Anammeleḵ, the mighty ones of
Sepharim.
32 They also revered hWhY, and from every class
they made for themselves priests of the high places,
who offered for them in the house of the high places.
33 They were revering hWhY, and they were serving
their own mighty ones, according to the ruling of the
nations from among whom they had been exiled.
34 To this day they are doing according to the former
rulings: they are not revering hWhY, nor do they follow
their Laws or their Right-Rulings, or the Torah and
Command which hWhY had commanded the children
of Ya’aqoḇ, whose name He made Yisra’ĕl,
35 with whom hWhY had made a Covenant and
commanded them, saying, “Do not revere other
964

MELAḴIM 2

mighty ones, nor bow down to them nor serve them
nor slaughter to them;
36 but hWhY, who brought you up from the land of
Mitsrayim with great power and with an outstretched
arm, Him you shall revere, and to Him you shall bow
yourselves, and to Him you shall slaughter.
37 “And guard to do forever the Laws, and the RightRulings, and the Torah, and the Command which He
wrote for you. And do not revere other mighty ones.
38 “And do not forget the Covenant that I have made
with you, and do not revere other mighty ones.
39 “And revere hWhY your Elohim, so that He delivers
you from the hand of all your enemies.”
40 But they did not obey, and did according to their
former ruling.
41 So these nations were revering hWhY, and served
their carved images, both their children and their
children’s children. As their fathers did, they are doing
to this day.

18 And it came to be in the third year of Hoshĕa son
of Ĕlah, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, that Ḥizqiyah son of
Aḥaz, sovereign of Yahuḏah, began to reign.
2 He was twenty-five years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Aḇi,
daughter of Zeḵaryah.
3 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
according to all that his father Dawiḏ did.
4 He took away the high places and broke the
pillars, and cut down the Ashĕrah, and broke in
pieces the bronze serpent which Mosheh had made,
for until those days the children of Yisra’ĕl burned
incense to it, and called it Neḥushtan.
965

2 KINGS

He put his trust in hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, and
after him was none like him among all the sovereigns
of Yahuḏah, nor who were before him,
6 and he clung to hWhY. He did not turn away from
following Him, but guarded His Commands, which
hWhY had commanded Mosheh.
7 And hWhY was with him - wherever he went he
acted wisely. And he rebelled against the sovereign
of Ashshur and did not serve him.
8 He smote the Pelishtites, as far as Azzah and its
borders - from watchtower to walled city.
9 And it came to be in the fourth year of Sovereign
Ḥizqiyahu, which was the seventh year of Hoshĕa
son of Ĕlah, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, that Shalmaneser
sovereign of Ashshur came up against Shomeron and
besieged it,
10 and they captured it at the end of three years. In
the sixth year of Ḥizqiyah, that is the ninth year of
Hoshĕa sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, Shomeron was
captured.
11 And the sovereign of Ashshur exiled Yisra’ĕl to
Ashshur, and placed them in Ḥalaḥ and Ḥaḇor, the
River of Gozan, and in the cities of the Maḏites,
12 because they did not obey the voice of hWhY their
Elohim, but transgressed His Covenant - all that
Mosheh the servant of hWhY had commanded. And
they did not obey nor do them.
13 And in the fourteenth year of Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu,
Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of Ashshur came up against all
the walled cities of Yahuḏah and captured them.
14 And Ḥizqiyah sovereign of Yahuḏah sent to the
sovereign of Ashshur at Laḵish, saying, “I have
sinned, turn away from me. I shall bear whatever you
impose on me.” And the sovereign of Ashshur
5

966

MELAḴIM 2

imposed upon Ḥizqiyah, the sovereign of Yahuḏah,
three hundred kiḵars of silver and thirty kiḵars of gold.
15 And Ḥizqiyah gave him all the silver that was found
in the House of hWhY and in the treasuries of the
sovereign’s house.
16 At that time Ḥizqiyah cut off the doors of the
Hĕyḵal of hWhY, and the doorposts which Ḥizqiyah
sovereign of Yahuḏah had overlaid, and gave it to the
sovereign of Ashshur.
17 And the sovereign of Ashshur sent the Tartan, and
the Raḇsaris, and the Raḇshaqĕh from Laḵish, with a
great army against Yerushalayim, to Sovereign
Ḥizqiyahu. And they went up and came to
Yerushalayim. And when they had come up, they
came and stood by the channel of the upper pool,
which was on the highway to the Launderer’s Field.
18 And they called to the sovereign. And Elyaqim son
of Ḥilqiyahu, who was over the household, and
Sheḇnah the scribe, and Yo’aḥ son of Asaph, the
recorder, came out to them.
19 And the Raḇshaqĕh said to them, “Please say to
Ḥizqiyahu, ‘Thus said the great sovereign, the
sovereign of Ashshur, “What is this trust in which you
have trusted?
20 “You have spoken of having counsel and strength
for battle, but they are only words of the lips! And in
whom do you trust, that you rebel against me?
21 “Now look! You have put your trust in the staff of
this crushed reed, Mitsrayim, on which if a man leans,
it shall go into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim to all who trust in him.
22 “But when you say to me, ‘We trust in hWhY our
Elohim,’ is it not He whose high places and whose
altars Ḥizqiyahu has taken away, and said to
967

2 KINGS

Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, ‘Bow yourselves before
this altar in Yerushalayim’?” ’
23 “And now, I urge you, give a pledge to my master
the sovereign of Ashshur, then I give you two
thousand horses, if you are able to put riders on them!
24 “And how do you turn back the face of one
commander of the least of my master’s servants, and
trust in Mitsrayim for chariots and horsemen?
25 “Have I now come up without hWhY against this
place to destroy it? HWHY said to me, ‘Go up against
this land, and you shall destroy it.’ ”
26 Then said Elyaqim son of Ḥilqiyahu, and Sheḇnah,
and Yo’aḥ to the Raḇshaqĕh, “Please speak to your
servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. And do not
speak to us in the language of Yahuḏah, in the ears
of the people on the wall.”
27 And the Raḇshaqĕh said to them, “Has my master
sent me to your master and to you to speak these
words, and not to the men sitting on the wall to eat
their own dung and drink their own urine, with you?”
28 And the Raḇshaqĕh stood and called out with a
loud voice in the language of Yahuḏah, and spoke
and said, “Hear the word of the great sovereign, the
sovereign of Ashshur!
29 “Thus said the sovereign, ‘Do not let Ḥizqiyahu
deceive you, for he is unable to deliver you out of his
hand,
30 and do not let Ḥizqiyahu make you trust in hWhY,
saying, “HWHY shall certainly deliver us, and this city
is not given into the hand of the sovereign of
Ashshur.” ’
31 “Do not listen to Ḥizqiyahu, for thus said the
sovereign of Ashshur, ‘Make peace with me by a
present and come out to me, and let each of you eat
968

MELAḴIM 2

from his own vine and each from his own fig tree, and
each of you drink the waters of his own cistern,
32 until I come. Then I shall take you away to a land
like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a
land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and
honey, and live, and not die. But do not listen to
Ḥizqiyahu, when he misleads you, saying, “hWhY
shall deliver us.”
33 ‘Has any of the mighty ones of the nations at all
delivered its land from the hand of the sovereign of
Ashshur?
34 ‘Where are the mighty ones of Ḥamath and
Arpaḏ? Where are the mighty ones of Sepharwayim
and Hĕna and Iwwah? Did they deliver Shomeron
from my hand?
35 ‘Who among all the mighty ones of the lands have
delivered their land out of my hand, that hWhY should
deliver Yerushalayim from my hand?’ ”
36 But the people were silent and did not answer him
a word, for the command of the sovereign was, “Do
not answer him.”
37 And Elyaqim son of Ḥilqiyah, who was over the
household, and Sheḇnah the scribe, and Yo’aḥ son
of Asaph, the recorder, came to Ḥizqiyahu with their
garments torn, and they reported to him the words of
the Raḇshaqĕh.

19 And it came to be, when Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu
heard it, that he tore his garments, and covered himself
with sackcloth, and went into the House of HWHY,
2 and sent Elyaqim, who was over the household,
and Sheḇnah the scribe, and the elders of the
kohenim, covering themselves with sackcloth, to
Yeshayahu the naḇi, son of Amots.
969

2 KINGS

And they said to him, “Thus said Ḥizqiyahu, ‘This
day is a day of distress and rebuke and scorn, for the
children have come to birth but there is no power to
bring forth.
4 ‘It could be that hWhY your Elohim hears all the
words of the Raḇshaqĕh, whom his master the
sovereign of Ashshur has sent to reproach the living
Elohim, and shall rebuke the words which HWHY your
Elohim has heard. Therefore lift up your prayer for the
remnant that is left.’ ”
5 And the servants of Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu came to
Yeshayahu,
6 and Yeshayahu said to them, “Say this to your
master, ‘Thus said HWHY, “Do not be afraid of the
words which you have heard, with which the servants
of the sovereign of Ashshur have reviled Me.
7 “See, I am putting a spirit upon him, and he shall
hear a report and return to his own land. And I shall
cause him to fall by the sword in his land.” ’ ”
8 And the Raḇshaqĕh returned and found the
sovereign of Ashshur fighting against Liḇnah, for he
had heard that he had left Laḵish.
9 And when the sovereign heard concerning
Tirhaqah sovereign of Kush, “See, he has come out
to fight against you,” he again sent messengers to
Ḥizqiyahu, saying,
10 “Speak to Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah,
saying, ‘Do not let your Elohim in whom you trust
deceive you, saying, “Yerushalayim is not given into
the hand of the sovereign of Ashshur.”
11 ‘See, you have heard what the sovereigns of
Ashshur have done to all lands by putting them under
the ban. And are you going to be delivered?
12 ‘Have the mighty ones of the nations delivered
those whom my fathers have destroyed: Gozan and
3

970

MELAḴIM 2

Ḥaran and Retseph, and the sons of Ĕḏen who were
in Telassar?
13 ‘Where is the sovereign of Ḥamath, and the
sovereign of Arpaḏ, and the sovereign of the city of
Sepharwayim, Hĕna, and Iwwah?’ ”
14 And Ḥizqiyahu received the letters from the hand
of the messengers, and read them, and went up to
the House of hWhY. And Ḥizqiyahu spread it before
hWhY.
15 And Ḥizqiyahu prayed before hWhY, and said, “O
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, the One who dwells between
the keruḇim, You are Elohim, You alone, of all the
reigns of the earth. You have made the shamayim
and earth.
16 “Incline Your ear, O hWhY, and hear. Open Your
eyes, O hWhY, and see. And hear the words of
Sanḥĕriḇ, which he has sent to reproach the living
Elohim.
17 “Truly, hWhY, the sovereigns of Ashshur have laid
waste the nations and their lands,
18 and have put their mighty ones into the fire, for
they were not mighty ones, but the work of men’s
hands, wood and stone, and destroyed them.
19 “And now, O hWhY our Elohim, I pray, save us from
his hand, so that all the reigns of the earth know that
You are hWhY Elohim, You alone.”
20 Then Yeshayahu son of Amots sent to Ḥizqiyahu,
saying, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I have
heard that which you have prayed to Me against
Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of Ashshur.’
21 “This is the word which hWhY has spoken
concerning him, ‘The maiden, the daughter of Tsiyon,
has despised you, mocked you; the daughter of
Yerushalayim has shaken her head behind you!
971

2 KINGS

‘Whom have you reproached and reviled? Against
whom have you raised a voice, and lifted up your
eyes on high? Against the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl!
23 ‘By the hand of your messengers you have
reproached hWhY, and said, “With my many chariots
I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the
sides of Leḇanon. And I cut down its tall cedars, its
choice cypress trees. And I enter its remotest parts,
its thickest forest.
24 ‘I have dug and drunk strange water, and with the
soles of my feet I dry up all the streams of defence.”
25 ‘Have you not heard long ago, I made it; from days
of old I formed it? Now I have brought it to be, that
you should make walled cities ruinous heaps.
26 ‘And their inhabitants were powerless, they were
overthrown and put to shame, they were as the grass
of the field and the green plants, as the grass on the
house-tops and withered before it had grown.
27 ‘But I know your sitting down, and your going out
and your coming in, and your rage against Me.
28 ‘Because your rage against Me and your pride
have come up to My ears, I shall put My hook in your
nose and My bridle in your lips, and I shall turn you
back by the way which you came.
29 ‘And this is the sign for you: This year you eat what
grows of itself, and in the second year what springs
from that, and in the third year sow and reap and plant
vineyards and eat their fruit.
30 ‘And the remnant who have escaped of the house
of Yahuḏah shall again take root downward, and bear
fruit upward.
31 ‘For out of Yerushalayim comes forth a remnant,
and those who escape from Mount Tsiyon - the
ardour of hWhY does this.’
22

972

MELAḴIM 2

“Therefore thus said hWhY concerning the
sovereign of Ashshur, ‘He does not come into this
city, nor does he shoot an arrow there, nor does he
come before it with shield, nor does he build a siege
mound against it.
33 ‘By the way that he came, by the same he turns
back. And he does not come into this city,’ declares
HWHY.
34 ‘And I shall defend this city, to save it for My own
sake and for the sake of Dawiḏ My servant.’ ”
35 And it came to be in that night that the messenger
of hWhY went out, and smote in the camp of Ashshur
one hundred and eighty-five thousand. And they rose
up early in the morning and saw all of them dead
bodies.
36 And Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of Ashshur broke camp
and went away, and turned back, and remained in
Ninewĕh.
37 And it came to be, as he was bowing himself in the
house of Nisroḵ his mighty one, that his sons
Aḏrammeleḵ and Sar’etser smote him with the sword,
and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And his son
Ĕsarḥaddon reigned in his place.
32

20 In those days Ḥizqiyahu was sick unto death.
And Yeshayahu the naḇi, son of Amots, went to him
and said to him, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Put your house in
order, for you are going to die, and not live.’ ”
2 And he turned his face toward the wall, and prayed
to hWhY, saying,
3 “I pray to You, O hWhY, remember how I have
walked before You in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done what was good in Your eyes.” And
Ḥizqiyahu wept bitterly.
973

2 KINGS

And it came to be, before Yeshayahu had gone
out into the middle court, that the word of hWhY came
to him, saying,
5 “Return and say to Ḥizqiyahu the leader of My
people, ‘Thus said hWhY, the Elohim of Dawiḏ your
father, “I have heard your prayer, I have seen your
tears. See, I am going to heal you. On the third day
go up to the House of hWhY.
6 “And I shall add to your days fifteen years, and
deliver you and this city from the hand of the
sovereign of Ashshur, and shall defend this city for
My own sake, and for the sake of Dawiḏ My servant.”
’”
7 And Yeshayahu said, “Take a cake of figs.” And
they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.
8 And Ḥizqiyahu said to Yeshayahu, “What is the
sign that hWhY heals me, and that I shall go up to the
House of hWhY the third day?”
9 And Yeshayahu said, “This is the sign for you from
HWHY, that HWHY does the word which He has spoken:
shall the shadow go forward ten degrees or go
backward ten degrees?”
10 And Ḥizqiyahu said, “It would be easy for the
shadow to go down ten degrees; no, but let the
shadow go backward ten degrees.”
11 And Yeshayahu the naḇi cried out to hWhY, and
He brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by
which it had gone down on the sundial of Aḥaz.
12 At that time Beroḏaḵ-Balaḏan son of Balaḏan,
sovereign of Baḇel, sent letters and a present to
Ḥizqiyahu, for he heard that Ḥizqiyahu had been sick.
13 And Ḥizqiyahu listened to them, and showed them
all his treasure house, the silver and the gold, and the
spices and the precious ointment, and all his armoury,
and all that was found among his treasures. There
4

974

MELAḴIM 2

was not an object in his house or in all his rule that
Ḥizqiyahu did not show them.
14 And Yeshayahu the naḇi came to Sovereign
Ḥizqiyahu, and said to him, “What did these men say,
and from where did they come to you?” And
Ḥizqiyahu said, “They came from a distant land, from
Baḇel.”
15 And he said, “What have they seen in your
house?” And Ḥizqiyahu answered, “They saw all that
is in my house; there is not an object among my
treasures that I did not show them.”
16 And Yeshayahu said to Ḥizqiyahu, “Hear the word
of HWHY:
17 ‘See, the days are coming when all that is in your
house, and what your fathers have treasured up until
this day, shall be brought to Baḇel - no object is to be
left,’ said HWHY.
18 ‘And they are going to take away some of your
sons who are to be born to you, whom you bring forth,
and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the
sovereign of Baḇel.’ ”
19 And Ḥizqiyahu said to Yeshayahu, “The word of
hWhY which you have spoken is good!” And he said,
“Is it not so, if peace and truth are to be in my days?”
20 And the rest of the acts of Ḥizqiyahu, and all his
might and how he made a pool and a channel and
brought water into the city, are they not written in the
book of the annals of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
21 So Ḥizqiyahu slept with his fathers. And
Menashsheh his son reigned in his place.

21 Menashsheh was twelve years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was
Ḥephtsiḇah.
975

2 KINGS

And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
the abominations of the gentiles whom hWhY
dispossessed before the children of Yisra’ĕl.
3 For he turned and built the high places which
Ḥizqiyahu his father had destroyed, and raised up
altars for Ba’al, and made an Ashĕrah, as Aḥaḇ
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl had done, and he bowed himself
to all the host of the shamayim and served them.
4 And he built altars in the House of hWhY, of which
hWhY had said, “In Yerushalayim I put My Name.”
5 And he built altars for all the host of the shamayim
in the two courtyards of the House of HWHY.
6 And he made his son pass through the fire, and
practised magic, and used divination, and consulted
spiritists and mediums. He did much evil in the eyes
of hWhY, to provoke.
7 And he placed a carved image of Ashĕrah that he
had made in the House of which hWhY had said to
Dawiḏ and to Shelomoh his son, “In this House and
in Yerushalayim, which I have chosen out of all the
tribes of Yisra’ĕl, I put My Name forever,
8 and no more shall I cause the feet of Yisra’ĕl to
move from the land which I gave their fathers - only if
they guard to do according to all that I have
commanded them, and according to all the Torah that
My servant Mosheh commanded them.”
9 But they did not obey, and Menashsheh led them
astray to do more evil than the gentiles whom hWhY
had destroyed before the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 And hWhY spoke by His servants the neḇi’im,
saying,
11 “Because Menashsheh sovereign of Yahuḏah has
done these abominations, having done more evil than
all the Amorites who were before him, and also made
Yahuḏah sin with his idols,
2

976

MELAḴIM 2

therefore thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘See,
I am bringing such evil upon Yerushalayim and
Yahuḏah that both ears of those who hear of it shall
tingle.
13 ‘And I shall stretch over Yerushalayim the
measuring line of Shomeron and the plummet of the
house of Aḥaḇ, and shall wipe Yerushalayim as one
wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
14 ‘And I shall forsake the remnant of My inheritance
and give them into the hand of their enemies. And
they shall be for a prey and for a plunder to all their
enemies,
15 because they have done evil in My eyes, and have
provoked Me since the day their fathers came out of
Mitsrayim, even to this day.’ ”
16 And also, Menashsheh shed very much innocent
blood, until he had filled Yerushalayim from one end
to another, besides his sin with which he made
Yahuḏah sin, in doing evil in the eyes of HWHY.
17 And the rest of the acts of Menashsheh, and all
that he did, and the sin that he committed, are they
not written in the book of the annals of the sovereigns
of Yahuḏah?
18 So Menashsheh slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden
of Uzza. And his son Amon reigned in his place.
19 Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned two years in Yerushalayim. And
the name of his mother was Meshullemeth the
daughter of Ḥaruts of Yoteḇah.
20 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, as his father
Menashsheh had done,
21 and walked in all the ways that his father had
walked, and served the idols that his father had
served, and bowed himself to them,
12

977

2 KINGS

and forsook hWhY Elohim of his fathers, and did
not walk in the Way of HWHY.
23 And the servants of Amon conspired against him,
and killed the sovereign in his own house.
24 But the people of the land smote all those who had
conspired against Sovereign Amon, and the people
of the land appointed his son Yoshiyahu to reign in
his place.
25 And the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are
they not written in the book of the annals of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
26 And he was buried in his tomb in the garden of
Uzza. And his son Yoshiyahu reigned in his place.
22

22 Yoshiyahu was eight years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Yerushalayim.
And his mother’s name was Yeḏiḏah the daughter of
Aḏayah of Botsqath.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY, and
walked in all the ways of his father Dawiḏ, and did not
turn aside, right or left.
3 And it came to be, in the eighteenth year of
Sovereign Yoshiyahu, that the sovereign sent
Shaphan the scribe, son of Atsalyahu, son of
Meshullam, to the House of hWhY, saying,
4 “Go up to Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn ha’gadol, and let
him weigh the silver which has been brought into the
House of hWhY, which the doorkeepers have
gathered from the people.
5 “And let them give it into the hand of those doing
the work, who are the overseers in the House of
hWhY. And let them give it to those who are in the
House of hWhY doing the work, to repair the damages
of the house,
978

MELAḴIM 2

to carpenters and to builders and to stonemasons,
and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.
7 “However, let not the silver given into their hand
be reckoned with them, for they are acting
trustworthily.”
8 And Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn ha’gadol said to Shaphan
the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Torah in the
House of hWhY.” And Ḥilqiyah gave the Book to
Shaphan, and he read it.
9 And Shaphan the scribe came to the sovereign,
and brought word to the sovereign again, saying,
“Your servants have gathered the silver that was
found in the house, and have given it into the hand of
those who do the work, who oversee the House of
hWhY.”
10 And Shaphan the scribe informed the sovereign,
saying, “Ḥilqiyah the kohĕn has given me a Book.”
And Shaphan read it before the sovereign.
11 And it came to be, when the sovereign heard the
words of the Book of the Torah, that he tore his
garments,
12 and the sovereign commanded Ḥilqiyah the
kohĕn, and Aḥiqam son of Shaphan, and Aḵbor son
of Miḵayah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asayah a
servant of the sovereign, saying,
13 “Go, inquire of hWhY for me, for the people and for
all Yahuḏah, concerning the words of this Book that
has been found. For great is the wrath of hWhY that is
kindled against us, because our fathers have not
obeyed the words of this Book, to do according to all
that is written concerning us.”
14 Then Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn, and Aḥiqam, and
Aḵbor, and Shaphan, and Asayah went to Ḥuldah the
neḇiyah, the wife of Shallum son of Tiqwah, son of
Ḥarḥas, keeper of the wardrobe. Now she was
6

979

2 KINGS

dwelling in Yerushalayim in the Second Quarter. And
they spoke with her.
15 And she said to them, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘Say to the man who sent you to Me,
16 “Thus said hWhY, ‘See, I am bringing evil on this
place and on its inhabitants, all the words of the Book
which the sovereign of Yahuḏah has read,
17 because they have forsaken Me and burned
incense to other mighty ones to provoke Me with all
the works of their hands. And so My wrath shall be
kindled against this place and not be quenched.’ ” ’
18 “And to the sovereign of Yahuḏah, who sent you
to inquire of hWhY, say this to him, ‘Thus said hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “As for the words which you have
heard,
19 because your heart was tender, and you humbled
yourself before hWhY when you heard what I spoke
against this place and against its inhabitants, that
they would become a ruin and a curse, and tore your
garments and wept before Me, I also have heard,”
declares hWhY.
20 “Therefore, see, I am gathering you to your
fathers, and you shall be gathered to your grave in
peace, so that your eyes do not see all the evil I am
bringing on this place.” ’ ” And they brought word to
the sovereign.

23 And the sovereign sent, and they gathered all the
elders of Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim to him.
2 And the sovereign went up to the House of HWHY
with all the men of Yahuḏah, and all the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim with him, and the kohenim and the
neḇi’im and all the people, both small and great. And
he read in their hearing all the words of the Book of
980

MELAḴIM 2

the Covenant which had been found in the House of
HWHY.
3 And the sovereign stood by the column and made
a covenant before hWhY, to follow hWhY and to guard
His Commands and His Witnesses and His Laws,
with all his heart and all his being, to establish the
Words of this Covenant that were written in this Book.
And all the people stood to the Covenant.
4 Then the sovereign commanded Ḥilqiyahu the
kohĕn ha’gadol, and the kohenim of the second order,
and the doorkeepers, to bring out of the Hĕyḵal of
hWhY all the objects that were made for Ba’al, and for
Ashĕrah, and for all the host of the shamayim. And he
burned them outside Yerushalayim in the fields of
Qiḏron, and took their ashes to Bĕyth Ĕl.
5 And he put down the black-robed priests whom the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah had appointed to burn
incense on the high places in the cities of Yahuḏah
and in the places all around Yerushalayim, and those
who burned incense to Ba’al, to the sun, and to the
moon, and to the constellations, and to all the host of
the shamayim.
6 And he brought out the Ashĕrah from the House
of hWhY, to the wadi Qiḏron outside Yerushalayim,
and burned it at the wadi Qiḏron and ground it to
ashes, and threw its ashes on the graves of the sons
of the people.
7 And he broke down the houses of the male cult
prostitutes that were in the House of hWhY, where the
women wove tapestries for the Ashĕrah.
8 And he brought all the kohenim from the cities of
Yahuḏah, and defiled the high places where the
priests had burned incense, from Geḇa to
Be’ĕrsheḇa, and broke down the high places at the
gates which were at the entrance of the Gate of
981

2 KINGS

Yahoshua the governor of the city, which were to the
left of the city gate.
9 However, the priests of the high places did not
come up to the altar of hWhY in Yerushalayim, but
they ate unleavened bread among their brothers.
10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the Valley of
Bĕn Hinnom, so that no man could make his son or
his daughter pass through the fire to Moleḵ.
11 And he did away with the horses that the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah had given to the sun, at the
entrance to the House of hWhY, by the room of
Nathan-Meleḵ the eunuch, that were in the court. And
he burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
12 And the altars that were on the roof of the upper
room of Aḥaz, which the sovereigns of Yahuḏah had
made, and the altars which Menashsheh had made in
the two courtyards of the House of hWhY, the
sovereign broke down, and rushed from there, and
threw their dust into the wadi Qiḏron.
13 And the sovereign defiled the high places that
were before Yerushalayim, which were on the right
hand of the Mountain of Destruction, which Shelomoh
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl built for Ashtoreth the
abomination of the Tsiḏonians, and for Kemosh the
abomination of the Mo’aḇites, and for Milkom the
abomination of the children of Ammon.
14 And he broke in pieces the pillars and cut down
the Ashĕrim, and filled their places with the bones of
men.
15 And also the altar that was at Bĕyth Ĕl, and the
high place which Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat made, by
which he made Yisra’ĕl sin, both that altar and the
high place he broke down. And he burned the high
place and ground it to dust, and burned the Ashĕrah.
982

MELAḴIM 2

Then Yoshiyahu turned, and saw the tombs that
were there on the mountain. And he sent and took the
bones out of the tombs and burned them on the altar,
and defiled it according to the word of hWhY which the
man of Elohim proclaimed, who proclaimed these
words.
17 And he said, “What tombstone is this that I see?”
And the men of the city said to him, “It is the tomb of
the man of Elohim who came from Yahuḏah and
proclaimed these matters which you have done
against the altar of Bĕyth Ĕl.”
18 And he said, “Let him alone, let no one move his
bones.” So they left his bones alone, with the bones
of the naḇi who came from Shomeron.
19 And Yoshiyahu also took away all the houses of
the high places that were in the cities of Shomeron,
which the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl had made to
provoke. And he did to them according to all the
deeds he did in Bĕyth Ĕl.
20 And he slaughtered all the priests of the high
places who were there, on the altars, and burned
men’s bones on them, and went back to
Yerushalayim.
21 And the sovereign commanded all the people,
saying, “Prepare the Pesaḥ to hWhY your Elohim, as
it is written in this Book of the Covenant.”
22 For such a Pesaḥ had not been prepared since the
days of the rulers who ruled Yisra’ĕl, nor in all the
days of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl and the sovereigns
of Yahuḏah,
23 but in the eighteenth year of Sovereign Yoshiyahu
this Pesaḥ was prepared before hWhY in
Yerushalayim.
24 And also, Yoshiyahu put away those who
consulted mediums and spiritists, and the household
16

983

2 KINGS

mighty ones and idols, and all the abominations that
were seen in the land of Yahuḏah and in
Yerushalayim, in order to establish the words of the
Torah which were written in the Book that Ḥilqiyahu
the kohĕn found in the House of hWhY.
25 And before him there was no sovereign like him,
who turned back to hWhY with all his heart, and with
all his being, and with all his might, according to all
the Torah of Mosheh; and after him none rose up like
him.
26 However, hWhY did not turn from the fierceness of
His great wrath, with which His wrath burned against
Yahuḏah, because of all the provocations with which
Menashsheh had provoked Him.
27 And hWhY said, “Even Yahuḏah I shall remove
from My presence, as I have removed Yisra’ĕl, and I
shall reject this city Yerushalayim which I have
chosen, and the House of which I said, ‘My Name is
there.’ ”
28 And the rest of the acts of Yoshiyahu, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
29 In his days Pharaoh Neḵo sovereign of Mitsrayim
went up against the sovereign of Ashshur, to the
River Perath. And Sovereign Yoshiyahu went out to
him, and he killed him at Meḡiddo when he saw him.
30 And his servants conveyed his body in a chariot
from Meḡiddo, and brought him to Yerushalayim, and
buried him in his own tomb. And the people of the land
took Yaho’aḥaz son of Yoshiyahu, and anointed him,
and appointed him to reign in his father’s place.
31 Yaho’aḥaz was twenty-three years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned three months in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Ḥamutal
the daughter of Yirmeyahu of Liḇnah.
984

MELAḴIM 2

And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
all that his fathers did.
33 And Pharaoh Neḵo imprisoned him at Riḇlah in the
land of Ḥamath, to keep him from reigning in
Yerushalayim. And he imposed on the land a fine of
one hundred kiḵars of silver and a kiḵar of gold.
34 And Pharaoh Neḵo appointed Elyaqim son of
Yoshiyahu to reign in place of his father Yoshiyahu,
and changed his name to Yahoyaqim. And Pharaoh
took Yaho’aḥaz and went to Mitsrayim, and he died
there.
35 And Yahoyaqim gave the silver and gold to
Pharaoh. Only, he taxed the land to give silver
according to the command of Pharaoh. He exacted
the silver and gold from the people of the land, from
every one according to his assessment, to give it to
Pharaoh Neḵo.
36 Yahoyaqim was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Zeḇiḏah
the daughter of Peḏayah of Rumah.
37 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
all that his fathers did.
32

24 In his days Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel
came up, and Yahoyaqim became his servant for three
years. And he turned and rebelled against him.
2 And hWhY sent against him raiding bands of
Kasdites, and raiding bands of Aram, and raiding
bands of Mo’aḇ, and raiding bands of the children of
Ammon. And He sent them against Yahuḏah to
destroy it, according to the word of hWhY which He
had spoken by His servants the neḇi’im.

985

2 KINGS

Only at the command of HWHY this came upon
Yahuḏah, to remove from His presence, because of
the sins of Menashsheh, according to all that he did,
4 and also because of the innocent blood that he
shed. For he filled Yerushalayim with innocent blood,
which hWhY would not forgive.
5 And the rest of the acts of Yahoyaqim, and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the annals
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah?
6 So Yahoyaqim slept with his fathers. And
Yahoyaḵin his son reigned in his place.
7 And the sovereign of Mitsrayim did not come out
of his land again, for the sovereign of Baḇel had taken
all that belonged to the sovereign of Mitsrayim from
the wadi of Mitsrayim to the River Perath.
8 Yahoyaḵin was eighteen years old when he began
to reign, and he reigned in Yerushalayim three
months. And his mother’s name was Neḥushta the
daughter of Elnathan of Yerushalayim.
9 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
all that his father did.
10 At that time the servants of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel came up against Yerushalayim,
and the city was besieged.
11 And Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel came
against the city, as his servants were besieging it.
12 And Yahoyaḵin sovereign of Yahuḏah, and his
mother, and his servants, and his heads, and his
eunuchs went out to the sovereign of Baḇel. And the
sovereign of Baḇel, in the eighth year of his reign,
took him prisoner.
13 And he took from there all the treasures of the
House of hWhY and the treasures of the sovereign’s
house, and he cut in pieces all the objects of gold
3

986

MELAḴIM 2

which Shelomoh sovereign of Yisra’ĕl had made in
the Hĕyḵal of hWhY, as HWHY had said.
14 And he exiled all Yerushalayim, and all the officers
and all the mighty brave men - ten thousand exiles and all the craftsmen and smiths. None remained
except the poorest people of the land.
15 And he exiled Yahoyaḵin to Baḇel. And the
sovereign’s mother, and the sovereign’s wives, and
his eunuchs, and the leading men of the land he
exiled from Yerushalayim to Baḇel.
16 And all the mighty brave men, seven thousand,
and craftsmen and smiths, one thousand, all who
were strong and fit for battle, these the sovereign of
Baḇel brought to Baḇel into exile.
17 And the sovereign of Baḇel appointed Mattanyah,
Yahoyaḵin’s uncle, to reign in his place, and changed
his name to Tsiḏqiyahu.
18 Tsiḏqiyahu was twenty-one years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Ḥamutal
the daughter of Yirmeyahu of Liḇnah.
19 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
all that Yahoyaqim did.
20 For this took place in Yerushalayim and Yahuḏah
because of the displeasure of hWhY, until He had cast
them out from His presence. And Tsiḏqiyahu rebelled
against the sovereign of Baḇel.

25 And it came to be in the ninth year of his reign, in
the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, that
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel and all his army
came against Yerushalayim and encamped against it,
and they built a siege wall against it all around.
2 And the city was besieged until the eleventh year
of Sovereign Tsiḏqiyahu.
987

2 KINGS

By the ninth of the month the scarcity of food had
become so severe in the city that there was no food
for the people of the land.
4 Then the city wall was breached, and all the men
of battle fled at night by way of the gate between two
walls, which was by the sovereign’s garden, even
though the Kasdites were still encamped all around
against the city. And the sovereign went by way of the
desert plain.
5 And the army of the Kasdites pursued the
sovereign, and overtook him in the desert plains of
Yeriḥo, and all his army was scattered from him.
6 And they seized the sovereign and brought him up
to the sovereign of Baḇel at Riḇlah, and they
pronounced sentence on him.
7 And they slaughtered the sons of Tsiḏqiyahu
before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Tsiḏqiyahu,
and bound him with bronze shackles, and took him to
Baḇel.
8 And in the fifth month, on the seventh of the
month, which was the nineteenth year of Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, Neḇuzaraḏan
the chief of the guard, a servant of the sovereign of
Baḇel, came to Yerushalayim.
9 And he burned the House of hWhY and the house
of the sovereign, and all the houses of Yerushalayim
- even every great house he burned with fire.
10 And all the army of the Kasdites who were with the
chief of the guard broke down the walls of
Yerushalayim all around.
11 And Neḇuzaraḏan the chief of the guard took into
exile the rest of the people who were left in the city
and the deserters who deserted to the sovereign of
Baḇel, with the rest of the multitude.
3

988

MELAḴIM 2

But the chief of the guard left some of the poor of
the land as vinedressers and farmers.
13 And the bronze columns that were in the House of
hWhY, and the stands and the bronze sea that were
in the House of HWHY, the Kasdites broke in pieces,
and took their bronze away to Baḇel.
14 And they took the pots, and the shovels, and the
snuffers, and the ladles, and all the bronze utensils
the kohenim used in the service.
15 And the chief of the guard took the fire holders and
the basins which were of solid gold and solid silver.
16 The bronze of all these utensils was beyond
measure - the two columns, the one sea, and the
stands, which Shelomoh had made for the House of
hWhY.
17 The height of one column was eighteen ammah,
and the capital on it was of bronze. And the height of
the capital was three ammah, and the network and
pomegranates all around the capital were all of
bronze. And the second column was the same, with
a network.
18 And the chief of the guard took Serayah the chief
kohĕn, and Tsephanyahu the second kohĕn, and the
three doorkeepers.
19 And out of the city he took a certain eunuch who
was appointed over the men of battle, and five men
of those who saw the sovereign’s face, who were
found in the city, and the chief scribe of the army who
mustered the people of the land, and sixty men of the
people of the land who were found in the city.
20 And Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, took them
and made them go to the sovereign of Baḇel at
Riḇlah.
12

989

2 KINGS

And the sovereign of Baḇel smote them and put
them to death at Riḇlah in the land of Ḥamath. So he
exiled Yahuḏah from its own land.
22 And he appointed Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, son
of Shaphan, over the people who were left in the land
of Yahuḏah, whom Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of
Baḇel had left.
23 And all the commanders of the armies, they and
their men, heard that the sovereign of Baḇel had
appointed Geḏalyahu. And they came to Geḏalyahu
at Mitspah, even Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah, and
Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and Serayah son of
Tanḥumeth the Netophathite, and Ya’azanyahu the
son of a Ma’aḵathite, they and their men.
24 And Geḏalyahu swore to them and their men, and
said to them, “Do not be afraid of the servants of the
Kasdites. Dwell in the land and serve the sovereign
of Baḇel, and let it be well with you.”
25 And in the seventh month it came to be that
Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah, son of Elishama, of the
seed of the reign, came with ten men and smote
Geḏalyahu that he died, and the Yahuḏim, and the
Kasdites who were with him at Mitspah.
26 And all the people rose up, small and great, and
the commanders of the armies, and went to
Mitsrayim, for they were afraid of the Kasdites.
27 And it came to be in the thirty-seventh year of the
exile of Yahoyaḵin sovereign of Yahuḏah, in the
twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh of the month,
that Ewil-Meroḏaḵ sovereign of Baḇel, in the year that
he began to reign, released Yahoyaḵin sovereign of
Yahuḏah from prison,
28 and spoke kindly to him, and appointed his throne
above the throne of the sovereigns who were with him
in Baḇel,
21

990

MELAḴIM 2

and changed his prison garments. And he ate
bread continually before the sovereign all the days of
his life.
30 And as his allowance, a continual allowance was
given to him from the sovereign, a quota for each day,
all the days of his life.
29

991

ISAIAH

YESHAYAHU
‫ יׁשעיהו‬WhY[vY

1 The vision of Yeshayahu son of Amots, which he
saw concerning Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim in the
days of Uzziyahu, Yotham, Aḥaz, Ḥizqiyahu sovereigns of Yahuḏah.
2 Hear, O shamayim, and listen, O earth! For hWhY
has spoken, “I have reared and brought up children,
but they have transgressed against Me.
3 An ox knows its owner and a donkey its master’s
crib - Yisra’ĕl does not know, My people have not
understood.”
4 Alas, sinning nation, a people loaded with
wickedness, a seed of evil-doers, sons acting
corruptly! They have forsaken hWhY, they have
provoked the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl, they went
backward.
5 Why should you be beaten any more? You
continue in apostasy! All the head is sick, and all the
heart faints.
6 From the sole of the foot, to the head, there is no
soundness in it - wounds and bruises and open sores;
they have not been closed or bound up, or soothed
with ointment.
7 Your land is laid waste, your cities are burned with
fire, strangers devour your land in your presence. And
it is laid waste, as overthrown by strangers.
8 And the daughter of Tsiyon is left as a booth in a
vineyard, as a hut in a garden of cucumbers, as a
besieged city.
9 Unless hWhY of hosts had left to us a small
remnant, we would have become like Seḏom, we
would have been made like Amorah.
992

YESHAYAHU

Hear the word of hWhY, you rulers of Seḏom; give
ear to the Torah of our Elohim, you people of Amorah!
11 “Of what use to Me are your many slaughterings?”
declares hWhY. “I have had enough of burnt offerings
of rams and the fat of fed beasts. I do not delight in
the blood of bulls, or of lambs or goats.
12 “When you come to appear before Me, who has
required this from your hand, to trample My
courtyards?
13 “Stop bringing futile offerings, incense, it is an
abomination to Me. New Moons, Shabbathoth, the
calling of meetings - I am unable to bear
unrighteousness and assembly.
14 “My being hates your new moons and your
appointed times, they are a trouble to Me, I am weary
of bearing them.
15 “And when you spread out your hands, I hide My
eyes from you; even though you make many prayers,
I do not hear. Your hands have become filled with
blood.
16 “Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean; put
away the evil of your doings from before My eyes.
Stop doing evil!
17 “Learn to do good! Seek Right-Ruling, reprove the
oppressor, defend the fatherless, plead for the widow.
18 “Come now, and let us reason together,” says
hWhY. “Though your sins are like scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow; though they are red like crimson,
they shall be as wool.
19 “If you submit and obey, you shall eat the good of
the land;
20 but if you refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured
by the sword,” for the mouth of hWhY has spoken.
10

993

ISAIAH

How the steadfast city has become a whore! I
have filled it with Right-Ruling; righteousness lodged
in it, but now murderers.
22 Your silver has become dross, your wine is mixed
with water.
23 Your rulers are stubborn, and companions of
thieves. Everyone loves bribes, and runs after
rewards. They do not defend the fatherless, nor does
the cause of the widow reach them.
24 Therefore the Aḏon declares, hWhY of hosts,
Almighty of Yisra’ĕl, “Ah, I shall be eased of My
adversaries, and I shall be avenged of My enemies.
25 “And I shall turn My hand against you, and shall
refine your dross as with lye, and shall remove all
your alloy.
26 “And I shall give back your judges as at the first,
and your counsellors as at the beginning. After this
you shall be called the city of righteousness, a
steadfast city.”
27 Tsiyon shall be ransomed with right-ruling, and her
returning ones with righteousness.
28 And the destruction of transgressors and of
sinners is together, and those who forsake hWhY shall
be consumed.
29 For they shall be ashamed of the terebinth trees
which you have desired. And you shall be
embarrassed because of the gardens which you have
chosen.
30 For you shall be as a terebinth whose leaf fades,
and as a garden that has no water.
31 The strong shall be for tow, and his work for a
spark. And both shall burn together, with no one to
extinguish.
21

994

YESHAYAHU

2 The word that Yeshayahu the son of Amots saw
concerning Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim:
2 And it shall be in the latter days that the mountain
of the House of hWhY is established on the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills. And
all nations shall flow to it.
3 And many peoples shall come and say, “Come,
and let us go up to the mountain of hWhY, to the
House of the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, and let Him teach us
His Ways, and let us walk in His paths, for out of
Tsiyon comes forth the Torah, and the Word of hWhY
from Yerushalayim.”
4 And He shall judge between the nations, and shall
reprove many peoples. And they shall beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither teach battle any more.
5 O house of Ya’aqoḇ, come and let us walk in the
light of HWHY.
6 For You have forsaken Your people, the house of
Ya’aqoḇ, because they have been filled from the
East, and practise magic like the Pelishtites, and they
are pleased with the children of foreigners.
7 And their land is filled with silver and gold, and
there is no end to their treasures. And their land is
filled with horses, and there is no end to their chariots.
8 And their land is filled with idols; they bow
themselves to the work of their own hands, to what
their own fingers have made.
9 And the lowly bows down, and the high is
humbled; therefore You do not bear them.
10 Enter into the rock, and hide in the dust, because
of the reverence of hWhY and the splendour of His
excellency.
995

ISAIAH

The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, the pride
of men shall be bowed down, and hWhY alone shall
be exalted in that day.
12 For hWhY of hosts has a day against all that is
proud and lofty, against all that is lifted up, so that it
is brought low;
13 and against all the cedars of Leḇanon that are high
and lifted up, and against all the oaks of Bashan;
14 and against all the high mountains, and against all
the hills that are lifted up;
15 and against every lofty tower, and against every
strong wall;
16 and against all the ships of Tarshish, and against
all the desirable craft.
17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and
the pride of men shall be brought low. And hWhY
alone shall be exalted in that day,
18 and the idols completely pass away.
19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and
into the caves of the earth, from dread of hWhY and
the splendour of His excellency, when He arises to
shake the earth mightily.
20 In that day man shall throw away his idols of silver
and his idols of gold, which they made, each for
himself to worship, to the moles and bats,
21 to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the crags
of the rugged rocks, because of the reverence of
hWhY and the splendour of His excellency, when He
arises to shake the earth mightily.
22 Cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
for in what is he to be reckoned upon?
11

3 For look, the Aḏon, hWhY of hosts, is turning aside
from Yerushalayim and from Yahuḏah the stock and
996

YESHAYAHU

the store, all the supply of bread and all the supply of
water;
2 the mighty man and the man of battle, the judge
and the naḇi, and the diviner and the elder;
3 the commander of fifty and the highly respected
man, and the counsellor and the skilled craftsman,
and the clever enchanter.
4 “And I shall make youths their heads, and children
shall rule over them.
5 And the people shall exert pressure, man on man,
man on his neighbour; the young rise up against the
older, and the lightly esteemed against the highly
esteemed.”
6 When a man takes hold of his brother in the house
of his father, by the garment, “Come, be a chief over
us, and let this ruin be under your hand,”
7 he shall swear in that day, saying, “I am not a
healer, for in my house is neither bread nor garment;
do not make me a chief of the people.”
8 For Yerushalayim has stumbled, and Yahuḏah
has fallen, because their tongue and their doings are
against hWhY, to provoke the eyes of His esteem.
9 The look on their faces witnesses against them,
and they declare their sin as Seḏom; they do not hide
it. Woe to their being! For they have brought evil upon
themselves.
10 “Say to the righteous it is well, for they eat the fruit
of their doings.
11 “Woe to the wicked - evil! For the reward of his
hand is done to him.
12 “My people! Youths exert pressure on them, and
women rule over them. O My people! Your leaders
lead astray, and swallow the way of your paths.”
13 hWhY shall stand up to plead, and is standing to
judge the peoples.
997

ISAIAH

hWhY enters into judgment with the elders of His
people and its heads, “It is you who have eaten up
the vineyard, the plunder of the poor is in your
houses.
15 “What do you mean by crushing My people and
grinding the faces of the poor?” declares the Aḏon,
hWhY of hosts.
16 And hWhY says, “Because the daughters of Tsiyon
are haughty, and walk with outstretched necks and
seductive eyes, walking and mincing as they go,
making a jingling with their feet,
17 therefore hWhY shall smite with a scab the crown
of the head of the daughters of Tsiyon, and HWHY
expose their nakedness.”
18 In that day hWhY takes away the finery of the
anklets, and the headbands, and the crescents,
19 the pendants, the bracelets and the veils,
20 the headdresses, and the leg ornaments, and the
sashes, and the perfume flasks, and the amulets,
21 the rings, and the nose jewels,
22 the costly robes, and the cloaks, and the shawls,
and the purses,
23 the mirrors, and the fine linen, and the turbans,
and the large veils.
24 And it shall be: Instead of a sweet fragrance, a
smell of decay; and instead of a belt, a rope; and
instead of braided curls, baldness; and instead of a
festal robe, a girding of sackcloth; and branding
instead of loveliness.
25 Your men shall fall by the sword, and your strength
in battle.
26 And her gates shall lament and mourn, and she,
deserted, shall sit on the ground.
14

998

YESHAYAHU

4 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one
man, saying, “We shall eat our own food and wear our
own clothes; only let us be called by your name, to take
away our reproach.”
2 In that day the Branch of hWhY shall be splendid
and esteemed. And the fruit of the earth shall be
excellent and comely for the escaped ones of Yisra’ĕl.
3 And it shall be that he who is left in Tsiyon and he
who remains in Yerushalayim is called qodesh,
everyone who is written among the living in
Yerushalayim.
4 When hWhY has washed away the filth of the
daughters of Tsiyon, and rinsed away the blood of
Yerushalayim from her midst, by the spirit of judgment
and by the spirit of burning,
5 then hWhY shall create above every dwelling place
of Mount Tsiyon, and above her assemblies, a cloud
and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by
night, for over all the esteem shall be a covering,
6 and a booth for shade in the daytime from the
heat, for a place of refuge, and for a shelter from
storm and rain.

5 Please let me sing to the One I love, a song for my
loved One regarding His vineyard: my loved One has
a vineyard on a fertile hill.
2 And He dug it up and cleared it of stones, and
planted it with the choicest vine, and built a
watchtower in its midst, and also made a winepress
in it. And He waited for the yielding of grapes, but it
yielded rotten ones.
3 “And now, O inhabitant of Yerushalayim and man
of Yahuḏah, please judge between Me and My
vineyard.
999

ISAIAH

“What more could have been done to My vineyard
that I have not done in it? Why, when I waited for the
yielding of grapes, did it yield rotten ones?
5 “And now, please let Me inform you what I am
doing to My vineyard: To take away its hedge and it
shall be burned; to break down its wall and it shall be
trampled down;
6 and I lay it waste; it is not pruned or dug and
thornbushes and weeds shall come up; and I
command the clouds not to rain on it.”
7 For the vineyard of hWhY of hosts is the house of
Yisra’ĕl, and the man of Yahuḏah is His pleasant
plant. He looked for right-ruling, but see, oppression;
for righteousness, but see, weeping.
8 Woe to those who join house to house, who add
field to field, until there is no room, and you are made
to dwell alone in the midst of the land!
9 In my hearing hWhY of hosts, “Truly, many houses
shall be a waste - big and fine ones, without
inhabitant.
10 “For ten acres of vineyard yield one bath, and a
ḥomer of seed yields one ĕphah.”
11 Woe to those who rise early in the morning
pursuing strong drink, who stay up late at night - wine
inflames them!
12 And the lyre and the harp, the tambourine and
flute, and wine are in their feasts; but they do not
regard the deeds of hWhY, nor see the work of His
hands.
13 Therefore my people have gone into exile,
because they have no knowledge. And their
esteemed men are starved, and their crowd dried up
with thirst.
14 Therefore the grave has made itself wide and
opened its mouth. Without Law, their splendour and
4

1000

YESHAYAHU

their crowd and their uproar, and he who is exulting
within her, shall go down into it.
15 And man is bowed down, and mortal man
humbled, and the eyes of the proud are humbled.
16 But hWhY of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the
qodesh Ĕl is qodesh in righteousness.
17 And the lambs shall feed in their pasture, and
strangers shall eat in the waste places of the fat ones.
18 Woe to those who draw wickedness with cords of
falsehood, and sin as with wagon ropes,
19 who are saying, “Let Him hurry! Let Him hasten
His work, so that we see it! And let the counsel of the
Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl draw near and come, so that
we know.”
20 Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil;
who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; who
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
21 Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes, and
clever in their own sight!
22 Woe to the mighty to drink wine, and brave men to
mix strong drink,
23 who declare right the wicked for a bribe, and the
righteousness of the righteous they turn aside from
him!
24 Therefore, as a tongue of fire devours the stubble,
and the flame consumes the chaff, their root is as
rottenness, and their blossom goes up like dust because they have rejected the Torah of hWhY of
hosts, and despised the Word of the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl.
25 Therefore the displeasure of hWhY has burned
against His people, and He stretches out His hand
against them and smites them, and the mountains
tremble. And their carcass is as filth in the middle of
1001

ISAIAH

the streets. With all this His displeasure has not
turned back, and His hand is still stretched out!
26 And He shall lift up a banner to the nations from
afar, and shall whistle to them from the end of the
earth. And see, they come with speed, swiftly!
27 Not one of them is weary or stumbling, not one
slumbers or sleeps. Not a belt shall be loosened on
their loins, nor the thong of their sandals be broken.
28 Their arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent;
their horses’ hooves shall seem like flint, and their
wheels like a whirlwind.
29 Their roar is like that of a lion, they roar like young
lions. And they growl and seize prey, and slip away,
with no one to rescue.
30 And in that day they shall growl over it as with the
growling of the sea. And one shall look at the earth,
and see, darkness and distress! And light shall be
darkened by the clouds.

6 In the year that Sovereign Uzziyahu died, I saw
hWhY sitting on a throne, high and lifted up, and the
train of His robe filled the Hĕyḵal.
2 Above it stood seraphim. Each one had six wings:
with two he covered his face, with two he covered his
feet, and with two he flew.
3 And one cried to another and said, “Qodesh,
qodesh, qodesh is hWhY of hosts; all the earth is filled
with His esteem!”
4 And the posts of the door were shaken by the
voice of him who cried out, and the house was filled
with smoke.
5 And I said, “Woe to me, for I am undone! Because
I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of
a people of unclean lips - for my eyes have seen the
Sovereign, HWHY of hosts.”
1002

YESHAYAHU

And one of the seraphim flew to me, having in his
hand a live coal which he had taken with the tongs
from the altar.
7 And he touched my mouth with it, and said, “See,
this has touched your lips; your wickedness is taken
away, and your sin is covered.”
8 And I heard the voice of hWhY, saying, “Whom do
I send, and who would go for Us?” And I said, “Here
am I! Send me.”
9 And He said, “Go, and you shall say to this people,
‘Hearing, you hear, but do not understand; and
seeing, you see, but do not know.’
10 “Make the heart of this people fat, and their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their heart, and shall turn and be healed.”
11 Then I said, “hWhY, until when?” And He
answered, “Until the cities are laid waste and without
inhabitant, and the houses are without a man, and the
land is laid waste, a ruin,
12 and hWhY has removed men far away, and the
forsaken places be many in the midst of the land.
13 “But still, there is a tenth part in it, and it shall again
be for a burning, like a terebinth tree and like an oak,
whose stump remains when it is cut down. The
qodesh seed is its stump!”
6

7 And it came to be in the days of Aḥaz son of
Yotham, son of Uzziyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, that
Retsin sovereign of Aram and Peqaḥ son of
Remalyahu, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, went up to
Yerushalayim to fight against it, but could not prevail
against it.
2 And it was reported to the house of Dawiḏ, saying,
“Aram has allied with Ephrayim.” And his heart and
1003

ISAIAH

the heart of his people were moved as the trees of the
forest are moved with the wind.
3 And hWhY said to Yeshayahu, “Go out now to
meet Aḥaz, you and She’ar-Yashuḇ your son, at the
end of the channel of the upper pool, on the highway
of the Launderer’s Field,
4 and say to him, ‘Take heed, and be calm; do not
fear or be faint-hearted for these two stubs of smoking
firebrands, for the fierce displeasure of Retsin and
Aram, and the son of Remalyahu.
5 ‘Because Aram, Ephrayim, and the son of
Remalyahu have plotted evil against you, saying,
6 “Let us go up against Yahuḏah and tear it apart,
and break it open for ourselves, and appoint a
sovereign over them, the son of Taḇe’ĕl.”
7 ‘Thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “It is not going to stand,
nor shall it take place.
8 “For the head of Aram is Dammeseq, and the head
of Dammeseq is Retsin. And within sixty-five years
Ephrayim is to be broken as a people.
9 “And the head of Ephrayim is Shomeron, and the
head of Shomeron is the son of Remalyahu. If you do
not believe, you are not steadfast.” ’ ”
10 And hWhY spoke again to Aḥaz, saying,
11 “Ask a sign for yourself from hWhY your Elohim;
make deep the request or make it high.”
12 But Aḥaz said, “I do not ask nor try hWhY!”
13 And he said, “Hear now, O house of Dawiḏ! Is it
not enough that you weary men, that you weary my
Elohim also?
14 “Therefore hWhY Himself gives you a sign: Look,
the maiden conceives and gives birth to a Bĕn, and
shall call His Name Immanu’ĕl.
15 “He eats curds and honey when He knows to
refuse evil and choose the good.
1004

YESHAYAHU

“For before the Child knows to refuse evil and
choose the good, the land that you dread is to be
forsaken by both her sovereigns.
17 “hWhY brings on you and your people and your
father’s house days that have not come since the day
that Ephrayim turned away from Yahuḏah - the
sovereign of Ashshur.”
18 And it shall be in that day that hWhY whistles for
the fly that is in the farthest part of the rivers of
Mitsrayim, and for the bee that is in the land of
Ashshur.
19 And they shall come, and all of them shall rest in
the steep ravines and in the clefts of the rocks, and
on all weeds and in all pastures.
20 In that day hWhY shall shave with a razor hired
beyond the River - with the sovereign of Ashshur - the
head and the hair of the legs, and also remove the
beard.
21 And it shall be in that day that a man keeps alive
a young cow and two sheep.
22 And it shall be, that he shall eat curds because of
the plenty of milk he gets, for everyone left in the land
shall eat curds.
23 And it shall be in that day, every place where there
were a thousand vines worth a thousand sheqels of
silver, let it be for thornbushes and weeds.
24 With arrows and bows one shall go there, because
all the land shall be thornbushes and weeds.
25 And to all the hills which were tilled with the hoe,
you do not go for fear of thornbushes and weeds; but
it shall be for sending oxen to, and a place for sheep
to roam.
16

1005

ISAIAH

8 And hWhY said to me, “Take a large tablet, and write
on it with a man’s pen concerning Mahĕr-Shalal-ḤashBaz.
2 “And let Me take reliable witnesses to record,
Uriyah the kohĕn and Zeḵaryahu son of
Yeḇereḵyahu.”
3 And I went to the neḇiyah, and she conceived and
bore a son. And hWhY said to me, “Call his name
Mahĕr-Shalal-Ḥash-Baz;
4 for before the child knows to cry ‘My father’ and
‘My mother,’ the riches of Dammeseq and the spoil of
Shomeron is taken away before the sovereign of
Ashshur.”
5 And hWhY spoke to me again, saying,
6 “In as much as these people refused the waters of
Shiloaḥ that flow softly, and rejoice in Retsin and in
Remalyahu’s son;
7 now therefore, see, hWhY brings up over them the
waters of the River, strong and mighty - the sovereign
of Ashshur and all his esteem. And he shall come up
over all his channels and go over all his banks.
8 “And he shall pass through Yahuḏah, he shall
overflow and pass over, reaching up to the neck. And
the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of
Your land, O Immanu’ĕl.
9 “Be shattered, O you peoples, and be broken in
pieces! Give ear, all you from the far places of the
earth. Gird yourselves, but be broken in pieces; gird
yourselves, but be broken in pieces.
10 “Take counsel, and it comes to naught; speak a
word, and it does not stand, for Ĕl is with us.”
11 For hWhY spoke thus to me with a strong hand,
and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of
this people, saying,
1006

YESHAYAHU

“Do not say, ‘A conspiracy,’ concerning all that this
people call a conspiracy, nor be afraid of their threats,
nor be troubled.
13 “hWhY of hosts, Him you shall qadosh. Let Him be
your reverence, and let Him be your awe.
14 “And He shall be for a Miqdash, but a stone of
stumbling and a rock that makes for falling to both the
houses of Yisra’ĕl, as a trap and a snare to the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim.
15 “And many among them shall stumble and fall, and
be broken and snared and taken.”
16 Bind up the Witness, seal the Torah among my
talmidim.
17 And I shall wait on hWhY, who hides His face from
the house of Ya’aqoḇ. And I shall look for Him.
18 Look, I and the children whom hWhY has given me
- for signs and wonders in Yisra’ĕl from hWhY of hosts,
who dwells in Mount Tsiyon.
19 And when they say to you, “Seek those who are
mediums and wizards, who whisper and mutter,”
should not a people seek their Elohim? Should they
seek the dead on behalf of the living?
20 To the Torah and to the Witness! If they do not
speak according to this Word, it is because they have
no daybreak.
21 And they shall pass through it hard-pressed and
hungry. And it shall be, when they are hungry, that
they shall be wroth and curse their sovereign and
their Elohim, looking upward.
22 And they shall look to the earth and see distress
and darkness, gloom of hard times, and be driven into
thick darkness.
12

9 But there is no gloom upon her who is distressed,
as when at first He humbled the land of Zeḇulun and
1007

ISAIAH

the land of Naphtali, and afterward more heavily
oppressed her, by the way of the sea, beyond the
Yardĕn, in Galil of the nations.
2 The people who were walking in darkness have
seen a great light; upon those who dwelt in the land
of the shadow of death a light has shone.
3 You shall increase the nation; You shall make its
joy great. They shall rejoice before You, as in the joy
of harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
4 For You shall break the yoke of his burden and the
staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in
the day of Miḏyan.
5 For every boot of one trampling in tumult, and coat
rolled in blood, shall be used for burning and fuel for
fire.
6 For a Child shall be born unto us, a Bĕn shall be
given unto us, and the rule is on His shoulder. And
His Name is called Wonder, Counsellor, Strong Ĕl,
Father of Continuity, Prince of Peace.
7 Of the increase of His rule and peace there is no
end, upon the throne of Dawiḏ and over His reign, to
establish it and sustain it with right-ruling and with
righteousness from now on, even forever. The ardour
of hWhY of hosts does this.
8 hWhY sent a word against Ya’aqoḇ, and it has
fallen on Yisra’ĕl.
9 And the people shall know, all of them, Ephrayim
and the inhabitant of Shomeron, who say in pride and
greatness of heart:
10 “The bricks have fallen down, but we rebuild with
hewn stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we
replace them with cedars.”
11 And hWhY raised the adversaries of Retsin against
him, and stirred up his enemies,
1008

YESHAYAHU

the Arameans before and the Pelishtites behind.
And they devour Yisra’ĕl with an open mouth. With all
this His displeasure has not turned back, and His
hand is still stretched out.
13 And the people have not turned back to Him who
smites them, nor have they sought HWHY of hosts.
14 And HWHY cuts off head and tail from Yisra’ĕl, palm
branch and reed in one day.
15 Elder and highly respected, he is the head; the
naḇi who teaches falsehood, he is the tail.
16 For the leaders of this people lead astray, and
those who are guided by them are swallowed up.
17 Therefore hWhY does not rejoice over their young
men, and has no compassion on their fatherless and
widows; for everyone is defiled and evil, and every
mouth speaks foolishness. With all this His
displeasure has not turned back, and His hand is still
stretched out.
18 For wickedness burns as the fire; it consumes
thornbushes and weeds, and lights the bushes of the
forest ablaze, and they roll up like rising smoke.
19 The land shall be burned up by the wrath of hWhY
of hosts, and the people be as fuel for the fire. A man
shall not spare his brother,
20 and cut down on the right hand, but shall be
hungry; and he devours on the left hand, but shall not
be satisfied; each one devouring the flesh of his own
arm:
21 Menashsheh,
Ephrayim,
and
Ephrayim,
Menashsheh; together they are against Yahuḏah.
With all this His displeasure has not turned back, and
His hand is still stretched out.
12

10 “Woe to those making unrighteous decrees,
writers who have prescribed toil,
1009

ISAIAH

to keep the needy back from right-ruling, and to
take what is right from the poor of My people, that
widows become their prey, and orphans their plunder.
3 “What shall you do in the day of visitation, and in
the ruin which comes from afar? To whom would you
run for help? And where would you leave your
wealth?
4 “Without Me they shall bow down among the
prisoners, and fall among the slain.” With all this His
displeasure has not turned back, and His hand is still
stretched out.
5 “Woe to Ashshur, the rod of My displeasure and
the staff in whose hand is My displeasure.
6 “Against a defiled nation I send him, and against
the people of My wrath I command him to seize the
spoil, to take the prey, and to tread them down like
the mud of the streets.
7 “But he does not intend so, nor does his heart think
so, for it is in his heart to destroy, and cut off not a few
nations.
8 “For he says, ‘Are not my princes sovereigns?
9 ‘Is not Kalno like Karkemish? Is not Ḥamath like
Arpaḏ? Is not Shomeron like Dammeseq?
10 ‘As my hand has found the reigns of the idols,
whose carved images excelled those of
Yerushalayim and Shomeron,
11 as I have done to Shomeron and her idols, do I not
do also to Yerushalayim and her idols?’
12 “And it shall be, when hWhY has performed all His
work on Mount Tsiyon and on Yerushalayim, that I
shall punish the fruit of the greatness of the heart of
the sovereign of Ashshur, and the boasting of his
haughty looks.
13 “For he has said, ‘By the power of my hand I have
done it, and by my wisdom, for I have been clever.
2

1010

YESHAYAHU

And I remove the boundaries of the people, and have
robbed their treasuries. And I put down the
inhabitants like a strong one.
14 ‘And my hand finds the riches of the people like a
nest. And I have gathered all the earth like forsaken
eggs are gathered. And there was no one who moved
his wing, nor opened his mouth with even a peep.’ ”
15 Would the axe boast itself over him who chops
with it, or the saw exalt itself over him who saws with
it? As a rod waving those who lift it up! As a staff lifting
up that which is not wood!
16 Therefore the Aḏon, hWhY of hosts, sends
leanness among his fat ones. And under his esteem
he kindles a burning like the burning of a fire.
17 And the Light of Yisra’ĕl shall be for a fire, and his
Qadosh One for a flame. And it shall burn and devour
his weeds and his thornbushes in one day,
18 and consume the esteem of his forest and of his
fertile field, both life and flesh. And they shall be as
when a sick man wastes away,
19 and the remaining trees of his forest shall be so
few in number that a child records them.
20 And in that day it shall be that the remnant of
Yisra’ĕl, and those who have escaped of the house of
Ya’aqoḇ, never again lean upon him who smote them,
but shall lean upon hWhY, the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl,
in truth.
21 A remnant shall return, the remnant of Ya’aqoḇ, to
the Mighty Ĕl.
22 For though your people, O Yisra’ĕl, be as the sand
of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return - a
decisive end, overflowing righteousness.
23 For the Aḏon hWhY of hosts is making a complete
end, as decided, in the midst of all the earth.
1011

ISAIAH

Therefore thus said the Aḏon hWhY of hosts, “My
people, who dwell in Tsiyon, be not afraid of Ashshur,
who beats you with a rod and lifts up his staff against
you, in the way of Mitsrayim.
25 “For yet a little while and the displeasure shall be
completed, and My displeasure be to their
destruction.”
26 And hWhY of hosts stirs up a lash for him as the
smiting of Miḏyan at the rock of Orĕḇ. And as His rod
was on the sea, so shall He lift it up in the way of
Mitsrayim.
27 And in that day it shall be that his burden is
removed from your shoulder, and his yoke from your
neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing oil.
28 He has come upon Ayath, he has passed Miḡron.
At Miḵmash he stored his supplies.
29 They have gone through the pass, they have
taken up lodging at Geḇa. Ramah is afraid, Giḇ’ah of
Sha’ul has fled.
30 Lift up your voice, O daughter of Gallim! Listen,
Layishah - O poor Anathoth!
31 Maḏmĕnah has fled, the inhabitants of Gĕḇim
sought refuge.
32 Yet he remains at Noḇ that day; he shakes his fist
at the mountain of the daughter of Tsiyon, the hill of
Yerushalayim.
33 Look, the Aḏon, hWhY of hosts, is lopping off a
branch with an awesome crash, and the tall ones are
cut down, and the lofty ones are laid low.
34 And He shall cut down the thickets of the forest
with iron, and Leḇanon shall fall as a mighty one!
24

11 And a Rod shall come forth from the stump of
Yishai, and a Sprout from his roots shall bear fruit.
1012

YESHAYAHU

The Ruaḥ of hWhY shall rest upon Him - the Ruaḥ
of wisdom and understanding, the Ruaḥ of counsel
and might, the Ruaḥ of knowledge and of the
reverence of HWHY,
3 and shall make Him breathe in the reverence of
hWhY. And He shall not judge by the sight of His eyes,
nor decide by the hearing of His ears.
4 But with righteousness He shall judge the poor,
and shall decide with straightness for the meek ones
of the earth, and shall smite the earth with the rod of
His mouth, and slay the wicked with the breath of His
lips.
5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins,
and trustworthiness the girdle of His waist.
6 And a wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and a leopard
lie down with the young goat, and the calf and the
young lion and the fatling together, and a little child
leads them.
7 And cow and bear shall feed, their young ones lie
down together, and a lion eat straw like an ox.
8 And the nursing child shall play by the cobra’s
hole, and the weaned child shall put his hand in the
adder’s den.
9 They do no evil nor destroy in all My qodesh
mountain, for the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of hWhY as the waters cover the sea.
10 And in that day there shall be a Root of Yishai,
standing as a banner to the people. Unto Him the
gentiles shall seek, and His rest shall be esteem.
11 And it shall be in that day that hWhY puts His hand
again a second time to recover the remnant of His
people who are left, from Ashshur and from
Mitsrayim, from Pathros and from Kush, from Ĕylam
and from Shin’ar, from Ḥamath and from the islands
of the sea.
2

1013

ISAIAH

And He shall raise a banner for the nations, and
gather the outcasts of Yisra’ĕl, and assemble the
dispersed of Yahuḏah from the four corners of the
earth.
13 And the envy of Ephrayim shall turn aside, and the
adversaries of Yahuḏah be cut off. Ephrayim shall not
envy Yahuḏah, and Yahuḏah not trouble Ephrayim.
14 But they shall fly down upon the shoulder of the
Pelishtites toward the west; together they plunder the
people of the east, their hand stretching forth on
Eḏom and Mo’aḇ, and the children of Ammon shall be
subject to them.
15 And hWhY shall put under the ban the tongue of
the Sea of Mitsrayim, and He shall wave His hand
over the River with the might of His Ruaḥ, and shall
smite it in the seven streams, and shall cause to tread
it in sandals.
16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of
His people, those left from Ashshur, as it was for
Yisra’ĕl in the day when he came up from the land of
Mitsrayim.
12

12 And in that day you shall say, “I thank You HWHY,
though You were enraged with me, Your displeasure
has turned back, and You have comforted me.
2 “See, Ĕl is my deliverance, I trust and am not
afraid. For Yah, hWhY, is my strength and my song;
and He has become my deliverance.”
3 And you shall draw water with joy from the
fountains of deliverance.
4 And in that day you shall say, “Praise hWhY, call
upon His Name; make known His deeds among the
peoples, make mention that His Name is exalted.
5 “Sing to hWhY, for He has done excellently; this is
known in all the earth.
1014

YESHAYAHU

“Cry aloud and shout, O inhabitant of Tsiyon, for
great is the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl in your midst!”

6

13 The message concerning Baḇel which
Yeshayahu son of Amots saw.
2 “Lift up a banner on the high mountain, raise your
voice to them; wave your hand, let them enter the
gates of the nobles.
3 “I have commanded My qodeshim; I have also
called My mighty men for My displeasure, My proudly
exulting ones.”
4 The noise of an uproar in the mountains, like that
of many people! A noise of uproar of the reigns of
gentiles gathered together! hWhY of hosts is gathering
an army for battle.
5 They are coming from a distant land, from the end
of the shamayim, even hWhY and His weapons of
displeasure, to destroy all the earth.
6 Howl, for the day of hWhY is near! It comes as a
destruction from Ĕl Shaddai.
7 Therefore all hands go limp, every man’s heart
melts,
8 and they shall be afraid. Pangs and sorrows take
hold of them, they are in pain as a woman in labour;
they are amazed at one another, their faces aflame!
9 See, the day of hWhY is coming, fierce, with wrath
and heat of displeasure, to lay the earth waste, and
destroy its sinners from it.
10 For the stars of the shamayim and their
constellations do not give off their light. The sun shall
be dark at its rising, and the moon not send out its
light.
11 “And I shall punish the world for its evil, and the
wicked for their wickedness, and shall put an end to
1015

ISAIAH

the arrogance of the proud, and lay low the pride of
the ruthless.
12 “I shall make mortal man scarcer than fine gold,
and mankind than the gold of Ophir.
13 “So I shall make the shamayim tremble, and the
earth shall shake from her place, in the wrath of hWhY
of hosts and in the day of the heat of His displeasure.
14 “And it shall be as the hunted gazelle, and as a
sheep that no man takes up - every man turns to his
own people, and everyone flees to his own land.
15 “Whoever is found is thrust through, and everyone
taken falls by the sword.
16 “And their children are dashed to pieces before
their eyes, their houses plundered and their wives
ravished.
17 “See, I am stirring up the Maḏites against them,
who do not regard silver, and as for gold, they do not
delight in it.
18 “And bows dash the young to pieces, and they
have no compassion on the fruit of the womb, their
eye spares no children.
19 “And Baḇel, the splendour of reigns, the
comeliness of the Kasdites’ pride, shall be as when
Elohim overthrew Seḏom and Amorah.
20 “She shall never be inhabited, nor be settled from
generation to generation; nor shall the Araḇian pitch
tents there, nor shepherds rest their flocks there.
21 “But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, and
their houses shall be filled with owls. And ostriches
shall dwell there, and wild goats frolic there.
22 “And hyenas shall cry in their citadels, and jackals
in their pleasant palaces. And her time is near to
come, and her days are not drawn out.”

1016

YESHAYAHU

14 For hWhY has compassion on Ya’aqoḇ, and shall
again choose Yisra’ĕl, and give them rest in their own
land. And the strangers shall join them, and they shall
cling to the house of Ya’aqoḇ.
2 And peoples shall take them and bring them to
their own place. And the house of Yisra’ĕl shall
possess them for servants and female servants in the
land of hWhY. And they shall make captives of their
captors, and rule over their oppressors.
3 And it shall be, in the hWhY day gives you rest from
your sorrow, and from your trouble and the hard
service in which you were made to serve,
4 that you shall take up this proverb against the
sovereign of Baḇel, and say, “How the oppressor has
ceased, the gold-gatherer ceased!
5 “hWhY has broken the staff of the wicked, the
sceptre of the rulers,
6 he who smote the people in wrath with ceaseless
blows, he who ruled the gentiles in displeasure, is
persecuted and no one restrains.
7 “All the earth is at rest and at peace, they shall
break forth into singing.
8 “Even the cypress trees rejoice over you, and the
cedars of Leḇanon, saying, ‘Since you were cut down,
no woodcutter has come up against us.’
9 “The grave from beneath is excited about you, to
meet you at your coming; it stirs up the dead for you,
all the chief ones of the earth; it has raised up from
their thrones all the sovereigns of the gentiles.
10 “All of them respond and say to you, ‘Have you
also become as weak as we? Have you become like
us?
11 ‘Your arrogance has been brought down to the
grave, and the sound of your stringed instruments;
1017

ISAIAH

the maggot is spread under you, and worms cover
you.’
12 “How you have fallen from the shamayim, O Hĕlĕl,
son of the morning! You have been cut down to the
ground, you who laid low the gentiles!
13 “For you have said in your heart, ‘Let me go up to
the shamayim, let me raise my throne above the stars
of Ĕl, and let me sit in the mount of meeting on the
sides of the north;
14 let me go up above the heights of the clouds, let
me be like the Most High.’
15 “But you are brought down to the grave, to the
sides of the pit.
16 “Those who see you stare at you, and ponder over
you, saying, ‘Is this the man who made the earth
tremble, who shook reigns,
17 who made the world as a wilderness and
destroyed its cities, who would not open the house of
his prisoners?’
18 “All the sovereigns of the gentiles, all of them,
were laid in esteem, everyone in his own house;
19 but you have been thrown from your grave like an
abominable branch, like the garment of those who are
slain, thrust through with a sword, who go down to the
stones of the pit, like a trampled corpse.
20 “You are not joined with them in burial, for you
have destroyed your land and slain your people. Let
the seed of evil-doers never be mentioned.
21 “Prepare his children for slaughter, because of the
wickedness of their fathers, lest they rise up and
possess the land, and fill the face of the world with
cities.”
22 “And I shall rise up against them,” declares hWhY
of hosts, “and shall cut off from Baḇel the name and
1018

YESHAYAHU

remnant, and offspring and descendant,” declares
hWhY.
23 “And I shall make it a possession for the
porcupine, and marshes of muddy water; and shall
sweep it with the broom of destruction,” declares
hWhY of hosts.
24 hWhY of hosts has sworn, saying, “Truly, as I have
planned, so shall it be; and as I have purposed, so it
stands:
25 “To break Ashshur in My land, and tread him down
on My mountains. And his yoke shall be removed
from them, and his burden removed from their
shoulders.
26 “This is the counsel that is counselled for all the
earth, and this is the hand that is stretched out over
all the nations.
27 “For hWhY of hosts has counselled, and who
annuls it? And His hand that is stretched out, who
turns it back?”
28 This is the message which came in the year that
Sovereign Aḥaz died:
29 “Do not rejoice, all you of Pelesheth, that the rod
that smote you is broken; for out of the serpent’s roots
comes forth an adder, and its offspring is a fiery flying
serpent.
30 “And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the
needy lie down in safety. And I shall kill your roots
with scarcity of food, and it shall slay your remnant.
31 “Howl, O gate! Cry, O city! Melt away, all you of
Pelesheth! For smoke shall come from the north, and
there is no stranger in his ranks.”
32 And what does one answer the messengers of a
nation? “That hWhY has founded Tsiyon, and the poor
of His people take refuge in it.”
1019

ISAIAH

15 The message concerning Mo’aḇ. Because in the
night Ar of Mo’aḇ was laid waste, was silenced!
Because in the night Qir of Mo’aḇ was laid waste, was
silenced!
2 He has gone up to the house and Diḇon, to the
high places to weep. Mo’aḇ is wailing over Neḇo and
over Mĕyḏeḇa; on all their heads is baldness, and
every beard is cut off.
3 In their streets they shall put on sackcloth; on the
tops of their houses and in their streets everyone
wails, weeping bitterly.
4 And Ḥeshbon and El’alĕh cry out, their voice shall
be heard as far as Yahats. Therefore the armed ones
of Mo’aḇ shout; his being shall tremble within him.
5 My own heart is toward Mo’aḇ; her fugitives cry
unto Tso’ar, like a three-year-old heifer. For by the
ascent of Luḥith they go up with weeping; for in the
way of Ḥoronayim they raise a cry of destruction.
6 For the waters of Nimrim are wastes, for the green
grass has withered away; the grass fails, there is no
greenness.
7 Therefore the wealth, acquired and stored up, they
take away to the wadi ha’Araḇim.
8 For the cry has gone all around the borders of
Mo’aḇ, its wailing to Ĕḡlayim and its wailing to Be’ĕr
Ĕlim.
9 “For the waters of Dimon shall be filled with blood;
for I shall bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him who
escapes from Mo’aḇ, and on the remnant of the land.”

16 Send a lamb to the ruler of the land, from Sela to
the wilderness, to the mountain of the daughter of
Tsiyon.
1020

YESHAYAHU

And it shall be, like a wandering bird, a nest thrown
out, so are the daughters of Mo’aḇ at the fords of
Arnon.
3 “Bring counsel, execute judgment; make your
shadow like the night in the middle of the day; hide
the outcasts, do not betray him who escapes.
4 “Let My outcasts dwell with you, O Mo’aḇ; be a
shelter to them from the face of the ravager. For the
oppressor has met his end, destruction has ceased,
those trampling down have perished from the land.
5 “And in kindness the throne shall be established.
And One shall sit on it in truth, in the Tent of Dawiḏ,
judging and seeking Right-Ruling, and speeding
righteousness.”
6 We have heard of the pride of Mo’aḇ - very proud
- of his pride, his arrogance and his rage. His
boastings are not true.
7 So Mo’aḇ wails for Mo’aḇ, everyone wails. For the
raisin-cakes of Qir Ḥaraseth they moan. They are
utterly smitten.
8 For the fields of Ḥeshbon languish - the vine of
Siḇmah. The masters of the gentiles have broken
down its choice plants, which have reached to Ya’zĕr
and wandered through the wilderness. Her branches
are stretched out, they are gone over the sea.
9 Therefore I bewail the vine of Siḇmah, with the
weeping of Ya’zĕr. I water you with my tears, O
Ḥeshbon and El’alĕh, for acclamation have fallen
over your summer fruit and your harvest.
10 Gladness is taken away, and joy from the orchard;
in the vineyards there is no singing, nor shouting; No
treaders tread out wine in their presses; I have made
their acclamation cease.
11 Therefore my inward parts sound like a lyre for
Mo’aḇ, and my inner being for Qir Ḥeres.
2

1021

ISAIAH

And it shall be, when it is seen that Mo’aḇ has
wearied herself on the high place, that she shall come
to her sanctuary to pray, but not be able.
13 This is the word which hWhY has spoken
concerning Mo’aḇ since that time.
14 But now hWhY has spoken, saying, “Within three
years, as the years of a hired man, the esteem of
Mo’aḇ is to be despised with all its great throng, and
the remnant be few, small and weak.”
12

17 The message concerning Dammeseq. “See,
Dammeseq ceases to be a city, and shall become a
heap of ruins.
2 “The cities of Aro’ĕr are forsaken, they are for
flocks which shall lie down, with no one to frighten.
3 “And the stronghold shall cease from Ephrayim,
and the reign from Dammeseq, and the remnant of
Aram be as the esteem of the sons of Yisra’ĕl,”
declares hWhY of hosts.
4 “And in that day it shall be that the esteem of
Ya’aqoḇ wanes, and the fatness of his flesh grows
lean.
5 “And it shall be as when the harvester gathers the
grain, and reaps the heads with his arm. And it shall
be as he who gathers heads of grain in the Valley of
Repha’im.
6 “And gleaning grapes shall be left in it, like the
shaking of an olive tree, two or three olives at the top
of the uppermost branch, four or five in its most fruitbearing branches,” declares hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
7 In that day man shall look to his Maker, and his
eyes turn to the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his
hands; and he shall not see that which his own fingers
made, nor the Ashĕrim nor the sun-pillars.
1022

YESHAYAHU

In that day his strong cities become like a forsaken
forest and an uppermost branch, which they left
because of the children of Yisra’ĕl. And it shall
become a ruin.
10 Because you have forgotten the Elohim of your
deliverance, and have not remembered the Rock of
your stronghold, therefore you shall plant pleasant
plants and put out foreign seedlings,
11 by day make your plant to grow, and in the
morning make your seed to flourish - the harvest is a
heap in the day of grief and incurable pain.
12 Woe to the uproar of many people who make a
noise like the roar of the seas, and to the rushing of
nations that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty
waters 13 nations rushing like the rushing of many waters.
But He shall rebuke them and they shall flee far away,
and be chased like the chaff of the mountains before
the wind, like whirling dust before the whirlwind.
14 At eventide, look! Alarm! Before morning, it is no
more. This is the portion of those who plunder us, and
the lot of those who rob us.
9

18 Woe to the land shadowed with whirring wings,
which is beyond the rivers of Kush,
2 which sends envoys by sea, even in vessels of
reed on the waters, saying, “Go, swift messengers, to
a nation tall and smooth-skinned, to a people dreaded
from their beginning onward, a nation mighty and
trampling, whose land the rivers divide.”
3 All inhabitants of the world, and you that dwell on
the earth: When a banner is lifted up on the
mountains, look! And when a ram’s horn is blown,
hear!
1023

ISAIAH

For thus hWhY said to me, “I am still, and I watch
in My dwelling place like dazzling heat in sunshine,
like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.”
5 For before harvest, when the bud is perfect and
the sour grape is ripening in the flower, then He shall
cut off the twigs with pruning hooks, and shall cut
down and take away the spreading branches.
6 They are left together for the mountain birds of
prey and for the beasts of the earth. And the birds of
prey shall summer on them, and all the beasts of the
earth winter on them.
7 In that time a present shall be brought to hWhY of
hosts from a people tall and smooth-skinned, and
from a people awesome from their beginning onward
- a nation mighty and trampling, whose land the rivers
have divided - to the place of the Name of hWhY of
hosts, to Mount Tsiyon.
4

19 The message concerning Mitsrayim. See, hWhY
is riding on a swift cloud, and He shall come into
Mitsrayim. And the idols of Mitsrayim shall tremble at
His presence, and the heart of Mitsrayim melt in its
midst.
2 “And I shall stir up Mitsrites against Mitsrites, and
they shall fight, each one against his brother, and
each one against his neighbour, city against city,
reign against reign.
3 “And the spirit of Mitsrayim shall vanish within
them, and I destroy their counsel. And they shall seek
the idols and the mutterers, the mediums and the
sorcerers.
4 “And I shall deliver the Mitsrites into the hand of a
cruel master, and a fierce sovereign to rule over
them,” declares the Aḏon, hWhY of hosts.
1024

YESHAYAHU

And waters shall fail from the sea, and the river
wasted and dried up.
6 And the rivers shall stink, and the streams shall be
weak and dried up. Reeds and rushes shall wither.
7 Bare places by the River, by the mouth of the
River, and every sown field by the River shall wither.
It shall be driven away, and be no more.
8 And the fishermen shall lament, and all those who
cast hooks into the River shall mourn, and they who
spread nets on the waters shall pine away.
9 And those who work in fine flax, and those who
weave fine fabric shall become ashamed.
10 And its foundations shall be crushed, all the wage
workers grieved in being.
11 The princes of Tso’an are only fools; the counsel
of Pharaoh’s wise ones have become senseless.
How do you say to Pharaoh, “I am the son of the wise,
the son of ancient sovereigns?”
12 Where are they? Where are your wise men? Let
them show you, and let them know what hWhY of
hosts has counselled against Mitsrayim.
13 The princes of Tso’an have become fools, the
princes of Noph are deceived. They, the corner-stone
of her tribes, have led Mitsrayim astray.
14 hWhY has mixed a perverse spirit in her midst. And
they have led Mitsrayim astray in all her work, as a
drunkard strays in his vomit.
15 And there is no work for Mitsrayim, by either head
or tail, palm branch or bulrush.
16 In that day Mitsrayim shall become like women,
and tremble and fear because of the waving of the
hand of hWhY of hosts, which He waves over it.
17 And the land of Yahuḏah shall be a fear to
Mitsrayim, everyone who mentions it fears for himself,
5

1025

ISAIAH

because of the counsel of hWhY of hosts which He
has counselled against it.
18 In that day five cities in the land of Mitsrayim shall
speak the language of Kena’an and swear by hWhY
of hosts, one is called the City of Destruction.
19 In that day an altar to hWhY shall be in the midst of
the land of Mitsrayim, and a standing column to HWHY
at its border.
20 And it shall be for a sign and for a witness to hWhY
of hosts in the land of Mitsrayim. When they cry to
HWHY because of the oppressors, He sends them a
Saviour and an Elohim, and shall deliver them.
21 And hWhY shall be known to Mitsrayim, and the
Mitsrites shall know hWhY in that day, and make
slaughtering and meal offering, and shall make a vow
to hWhY and pay it.
22 And hWhY shall smite Mitsrayim, smite it and heal
it. And they shall turn to hWhY, and He shall hear them
and heal them.
23 In that day there shall be a highway from Mitsrayim
to Ashshur, and Ashshur shall come into Mitsrayim
and Mitsrayim into Ashshur, and Mitsrayim shall
serve with Ashshur.
24 In that day Yisra’ĕl shall be one of three with
Mitsrayim and Ashshur, even a beraḵah in the midst
of the earth,
25 whom hWhY of hosts shall baraḵ, saying, “Baruḵ is
Mitsrayim My people, and Ashshur the work of My
hands, and Yisra’ĕl My inheritance.”

20 In the year that Tartan came to Ashdoḏ, when
Sargon the sovereign of Ashshur sent him, and he
fought against Ashdoḏ and took it,
2 at that same time hWhY spoke by means of
Yeshayahu son of Amots, saying, “Go, and remove
1026

YESHAYAHU

the sackcloth from your body, and take your sandals
off your feet.” And he did so, walking naked and
barefoot.
3 And hWhY said, “As My servant Yeshayahu has
walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and
a wonder against Mitsrayim and Kush,
4 so does the sovereign of Ashshur lead away the
captives of Mitsrayim and the exiles of Kush, young
and old, naked and barefoot, with their buttocks
uncovered - the shame of Mitsrayim.
5 “And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Kush,
their expectation, and of Mitsrayim, their boast.
6 “And the inhabitant of this coastland shall say in
that day, ‘See, such is our expectation, wherever we
flee for help to be delivered from the sovereign of
Ashshur. And how do we escape?’ ”

21 The message concerning the Wilderness of the
Sea. As whirlwinds in the Negeḇ sweep on, so it comes
from the wilderness, from an awesome land.
2 A distressing vision is revealed to me: the
treacherous betrays, and the ravager ravages. Go up,
O Ĕylam! Besiege, O Maḏai! All the groaning I bring
to an end.
3 Therefore my loins are filled with anguish; pangs
have seized me, like the pangs of a woman in labour.
I was distressed when I heard it; I was troubled when
I saw it.
4 My heart reeled, horror overwhelmed me; the
night for which I longed He turned into fear for me.
5 Prepare the table, spread the mat, eat and drink.
Arise, you princes, anoint the shield!
6 For hWhY has said this to me, “Go, appoint a
watchman, let him declare what he sees.”
1027

ISAIAH

And he saw a chariot with a pair of horsemen, a
chariot of donkeys, and a chariot of camels, and he
listened attentively, very attentively.
8 Then he cried, “A lion, O hWhY! I stand continually
on the watchtower in the daytime, and I have sat at
my post every night.
9 “And see this, a chariot of men coming with a pair
of horsemen!” And he spoke up and said, “Baḇel is
fallen, is fallen! And all the carved images of her
mighty ones He has broken to the ground.”
10 Oh, my threshing and the grain of my floor! That
which I have heard from hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, I have declared to you.
11 The message concerning Dumah. He calls to me
out of Sĕ’ir, “Watchman, how much of the night is
passed? Watchman, how much of the night has
passed?”
12 The watchman said, “Morning came, and also the
night. If you inquire, inquire. Come again!”
13 The message concerning Araḇia. In the forest in
Araḇia you stay, O you travelling companies of
Deḏanites.
14 You who dwell in the land of Tĕma, bring water to
him who is thirsty, meet the fugitive with bread.
15 For they fled from the swords, from the drawn
sword, from the bent bow, and from the stress of
battle.
16 For thus hWhY has said to me, “Within a year,
according to the year of a hired man, all the esteem
of Qĕḏar shall come to an end,
17 and the rest of the number of archers, the mighty
men of the people of Qĕḏar, shall be few. For hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl has spoken.”
7

1028

YESHAYAHU

22 The message concerning the Valley of Ḥizzayon.
What troubles you now, that you have all gone up to
the house-tops,
2 you who are filled with turmoils, a noisy city, a city
of revelry? Your slain are not slain with the sword, nor
the dead in battle.
3 All your rulers have fled together; without a bow
they were taken captive. All who are found in you are
bound together, who have fled from afar.
4 Therefore I said, “Look away from me, let me weep
bitterly. Do not try to comfort me because of the
ravaging of the daughter of my people.”
5 For it is a day of uproar and treading down and
perplexity by the Aḏon hWhY of hosts in the Valley of
Ḥizzayon - breaking down of a wall and of crying to
the mountain.
6 And Ĕylam bore the quiver with chariots of men
and horsemen, and Qir bared the shield.
7 And it shall be that your choicest valleys shall be
filled with chariots, and the horsemen shall take up
positions at the gate.
8 Then He removed the covering of Yahuḏah. And
you looked in that day to the weapons of the house of
the Forest.
9 And you saw the breaches of the city of Dawiḏ,
that it was great. And you gathered together the
waters of the lower pool.
10 And you counted the houses of Yerushalayim, and
the houses you broke down to strengthen the wall.
11 And you dug a ditch between the two walls for the
water of the old pool. But you have not looked to its
Maker, nor have you seen Him who fashioned it long
ago.
1029

ISAIAH

And in that day the Aḏon hWhY of hosts called for
weeping and for mourning, for baldness and for
girding with sackcloth.
13 Then see! Joy and gladness, slaying oxen and
killing sheep, eating meat and drinking wine, “Let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we die!”
14 And it was revealed in my hearing by hWhY of
hosts, “For this wickedness shall certainly not be
pardoned until you die,” said the Aḏon hWhY of hosts.
15 Thus said the Aḏon hWhY of hosts, “Go, come to
this steward, to Sheḇnah, who is over the house, and
say,
16 ‘What have you here, and whom have you here,
that you have hewn a tomb here, as he who hews
himself a tomb on high, cutting out a resting place for
himself in a rock?
17 ‘See, hWhY is hurling you away, O man, and is
firmly grasping you,
18 rolling you up tightly like a ball, into a wide land.
There you are to die, and there your esteemed
chariots are to be the shame of your master’s house.
19 ‘And I shall drive you from your office, and you
shall be ousted from your position.
20 ‘And it shall be in that day, that I shall call My
servant Elyaqim son of Ḥilqiyahu.
21 ‘And I shall put your robe on him, and strengthen
him with your girdle, and give your authority into his
hand. And he shall be a father to the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim and to the house of Yahuḏah.
22 ‘And I shall place the key of the house of Dawiḏ on
his shoulder. And he shall open, and no one shuts;
and shall shut, and no one opens.
23 ‘And I shall fasten him like a peg in a steadfast
place, and he shall become a throne of esteem to his
father’s house.
12

1030

YESHAYAHU

‘And they shall hang on him all the weight of his
father’s house, the offspring and the offshoots, all
vessels of small quantity, from the cups to all the jars.
25 ‘In that day,’ declares hWhY of hosts, ‘the peg that
is fastened in the steadfast place shall be removed
and be cut down and fall, and the burden that was on
it shall be cut off. For hWhY has spoken.’ ”
24

23 The message concerning Tsor. Howl, you ships
of Tarshish! For it has been destroyed, without house,
without harbour. From the land of Kittim it has been
revealed to them.
2 Be silent, you inhabitants of the coastland, you
merchants of Tsiḏon, who passed over the sea, they
filled you.
3 And on great waters the grain of Shiḥor, the
harvest of the River, was her increase. And she was
a market-place for the nations.
4 Be ashamed, O Tsiḏon, for the sea has spoken,
the stronghold of the sea, saying, “I have not
laboured, nor brought forth children; neither have I
reared young men, brought up maidens.”
5 Like the report of Mitsrayim, they too are grieved
at the report of Tsor.
6 Pass over to Tarshish; wail, you inhabitants of the
coastland!
7 Is this your city of revelry, whose antiquity is from
days of old, whose feet carried her far off to sojourn?
8 Who has counselled this against Tsor, the
crowning city, whose merchants are chiefs, whose
traders are the esteemed of the earth?
9 HWHY of hosts has counselled it, to defile the pride
of all splendour, and to shame all the esteemed of the
earth.
1031

ISAIAH

Overflow through your land like the River, O
daughter of Tarshish; there is no more strength.
11 He has stretched out His hand over the sea, He
shook the reigns; hWhY has given a command against
Kena’an to destroy its strongholds.
12 And He said, “Never again shall you exult, O you
oppressed maiden daughter of Tsiḏon. Arise, pass
over to Kittim, even there you shall find no rest.”
13 See the land of the Kasdites - this people did not
exist. Ashshur founded it for wild beasts of the desert.
They put up their siege-towers, they demolished her
palaces, and made her a ruin.
14 Howl, you ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold is
laid waste!
15 And in that day it shall be that Tsor is forgotten
seventy years, according to the days of one
sovereign. At the end of seventy years it shall be to
Tsor as in the song of the whore:
16 “Take a lyre, go about the city, you forgotten
whore; make sweet playing, sing many songs, so that
you might be remembered.”
17 And at the end of seventy years it shall be that
hWhY visits Tsor. And she shall return to her hire and
commit whoring with all the reigns of the earth on the
face of the land.
18 And her goods and her hire shall be qadosh for
hWhY, not treasured nor laid up, for her gain is for
those who dwell before hWhY, to eat sufficiently, and
for a choice covering.
10

24 See, hWhY is making the earth empty and making
it waste, and shall overturn its surface, and shall
scatter abroad its inhabitants.
2 And it shall be - as with the people so with the
kohĕn, as with the servant so with his master, as with
1032

YESHAYAHU

the female servant so with her mistress, as with the
buyer so with the seller, as with the lender so with the
borrower, as with the creditor so with the debtor;
3 the earth is completely emptied and utterly
plundered, for hWhY has spoken this word.
4 The earth shall mourn and wither, the world shall
languish and wither, the haughty people of the earth
shall languish.
5 For the earth has been defiled under its
inhabitants, because they have transgressed the
Torot, changed the Law, broken the everlasting
Covenant.
6 Therefore a curse shall consume the earth, and
those who dwell in it be punished. Therefore the
inhabitants of the earth shall be burned, and few men
shall be left.
7 The new wine shall fail, the vine shall languish, all
those glad at heart shall sigh.
8 The joy of the tambourine shall cease, the noise of
those who rejoice shall end, the joy of the lyre shall
cease.
9 No more do they drink wine with a song, strong
drink is bitter to those who drink it.
10 The deserted city shall be broken down, every
house shall be shut, no one enters.
11 There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy shall
be darkened, the gladness of the earth shall be gone.
12 The city is left in ruins, and the gate is stricken with
destruction.
13 For thus it is to be in the midst of the earth among
the peoples, like the shaking of an olive tree, like the
gleaning of grapes when the grape harvest is done.
14 They lift up their voice, they sing of the excellency
of hWhY, they shall cry aloud from the sea.
1033

ISAIAH

Therefore esteem hWhY in the east, the Name of
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl in the coastlands of the sea.
16 From the ends of the earth we shall hear songs,
“Splendour to the Righteous One!” But I say, “I waste
away, I waste away! Woe to me! The treacherous
betray, with treachery the treacherous betray.”
17 Fear and the pit and the snare are upon you, O
inhabitant of the earth.
18 And it shall be that he who flees from the noise of
the fear falls into the pit, and he who comes up from
the midst of the pit is caught in the snare. For the
windows from on high shall be opened, and the
foundations of the earth be shaken.
19 The earth shall be utterly broken, the earth shall
be completely shattered, the earth shall be fiercely
shaken.
20 The earth shall stagger like a drunkard. And it shall
totter like a hut, and its transgression shall be heavy
upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again.
21 And in that day it shall be that hWhY punishes on
high the host of exalted ones, and on the earth the
sovereigns of the earth.
22 And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners
are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the
prison, and be punished after many days.
23 And the moon shall blush, and the sun shall be
ashamed, for hWhY of hosts shall reign on Mount
Tsiyon, and in Yerushalayim, and before His elders,
in esteem!
15

25 O HWHY, You are my Elohim. I exalt You, I praise
Your Name, for You shall do a wonder - counsels of
long ago, trustworthiness, truth.

1034

YESHAYAHU

For You shall make a city a heap, a walled city a
ruin, a palace of foreigners to be a city no more never to be rebuilt.
3 Therefore a strong people praise You, the city of
the powerful nations revere You.
4 For You shall be a refuge to the poor, a refuge to
the needy in his distress, a shelter from the storm, a
shade from the heat. For the spirit of the ruthless is
like a storm against a wall.
5 You subdue the noise of foreigners, as heat in a
dry place; as heat in the shadow of a cloud, the
singing of the ruthless is subdued.
6 And in this mountain hWhY of hosts shall make for
all people a feast of choice pieces, a feast of old
wines, of choice pieces with marrow, of old wines,
well-refined.
7 And He shall swallow up on this mountain the
surface of the covering which covers all people, and
the veil which is spread over all nations.
8 He shall swallow up death forever, and the Aḏon
hWhY shall wipe away tears from all faces, and take
away the reproach of His people from all the earth.
For hWhY has spoken.
9 And it shall be said in that day, “See, this is our
Elohim. We have waited for Him, and He saves us.
This is hWhY, we have waited for Him, let us be glad
and rejoice in His deliverance.”
10 For the hand of hWhY rests on this mountain, and
Mo’aḇ is trodden down under Him, as straw is trodden
down in the water of a dunghill.
11 And He shall spread out His hands in their midst
as he who swims spreads out his hands to swim, and
He shall bring down their pride together, with the skill
of His hands.
2

1035

ISAIAH

And the high stronghold of your walls He shall
bring down, lay it low, levelled to the ground, down to
the dust.

12

26 In that day this song is sung in the land of
Yahuḏah, “We have a strong city - He appoints
deliverance, walls and ramparts.
2 “Open the gates, let the righteous nation which
guards the truth enter in.
3 “The one steadfast of mind You guard in perfect
peace, for he trusts in You.
4 “Trust in hWhY forever, for in Yah, hWhY, is a rock
of ages.
5 “For He shall bring down those who dwell on high.
He lays the exalted city low, He lays it low to the earth,
He brings it down to the dust.
6 “A foot tramples it down - feet of the poor,
footsteps of the needy.”
7 The path of the righteous is uprightness; O upright
One, You weigh the course of the righteous.
8 Also, in the path of Your Right-Rulings, O hWhY,
we have waited for You; the longing of being is for
Your Name and for the remembrance of You.
9 My being longs for You in the night, also, my spirit
within me seeks You earnestly. For when Your RightRulings are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
shall learn righteousness.
10 The wicked finds favour, he shall not learn
righteousness; in the land of straightforwardness he
acts perversely, and does not see the excellency of
HWHY.
11 O HWHY, Your hand is high, they do not see. They
see the ardour of the people and are ashamed; also,
let the fire for Your adversaries consume them.
1036

YESHAYAHU

O hWhY, You establish peace for us, for You have
also done all our works in us.
13 O hWhY our Elohim, other masters besides You
have had rule over us; only in You do we make
mention of Your Name.
14 The dead do not live; the departed spirits do not
rise. Therefore You have visited and destroyed them,
and made all their remembrance to perish.
15 You shall increase the nation, O hWhY, You shall
increase the nation; You are esteemed; You shall
expand all the borders of the land.
16 O HWHY, in distress they shall visit You, they shall
pour out a prayer when Your disciplining is upon
them.
17 As a woman with child and about to give birth
writhes and cries out in her pain, so shall we be before
Your face, O hWhY.
18 We have conceived, we writhed in pain; we have
given birth to wind. We have not accomplished
deliverance in the earth nor have the inhabitants of
the world fallen.
19 Let Your dead live, and my dead body, let them
arise. Awake and sing, you who dwell in dust; for Your
dew is a dew of light, and let the earth give birth to the
departed spirits.
20 Go, my people, enter your rooms, and shut your
doors behind you; hide yourself, as it were, for a little
while, until the displeasure is past.
21 For look, hWhY is coming out of His place to punish
the inhabitants of the earth for their wickedness. And
the earth shall disclose her blood, and no longer
cover her slain.
12

27 In that day hWhY with His severe sword, great
and strong, punishes Liwiathan the fleeing serpent,
1037

ISAIAH

Liwiathan that twisted serpent. And He shall slay the
dragon that is in the sea.
2 In that day sing to her, “A vineyard of red wine!
3 “I, hWhY, do guard it, I water it every moment; lest
any hurt it, I guard it night and day.
4 “Wrath is not in Me. Who would put thornbushes
and weeds against Me in battle? I would go through
them, I would burn them together.
5 “Or let him take hold of My strength and make
peace with Me. Let him make peace with Me!”
6 Those who come He causes to take root in
Ya’aqoḇ, Yisra’ĕl shall blossom and bud. And they
shall fill the face of the world with fruit.
7 Has He smitten him as He smote those who were
smiting him? Or were they slain as those they had
killed?
8 In measure, by sending her away, You contended
with her. He shall take away by His rough wind in the
day of the east wind.
9 Therefore by this the wickedness of Ya’aqoḇ is
covered. And this is all the fruit of taking away his sin:
when he makes all the stones of the altar like
chalkstones that are beaten to dust - Ashĕrim and
sun-pillars rise no more.
10 For the city of defence is lonely, a home forsaken
and left like a wilderness - there the calf feeds, and
there it lies down, and shall consume its branches.
11 When its twigs are dry, they are broken off, women
come and light them on fire. For it is a people of no
understanding, therefore He who made them has no
compassion on them, and He who formed them
shows them no favour.
12 And in that day it shall be that hWhY threshes, from
the channel of the River to the wadi of Mitsrayim. And
1038

YESHAYAHU

you shall be gathered one by one, O children of
Yisra’ĕl.
13 And in that day it shall be that a great horn is
blown, and those who were perishing in the land of
Ashshur and the outcasts in the land of Mitsrayim
shall come, and shall worship hWhY on the qodesh
mountain, in Yerushalayim.

28 Woe to the proud crown of the drunkards of
Ephrayim, and to the fading flower of its splendid
comeliness that is on the head of the fertile valley, to
those who are overcome with wine!
2 See, hWhY has one who is mighty and strong, like
a downpour of hail and a destroying storm, like a flood
of mighty waters overflowing, who casts down to the
earth with the hand.
3 The proud crown of the drunkards of Ephrayim, is
trampled under foot;
4 and the fading flower of its splendid comeliness
that is on the head of the fertile valley, like the first
fruit before the summer, which, when one sees it, he
eats it up while it is still in his hand.
5 In that day hWhY of hosts is for a crown of
splendour and a head-dress of comeliness to the
remnant of His people,
6 and a spirit of right-ruling to him who sits in rightruling, and strength to those who turn back the battle
at the gate.
7 And these too have gone astray through wine, and
through strong drink wandered about. Kohĕn and
naḇi have gone astray through strong drink, they are
swallowed up by wine, they wander about through
strong drink, they go astray in vision, they stumble in
right-ruling.
1039

ISAIAH

For all tables shall be covered with vomit, no place
without filth.
9 Whom would He teach knowledge? And whom
would He make to understand the message? Those
weaned from milk, those taken from the breasts!
10 For it is: command upon command, command
upon command, line upon line, line upon line, here a
little, there a little.
11 For with a jabbering lip and a foreign tongue He
speaks to this people,
12 to whom He said, “This is the rest, give rest to the
weary,” and, “This is the refreshing.” But they would
not hear.
13 But the Word of hWhY was to them, “Command
upon command, command upon command, line upon
line, line upon line, here a little, there a little,” so that
they go and shall stumble backward, and be broken
and snared and taken captive.
14 Therefore hear the Word of hWhY, you men of
scorn, who rule this people who are in Yerushalayim,
15 because you have said, “We have made a
covenant with death, and with the grave we have
effected a vision. When the overflowing scourge
passes through, it does not come to us, for we have
made lying our refuge, and under falsehood we have
hidden ourselves.”
16 Therefore thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “See, I am
laying in Tsiyon a stone for a foundation, a tried stone,
a precious corner-stone, a settled foundation. He who
trusts shall not hasten away.
17 And I shall make Right-Ruling the measuring line,
and righteousness the plummet. And the hail shall
sweep away the refuge of lying, and the waters
overflow the hiding place.
8

1040

YESHAYAHU

And your covenant with death shall be annulled,
and your vision with the grave not stand. When an
overflowing scourge passes through, then you shall
be trampled down by it.
19 As often as it passes through it shall take you, for
it shall pass through every morning, and by day and
by night. And it shall be only trembling to understand
the message.”
20 For the bed shall be too short for a man to stretch
out on, and the covering shall be too narrow to wrap
himself in it.
21 For hWhY rises up as at Mount Peratsim, and He
is wroth as at the Valley of Giḇ’on, to do His work, His
strange work, and to do His deed, His strange deed.
22 And now, do not be scoffers, lest your bonds be
made strong. For I have heard from the Aḏon hWhY
of hosts, a destruction decreed upon all the earth.
23 Give ear and hear my voice, listen and hear my
word.
24 Does the ploughman keep ploughing all day to
sow? Does he keep turning his soil and breaking the
clods?
25 When he has levelled its surface, does he not sow
the caraway and scatter the cummin, plant the wheat
in rows, the barley in the appointed place, and the
spelt in its place?
26 For He instructs him for Right-Ruling, his Elohim
teaches him.
27 For caraway is not threshed with a threshing
sledge, nor is a wagon wheel rolled over cummin, but
caraway is beaten out with a stick, and cummin with
a rod.
28 Grain is crushed, so one does not go on threshing
it forever, nor break it with his wagon wheel, nor crush
it with his horsemen.
18

1041

ISAIAH

Even this has come from hWhY of hosts, who did
wonders in counsel, who made wisdom great.

29

29 Woe to Ari’ĕl, to Ari’ĕl, the city where Dawiḏ
dwelt! Add year to year, let festivals come around.
2 “And I shall distress Ari’ĕl, and there shall be
mourning and sorrow, and it shall be to Me as Ari’ĕl.
3 “And I shall encamp against you all around, I shall
lay siege against you with a mound, and I shall raise
siege-works against you.
4 “And you shall be brought low and speak out of the
ground, and your speech shall be low, out of the dust.
And your voice shall be like a medium’s, out of the
ground, and your speech whisper out of the dust.
5 “But the crowd of those strange to you shall be like
fine dust, and the crowd of the ruthless ones as chaff
blowing away. And it shall be in an instant, suddenly!”
6 You shall be visited by hWhY of hosts with thunder
and earthquake and great noise, with whirlwind and
storm, and flame of devouring fire.
7 Then the crowd of all the gentiles who fight against
Ari’ĕl, even all who fight against her and her
stronghold, and distress her, shall be as a dream of a
night vision.
8 And it shall be as when a hungry man dreams, and
see, he eats; but he awakes, and his being is empty;
or as when a thirsty man dreams, and see, he drinks;
but he awakes, and see, he is faint, and his being is
longing. Thus shall the crowd of all the gentiles be
who fight against Mount Tsiyon.
9 Pause and wonder! Blind yourselves and be blind!
They are drunk, but not with wine; they stagger, but
not with strong drink.

1042

YESHAYAHU

For hWhY has poured out on you the spirit of deep
sleep, and has closed your eyes, the neḇi’im. And He
has covered your heads, the seers.
11 And the entire vision is to you like the words of a
book that is sealed, which men give to one who
knows books, saying, “Read this, please.” And he
said, “I am unable, for it is sealed.”
12 And the book is given to one who does not know
books, saying, “Read this, please.” And he said, “I
have not known books.”
13 And hWhY says, “Because this people has drawn
near with its mouth, and with its lips they have
esteemed Me, and it has kept its heart far from Me,
and their reverence of Me has become a command of
men that is taught!
14 “Therefore, see, I am again doing a marvellous
work among this people, a marvellous work and a
wonder. And the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their clever men
shall be hidden.”
15 Woe to those who seek deep to hide their counsel
far from hWhY, and their works are in the dark; they
say, “Who sees us?” and, “Who knows us?”
16 How perverse of you! Should the potter be
reckoned as the clay? Should what is made say of its
Maker, “He did not make me”? And what is formed
say of Him who formed it, “He did not understand”?
17 Is it not yet a little while, and Leḇanon shall be
turned into garden land, and garden land be reckoned
as a forest?
18 And in that day the deaf shall hear the words of
the Book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of
gloom, and out of darkness.
10

1043

ISAIAH

And the meek ones shall increase their joy in
hWhY, and the poor among men rejoice in the Qadosh
One of Yisra’ĕl.
20 For the ruthless one is brought to naught, the
scorner is consumed, and all who watch for evil shall
be cut off,
21 those who make a man to sin in word, and lay a
snare for him who reproves in the gate, and turn aside
the righteous with emptiness.
22 Therefore thus said hWhY, who ransomed
Aḇraham, concerning the house of Ya’aqoḇ,
“Ya’aqoḇ is no longer put to shame, no longer does
his face grow pale.
23 “For when he sees his children, the work of My
hands, in his midst, they shall qadosh My Name, and
qadosh the Qadosh One of Ya’aqoḇ, and revere the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
24 “And those who went astray in spirit shall come to
understanding, and the grumblers accept instruction.”
19

30 “Woe to the stubborn children,” declares hWhY,
“to make counsel, but not from Me, and to devise
plans, but not of My Ruaḥ, in order to add sin to sin;
2 who are walking to go down to Mitsrayim, and
have not asked My mouth, to be strengthened in the
strength of Pharaoh, and to seek refuge in the
shadow of Mitsrayim!
3 “And the strength of Pharaoh shall become your
shame, and the refuge in the shadow of Mitsrayim
your confusion.
4 “For his princes were at Tso’an, and his
messengers came to Ḥanĕs.
5 “They were all ashamed of a people who do not
profit them, not for help or profit, but a shame and also
a reproach.”
1044

YESHAYAHU

The message concerning the beasts of the Negeḇ.
Through a land of trouble and distress, from which
came the lioness and lion, the adder and fiery flying
serpent, they convey their riches on the backs of
young donkeys, and their treasures on the humps of
camels, to an unprofitable people,
7 even Mitsrayim, whose help is vain and empty.
Therefore I have called her Rahaḇ-Hĕm-Sheḇeth.
8 And go, write it before them on a tablet, and
inscribe it on a scroll, that it is for a latter day, a
witness forever:
9 that this is a rebellious people, lying children,
children who refuse to hear the Torah of hWhY,
10 who say to the seers, “Do not see,” and to the
neḇi’im, “Do not naḇa to us what is right. Speak to us
what is smooth, naḇa deceits.
11 “Turn aside from the Way, swerve from the path,
cause the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl to cease from
before us.”
12 Therefore thus said the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl,
“Because you despise this word, and trust in
oppression and perverseness, and rely on them,
13 therefore this wickedness is to you like a breach
ready to fall, a bulge in a high wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly, swiftly.”
14 And He shall break it like the breaking of the
potter’s vessel, which is broken in pieces, without
sparing, so that there is not found among its
fragments a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to
take water from the cistern.
15 For thus said the Aḏon hWhY, the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl, “In returning and rest you are saved, in
stillness and trust is your strength.” But you would not,
6

1045

ISAIAH

and you said, “No, for we flee upon horses,”
therefore you flee! And, “We ride on swift horses,”
therefore those who pursue you are swift!
17 One thousand at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke
of five you shall flee until you are left as a pole on top
of a mountain and as a sign on a hill.
18 And therefore hWhY shall wait, to show you favour.
And therefore He shall be exalted, to have
compassion on you. For hWhY is an Elohim of rightruling. Baruḵ are all those who wait for Him.
19 For the people shall dwell in Tsiyon at
Yerushalayim, you shall weep no more. He shall
show much favour to you at the sound of your cry;
when He hears, He shall answer you.
20 Though hWhY gave you bread of adversity and
water of affliction, your Teacher shall no longer be
hidden. But your eyes shall see your Teacher,
21 and your ears hear a word behind you, saying,
“This is the Way, walk in it,” whenever you turn to the
right, or whenever you turn to the left.
22 And you shall defile the covering of your graven
images of silver, and the plating of your moulded
images of gold. You shall throw them away as a
menstrual cloth and say to them, “Be gone!”
23 And He shall give the rain for your seed with which
you sow the ground, and bread of the increase of the
earth. And it shall be fat and rich, your cattle grazing
in an enlarged pasture in that day,
24 and the oxen and the young donkeys that work the
ground eat seasoned fodder winnowed with shovel
and fan.
25 And on every high mountain and on every high hill
there shall be rivers and streams of waters, in the day
of great killing, when the towers fall.
16

1046

YESHAYAHU

And the light of the moon shall be as the light of
the sun, and the light of the sun be sevenfold, as the
light of seven days, in the day that hWhY binds up the
breach of His people, and heals the wound of His
blows.
27 See, the Name of hWhY is coming from afar,
burning with His wrath, and heavy smoke. His lips
shall be filled with rage, and His tongue be as a
devouring fire;
28 and His breath shall be as an overflowing stream,
which reaches up to the neck, to sift the nations with
a sieve of falsehood, and a misleading bridle on the
jaws of the peoples.
29 Let the song be to you as in a night qadosh for a
Festival, and gladness of heart as he who is going
with a flute, to come into the mountain of hWhY, to the
Rock of Yisra’ĕl.
30 And hWhY shall cause His excellent voice to be
heard, and show the coming down of His arm, with
raging wrath and the flame of a consuming fire, with
scattering, downpour and hailstones.
31 For through the voice of hWhY Ashshur is broken
down, with a rod He smites.
32 And every passage of the ordained staff which
hWhY lays on him, shall be with tambourines and
lyres, when He shall fight with it, battling with a
brandishing arm.
33 For Topheth was ordained of old, even for the
sovereign it has been prepared. He has made it deep
and large, its fire pit with much wood; the breath of
hWhY, as a stream of burning sulphur, is burning in it!
26

31 Woe to those who go down to Mitsrayim for help,
and rely on horses, who trust in chariots because they
are many, and in horsemen because they are very
1047

ISAIAH

strong, but who do not look to the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl, nor seek HWHY!
2 And He also is wise, and has brought evil, and has
not turned aside His words. And He shall rise up
against the house of evil-doers, and against the help
of workers of wickedness.
3 And the Mitsrites are men, and not Ĕl. And their
horses are flesh, and not spirit. And when hWhY
stretches out His hand, both he who helps shall
stumble, and he who is helped shall fall. And they
shall all fall, together.
4 For this is what hWhY has said to me, “As a lion
roars, and a young lion over his prey, though a band
of shepherds is called out against him, he is not afraid
of their voice nor disturbed by their noise, so hWhY of
hosts shall come down to fight upon Mount Tsiyon
and upon its hill.
5 “Like hovering birds, so does hWhY of hosts
protect Yerushalayim - protecting and delivering,
passing over and rescuing.”
6 Turn back to Him from whom the children of
Yisra’ĕl have deeply fallen away.
7 For in that day, let each man reject his idols of
silver and his idols of gold, which your own hands
have made for yourselves, as a sin.
8 “And Ashshur shall fall by a sword not of man, and
a sword not of mankind shall devour him. But he shall
flee from the sword, and his young men shall become
slave labour,
9 and his strength pass away because of fear, and
his commanders shall be afraid of the banner,”
declares hWhY, whose light is in Tsiyon and whose
furnace is in Yerushalayim.

1048

YESHAYAHU

32 See, a sovereign shall reign in righteousness,
and rulers rule in right-ruling.
2 And each one shall be as a hiding place from the
wind, and a shelter from the downpour, as rivers of
water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in
a weary land.
3 And the eyes of those who see are not dim, and
the ears of those who hear listen.
4 And the heart of the rash understand knowledge,
and the tongue of the stammerers hurries to speak
plainly.
5 A fool is no longer called noble, nor the scoundrel
said to be respectable;
6 for a fool speaks folly, and his heart works
wickedness: to practise filthiness, and to speak
against hWhY that which misleads, to starve the being
of the hungry, and to withhold the drink from the
thirsty.
7 And the methods of the scoundrel are evil - he has
devised wicked plans to destroy the poor with words
of falsehood, even when the needy pleads for rightruling.
8 But the generous one devises what is generous,
and by generous deeds he rises up.
9 Rise up, you women who are at ease, hear my
voice you complacent daughters; listen to my speech.
10 In little more than a year you shall be troubled, you
complacent women; for the grape harvest shall fail,
the ingathering shall not come.
11 Tremble, you women who are at ease; be
troubled, you complacent ones; strip yourselves, and
make yourselves bare, and gird sackcloth on your
waists.
1049

ISAIAH

Lament upon the breasts for the pleasant fields,
for the fruit-bearing vine.
13 Weeds and thornbushes come up over the ground
of My people, indeed, over all the houses of joy, the
city of revelry;
14 for the palace is abandoned, the crowded city
deserted. Hill and watch-tower serve as caves
forever, a joy of wild donkeys, a pasture of flocks;
15 until the Ruaḥ is poured upon us from on high, and
the wilderness shall become garden-land, and the
garden-land be reckoned as a forest.
16 Then right-ruling shall dwell in the wilderness, and
righteousness remain in the garden-land.
17 The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the
service of righteousness be rest and safety forever.
18 And My people shall dwell in a home of peace, and
in safe dwellings, and in undisturbed resting places,
19 even when hail shall fall, felling the forest, and the
city be brought low in humiliation.
20 Baruḵ are you who sow beside all waters, who
send out the foot of the ox and the donkey.
12

33 Woe to you ravager, while you have not been
ravaged, and you treacherous, while they have not
betrayed you! When you have ceased ravaging, you
shall be ravaged. And when you stop betraying, they
shall betray you.
2 O hWhY, show us favour, for we have waited for
You. Be their arm every morning, our deliverance also
in time of distress.
3 At the noise of the rumbling the people shall flee.
When You lift Yourself up, the gentiles shall be
scattered.

1050

YESHAYAHU

And Your plunder shall be gathered like the
gathering of the caterpillar; as locusts rush about,
they rush upon them.
5 HWHY is exalted, for He dwells on high; He has
filled Tsiyon with Right-Ruling and righteousness.
6 And He shall be the trustworthiness of your times,
a wealth of deliverance, wisdom and knowledge. The
reverence of HWHY - that is His treasure.
7 See, their brave ones shall cry outside, the
messengers of peace weep bitterly.
8 The highways shall be deserted, the wayfaring
man shall have ceased. He has broken the Covenant,
he has despised the cities, he respected no man.
9 The earth shall mourn and languish, Leḇanon
shall be ashamed. Sharon shall be withered like a
desert, and Bashan and Karmel be shaking.
10 “Now I rise up,” declares hWhY. “Now I am exalted,
now I am lifted up.
11 “You conceive chaff, you bring forth stubble, your
spirit devours you like fire.
12 “And peoples shall be like the burnings of lime, like
thorns cut up they are burned in the fire.
13 “You who are afar off, hear what I shall do; and
you who are near, know My might.”
14 Sinners in Tsiyon shall be afraid; trembling shall
grip the defiled ones, “Who of us shall dwell with the
devouring fire? Who of us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings?”
15 He who walks righteously and speaks what is
straight, he who rejects the gain of oppressions, who
keeps his hands from accepting bribes, who stops his
ears from hearing of bloodshed, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil 4

1051

ISAIAH

he shall inhabit the heights; strongholds of rocks
be his refuge. His bread shall be given him, his water
be steadfast.
17 Your eyes shall see the Sovereign in His
comeliness, see a land that is far off.
18 Your heart ponders fear, “Where is the scribe?
Where is he who weighs? Where is he who counts
the towers?”
19 No longer shall you see a fierce people, a people
of too deep a lip to hear, of a jabbering tongue no one
understands.
20 See Tsiyon, the city of our appointed time; your
eyes shall see Yerushalayim, an undisturbed home,
a tent not taken down. Its stakes are never removed,
nor any of its cords broken.
21 But there, great is HWHY for us; a place of broad
rivers, streams, in which no boat with oars sails, nor
big ships pass by 22 for hWhY is our Judge, hWhY is our Lawgiver, hWhY
is our Sovereign, He saves us 23 your ropes shall be slack, they do not strengthen
their mast, they shall not spread the sail. Then the
prey of great plunder shall be divided, the lame shall
take the prey.
24 Neither shall the inhabitant say, “I am sick.” The
people who dwell in it are forgiven their wickedness!
16

34 Come near, you gentiles, to hear. And listen, you
people! Let the earth hear, and all that is in it, the world
and all its offspring.
2 For the displeasure of hWhY is against all the
gentiles, and His wrath against all their divisions. He
shall put them under the ban, He shall give them over
to the slaughter,
1052

YESHAYAHU

and their slain be thrown out, and their stench rise
from their corpses. And mountains shall be melted
with their blood.
4 And all the host of the shamayim shall rot away.
And the shamayim shall be rolled up like a scroll, and
all their host fade like a leaf fading on the vine, and
like the fading one of a fig tree.
5 “For My sword shall be drenched in the shamayim.
Look, it comes down on Eḏom, and on the people of
My curse, for judgment.
6 “The sword of hWhY shall be filled with blood, it
shall be made over-flowing with fatness, and with the
blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys
of rams. For hWhY has a slaughtering in Botsrah, and
a great slaughter in the land of Eḏom.
7 “And wild oxen shall come down with them, and
young bulls with bulls. And their land shall be
drenched with blood, and their dust made fat with
fatness.”
8 For it is the day of the vengeance of hWhY, the
year of recompense for the cause of Tsiyon.
9 And its streams shall be turned into tar, and its
dust into sulphur, and its land shall become burning
tar,
10 that is not quenched night or day, its smoke going
up forever. From generation to generation it lies
waste, no one passes through it forever and ever,
11 so that the pelican and the porcupine possess it,
also the owl and the raven dwell in it. And He shall
stretch out over it the line of formlessness and stones
of emptiness.
12 Its caves, with no one in them, is called a reign,
but all its rulers have vanished.
3

1053

ISAIAH

And thorns shall come up in its palaces, nettles
and brambles in its strongholds. And it shall be a
home for jackals, a courtyard for ostriches.
14 And the wild beasts of the desert shall also meet
with the jackals, and the shaggy goat call to its
companion. The night creature shall also settle there,
and shall find for herself a place of rest.
15 The arrow snake shall nest there, and lay eggs
and hatch, and gather them under her shadow. There
too the vultures shall gather, each with its mate.
16 Search from the Book of hWhY, and read: not one
of these shall be missing, not one shall be without a
mate, for He has commanded my mouth. And His
Ruaḥ shall gather them.
17 And He shall cast the lot for them, and His hand
shall divide it among them with a measuring line - they
possess it forever, from generation to generation they
dwell in it.
13

35 Let the wilderness and the dry place be glad for
them, and let the desert rejoice, and blossom as the
rose.
2 It blossoms much and rejoices, even with joy and
singing. The esteem of Leḇanon shall be given to it,
the excellence of Karmel and Sharon. They shall see
the esteem of HWHY, the excellency of our Elohim.
3 Strengthen the weak hands, and make firm the
weak knees.
4 Say to those with anxious heart, “Be strong, do not
fear! See, your Elohim comes with vengeance, with
the recompense of Elohim. He is coming to save you.”
5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and
the ears of the deaf be opened.

1054

YESHAYAHU

Then the lame shall leap like a deer, and the
tongue of the dumb sing, because waters shall burst
forth in the wilderness, and streams in the desert.
7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, and
the thirsty land springs of water - in the home for
jackals, where each lay, grass with reeds and rushes.
8 And there shall be a highway, and a way, and it
shall be called “The Way of Qodeshah.” The unclean
does not pass over it, but it is for those who walk the
Way, and not a wandering fool.
9 No lion is there, nor any ravenous beast go up on
it, it is not found there. But the redeemed shall walk
there.
10 And the ransomed of hWhY shall return and enter
Tsiyon with singing, with everlasting joy on their
heads. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
6

36 And it came to be in the fourteenth year of
Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu that Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of
Ashshur came up against all the walled cities of
Yahuḏah and took them.
2 And the sovereign of Ashshur sent the Raḇshaqĕh
with a great army from Laḵish to Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu
at Yerushalayim. And he stood by the channel of the
upper pool, on the highway to the Launderer’s Field.
3 And there came to him Elyaqim son of Ḥilqiyahu,
who was over the household, and Sheḇnah the
scribe, and Yo’aḥ son of Asaph, the recorder.
4 The Raḇshaqĕh then said to them, “Please say to
Ḥizqiyahu, ‘Thus said the great sovereign, the
sovereign of Ashshur, “What trust is this in which you
trust?

1055

ISAIAH

“I say: You speak of having counsel and strength
for battle, but they are vain words. Now in whom do
you trust, that you have rebelled against me?
6 “Look! You are trusting in the staff of this broken
reed, Mitsrayim, on which if a man leans, it shall go
into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh the
sovereign of Mitsrayim to all who trust in him.
7 “But if you say to me, ‘We trust in hWhY our
Elohim,’ is it not He whose high places and whose
altars Ḥizqiyahu has taken away, and has said to
Yahuḏah and to Yerushalayim, ‘Bow yourselves
before this altar’?
8 “And now, I urge you, please give a pledge to my
master the sovereign of Ashshur, and I give you two
thousand horses, if you are able on your part to put
riders on them!
9 “And how do you refuse one officer of the least of
my master’s servants, and put your trust in Mitsrayim
for chariots and horsemen?
10 “And now, have I come up without hWhY against
this land to destroy it? hWhY said to me, ‘Go up
against this land, and destroy it.’ ”
11 And Elyaqim, Sheḇnah, and Yo’aḥ said to the
Raḇshaqĕh, “Please speak to your servants in
Aramaic, for we understand it. And do not speak to us
in the language of Yahuḏah in the hearing of the
people who are on the wall.”
12 But the Raḇshaqĕh said, “Has my master sent me
to your master and to you to speak these words, and
not to the men who sit on the wall, to eat their own
dung and drink their own urine with you?”
13 And the Raḇshaqĕh stood and called out with a
loud voice in the language of Yahuḏah, and said,
“Hear the words of the great sovereign, the sovereign
of Ashshur!
5

1056

YESHAYAHU

“Thus said the sovereign, ‘Do not let Ḥizqiyahu
deceive you, for he is unable to deliver you,
15 and do not let Ḥizqiyahu make you trust in hWhY
saying, “hWhY, shall certainly deliver us, this city is not
given into the hand of the sovereign of Ashshur.” ’
16 “Do not listen to Ḥizqiyahu, for thus said the
sovereign of Ashshur, ‘Make peace with me by a
present and come out to me. And let each of you eat
from his own vine and each from his own fig tree, and
each of you drink the waters of his own cistern,
17 until I come. Then I shall take you away to a land
like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a
land of bread and vineyards.
18 ‘Beware lest Ḥizqiyahu mislead you, saying,
“hWhY shall deliver us.” Has any one of the mighty
ones of the nations delivered its land from the hand
of the sovereign of Ashshur?
19 ‘Where are the mighty ones of Ḥamath and
Arpaḏ? Where are the mighty ones of Sepharwayim?
And when have they delivered Shomeron from my
hand?
20 ‘Who among all the mighty ones of these lands
have delivered their land from my hand, that hWhY
should deliver Yerushalayim from my hand?’ ”
21 But they were silent and answered him not a word,
for the command of the sovereign was, “Do not
answer him.”
22 And Elyaqim son of Ḥilqiyahu, who was over the
household, Sheḇnah the scribe, and Yo’aḥ son of
Asaph, the recorder, came to Ḥizqiyahu with their
garments torn, and they reported to him the words of
the Raḇshaqĕh.
14

1057

ISAIAH

37 And it came to be, when Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu
heard it, that he tore his clothes, and covered himself
with sackcloth, and went into the House of HWHY,
2 and sent Elyaqim, who was over the household,
and Sheḇnah the scribe, and the elders of the
kohenim, covering themselves with sackcloth, to
Yeshayahu the naḇi, the son of Amots.
3 And they said to him, “Thus said Ḥizqiyahu, ‘This
day is a day of distress and rebuke and scorn, for the
children have come to birth, but there is no strength
to bring forth.
4 ‘It could be that hWhY your Elohim hears the words
of the Raḇshaqĕh, whom his master the sovereign of
Ashshur has sent to reproach the living Elohim, and
shall rebuke the words which hWhY your Elohim has
heard. Therefore lift up your prayer for the remnant
that is left.’ ”
5 So the servants of Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu came to
Yeshayahu,
6 and Yeshayahu said to them, “Say this to your
master, ‘Thus said hWhY, “Do not be afraid of the
words which you have heard, with which the servants
of the sovereign of Ashshur have reviled Me.
7 “See, I am putting a spirit in him, and he shall hear
a report and return to his own land. And I shall cause
him to fall by the sword in his own land.” ’ ”
8 And the Raḇshaqĕh returned and found the
sovereign of Ashshur fighting against Liḇnah, for he
had heard that he had left Laḵish.
9 And he heard concerning Tirhaqah sovereign of
Kush, “He has come out to fight with you.” And when
he heard it, he sent messengers to Ḥizqiyahu, saying,
10 “Speak to Ḥizqiyahu the sovereign of Yahuḏah,
saying, ‘Do not let your Elohim in whom you trust
1058

YESHAYAHU

deceive you, saying, “Yerushalayim is not given into
the hand of the sovereign of Ashshur.”
11 ‘See, you have heard what the sovereigns of
Ashshur have done to all lands by putting them under
the ban. And are you going to be delivered?
12 ‘Have the mighty ones of the nations delivered
those whom my fathers have destroyed, Gozan and
Ḥaran and Retseph, and the sons of Ĕḏen who were
in Telassar?
13 ‘Where is the sovereign of Ḥamath, and the
sovereign of Arpaḏ, and the sovereign of the city of
Sepharwayim, Hĕna, and Iwwah?’ ”
14 And Ḥizqiyahu received the letter from the hand of
the messengers, and read it. And Ḥizqiyahu went up
to the House of HWHY, and spread it before HWHY.
15 And Ḥizqiyahu prayed to hWhY, saying,
16 “O hWhY of hosts, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, the One who
dwells between the keruḇim, You are Elohim, You
alone, of all the reigns of the earth. You have made
the shamayim and earth.
17 “Incline Your ear, O hWhY, and hear. Open Your
eyes, O hWhY, and see. And hear all the words of
Sanḥĕriḇ, who has sent to reproach the living Elohim.
18 “Truly, hWhY, the sovereigns of Ashshur have laid
waste all the lands, and their land,
19 and have put their mighty ones into the fire, for
they were not mighty ones, but the work of men’s
hands, wood and stone. And they destroyed them.
20 “And now, O hWhY our Elohim, save us from his
hand, so that all the reigns of the earth know that You
are hWhY, You alone.”
21 Then Yeshayahu son of Amots sent to Ḥizqiyahu,
saying, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Because
you have prayed to Me against Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of
Ashshur,
1059

ISAIAH

this is the word which hWhY has spoken
concerning him, “The maiden, the daughter of Tsiyon,
has despised you, mocked you; the daughter of
Yerushalayim has shaken her head behind you!
23 “Whom have you reproached and reviled? And
against whom have you raised your voice, and lifted
up your eyes in pride? Against the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl!
24 “By the hand of your servants you have
reproached HWHY, and said, ‘With my many chariots I
have come up to the height of the mountains, to the
limits of Leḇanon. And I cut down its tall cedars and
its choice cypress trees. And I enter its farthest
height, its thickest forest.
25 ‘I have dug and drunk water, and with the soles of
my feet I have dried up all the streams of defence.’
26 “Have you not heard long ago how I made it, from
days of old, that I formed it? Now I have brought it
about, that you should be for crushing walled cities
into heaps of ruins.
27 “And their inhabitants were powerless, they were
over-thrown and put to shame. They were as the
grass of the field and as the green plant, as the grass
on the house-tops and as grain blighted before it is
grown.
28 “But I know your sitting down, and your going out
and your coming in, and your rage against Me.
29 “Because your rage against Me and your pride
have come up to My ears, I shall put My hook in your
nose and My bridle in your lips, and I shall turn you
back by the way which you came.
30 “And this shall be the sign for you: This year you
eat such as grows of itself, and the second year what
springs from that, and in the third year sow and reap,
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.
22

1060

YESHAYAHU

“And the remnant who have escaped of the house
of Yahuḏah shall again take root downward, and bear
fruit upward.
32 “For out of Yerushalayim comes forth a remnant,
and those who escape from Mount Tsiyon - the
ardour of hWhY of hosts does this.
33 “Therefore thus said hWhY concerning the
sovereign of Ashshur, ‘He does not come into this
city, nor does he shoot an arrow there, nor does he
come before it with shield, nor does he build a siege
mound against it.
34 ‘By the way that he came, by the same he turns
back. And into this city he does not come,’ declares
HWHY.
35 ‘And I shall defend this city, to save it for My own
sake and for the sake of My servant Dawiḏ.’ ”
36 And a messenger of hWhY went out, and killed in
the camp of Ashshur one hundred and eighty-five
thousand. And they arose early in the morning, and
saw all of them, dead bodies.
37 And Sanḥĕriḇ the sovereign of Ashshur broke
camp and went away, and turned back, and remained
at Ninewĕh.
38 And it came to be, as he was bowing himself in the
house of Nisroḵ his mighty one, that his sons
Aḏrammeleḵ and Sar’etser smote him with the sword,
and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And his son
Ĕsarḥaddon reigned in his place.
31

38 In those days Ḥizqiyahu was sick and near death.
And Yeshayahu the naḇi, the son of Amots, came to
him, and said to him, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Put your house
in order, for you are going to die and not live.’ ”
2 And Ḥizqiyahu turned his face toward the wall, and
prayed to HWHY,
1061

ISAIAH

and said, “I pray, O hWhY, please remember how
I have walked before You in truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done what is good in Your eyes.” And
Ḥizqiyahu wept bitterly.
4 And the word of hWhY came to Yeshayahu,
saying,
5 “Go and say to Ḥizqiyahu, ‘Thus said hWhY, the
Elohim of Dawiḏ your father, “I have heard your
prayer, I have seen your tears. See, I am adding
fifteen years to your days.
6 “And out of the hand of the sovereign of Ashshur I
shall deliver you and this city, and protect this city.”
’
7 “And this is the sign to you from hWhY that hWhY
does this word which He has spoken:
8 “See, I am bringing the shadow on the sundial,
which has gone down with the sun on the sundial of
Aḥaz, ten degrees backward.” And the sun returned
ten degrees on the dial by which it had gone down.
9 This is the writing of Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, when he had been sick and had recovered
from his sickness:
10 I said, “Am I to go into the gates of the grave in the
prime of my life? Shall I be deprived of the rest of my
years?”
11 I said, “I shall not see Yah - Yah in the land of the
living! I shall no longer look on man with the
inhabitants of the world!
12 “My dwelling is plucked up, taken from me like a
shepherd’s tent. I have cut off my life like a weaver;
He cuts me off from the loom. From day to night You
make an end of me.
13 “I composed myself until morning. Like a lion, so
He shatters all my bones. From day to night You
make an end of me.
3

1062

YESHAYAHU

“Like a swallow or a thrush, so I chattered; I
moaned like a dove; my eyes look weakly on high. O
hWhY, I am oppressed, undertake for me!
15 “What do I say? For He has spoken to me, and He
Himself has acted. Softly I go, all my years, because
of the bitterness of my being.
16 “O hWhY, by these are life, and my spirit finds life
in all of them. Restore me and make me live.
17 “See, for peace I had what was bitter, bitter. But
You have lovingly delivered my being from the pit of
corruption, for You have cast all my sins behind Your
back.
18 “For the grave does not thank You, nor death
praise You; those who go down to the pit do not watch
for Your truth.
19 “The living, the living - he is praising You, as I do
this day. A father makes known Your truth to his
children.
20 “hWhY, come to save me! And let us sing my songs
with stringed instruments all the days of our life in the
House of hWhY.”
21 For Yeshayahu had said, “Let them take a cake of
figs, and apply it on the boil, so that he lives.”
22 And Ḥizqiyahu asked, “What is the sign that I go
up to the House of HWHY?”
14

39 At that time Meroḏaḵ-Balaḏan son of Balaḏan,
sovereign of Baḇel, sent letters and a present to
Ḥizqiyahu for he heard that he had been sick and had
recovered.
2 And Ḥizqiyahu was pleased with them, and
showed them the house of his treasures, the silver
and gold, the spices and precious ointment, and all
his armoury, and all that was found among his
1063

ISAIAH

treasures. There was not an object in his house or in
all his rule that Ḥizqiyahu did not show them.
3 And Yeshayahu the naḇi went to Sovereign
Ḥizqiyahu, and said to him, “What did these men say,
and from where did they come to you?” And
Ḥizqiyahu said, “They came to me from a distant land,
from Baḇel.”
4 And he said, “What have they seen in your
house?” And Ḥizqiyahu said, “They have seen all that
is in my house; there is not an object among my
treasures that I did not show them.”
5 So Yeshayahu said to Ḥizqiyahu, “Hear the word
of hWhY of hosts:
6 ‘See, the days are coming when all that is in your
house, and what your fathers have stored up until this
day, shall be taken away to Baḇel; not a matter shall
be left,’ declares hWhY.
7 ‘And they shall take some of your sons who are
born to you, whom you bring forth. And they shall be
eunuchs in the palace of the sovereign of Baḇel.’ ”
8 And Ḥizqiyahu said to Yeshayahu, “The word of
hWhY which you have spoken is good!” And he said,
“Because there is peace and truth in my days.”

40 “Comfort, comfort My people!” says your Elohim.
“Speak to the heart of Yerushalayim, and cry out
to her, that her hard service is completed, that her
wickedness is pardoned, that she has received from
the hand of hWhY double for all her sins.”
3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness, “Prepare
the way of hWhY; make straight in the desert a
highway for our Elohim.
4 “Let every valley be raised, and every mountain
and hill made low. And the steep ground shall
become level, and the rough places smooth.
2

1064

YESHAYAHU

“And the esteem of hWhY shall be revealed, and
all flesh together shall see it. For the mouth of hWhY
has spoken.”
6 The voice said, “Cry out!” and he said, “What do I
cry?” “All flesh is grass, and all its loveliness is like the
flower of the field.
7 “Grass shall wither, the flower shall fade, when the
Ruaḥ of hWhY has blown on it! Truly the people are
grass!
8 “Grass shall wither, the flower shall fade, but the
Word of our Elohim stands forever.”
9 You who bring good news to Tsiyon, get up into
the high mountain. You who bring good news to
Yerushalayim, lift up your voice with strength, lift it up,
be not afraid. Say to the cities of Yahuḏah, “See your
Elohim!”
10 See, the Aḏon hWhY comes with strength, and His
arm rules for Him. See, His reward is with Him, and
His recompense before Him.
11 He feeds His flock like a shepherd, He gathers the
lambs with His arm, and carries them in His bosom,
gently leading those who are with young.
12 Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his
hand, and measured the shamayim with a zereth, and
contained the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighed the mountains in scales and the hills in a
balance?
13 Who has meted out the Ruaḥ of hWhY, or as His
counsellor taught Him?
14 With whom did He take counsel, and who
instructed Him, and taught Him in the path of RightRuling? Who taught Him knowledge, and showed
Him the Way of understanding?
5

1065

ISAIAH

See, nations are as a drop in a bucket, and are
reckoned as dust on the balance. See, He lifts up
isles as fine dust.
16 And Leḇanon is not enough to burn, nor its beasts
enough for a burnt offering.
17 All nations before Him are as naught, and they are
reckoned by Him as less than a speck, and
emptiness.
18 And to whom would you liken Ĕl? And what
likeness would you compare to Him?
19 The workman moulds a graven image, and the
goldsmith overspreads it with gold, and the
silversmith casts silver chains.
20 He who is too poor for such an offering chooses a
tree that does not rot. He seeks for himself a skilled
craftsman to prepare a carved image that does not
totter.
21 Did you not know? Have you not heard? Has it not
been declared to you from the beginning? Have you
not understood from the foundations of the earth?
22 It is He who sits above the circle of the earth, and
its inhabitants are like grasshoppers, who stretches
out the shamayim like a curtain, and spreads them
out like a tent to dwell in,
23 who brings princes to naught, shall make the
rulers of the earth as emptiness.
24 Hardly have they been planted, hardly have they
been sown, hardly has their stock taken root in the
earth, when He shall blow on them and they wither,
and a whirlwind take them away like stubble.
25 “And to whom then do you liken Me, or am I
compared?” says the Qadosh One.
26 Lift up your eyes on high and see. Who has
created these? He who is bringing out their host by
number, He calls them all by name, by the greatness
15

1066

YESHAYAHU

of His might and the strength of His power - not one
is missing.
27 Why do you say, O Ya’aqoḇ, and speak, O
Yisra’ĕl, “My way is hidden from hWhY, and my rights
are overlooked by my Elohim”?
28 Did you not know? Have you not heard? The
everlasting Elohim, hWhY, the Creator of the ends of
the earth, neither faints nor is weary. His
understanding is unsearchable.
29 He gives power to the faint, and to those who have
no might He increases strength.
30 Even youths shall faint and be weary, and young
men stumble and fall,
31 but those who wait on hWhY renew their strength,
they raise up the wing like eagles, they run and are
not weary, they walk and do not faint.

41 “Be silent before Me, you coastlands, and let
peoples renew their power! Let them come near, then
let them speak. Let us come together for Right-Ruling.
2 “Who raised up the righteous one from the east,
called him to His foot, gave the nations before him,
and made sovereigns submit to him? He gave them
as the dust to his sword, as driven stubble to his bow.
3 “He pursued them, passed over in safety, by a
path that he had not gone with his feet.
4 “Who has performed and done it, calling the
generations from the beginning? ‘I, hWhY, am the first,
and even the last I am He.’ ”
5 Coastlands see it and fear, the ends of the earth
are afraid - they draw near and come.
6 Everyone helps his neighbour, and says to his
brother, “Be strong!”
7 And the craftsman encourages the goldsmith. He
who smooths with the hammer inspires him who
1067

ISAIAH

strikes the anvil, saying of the joining, “It is good.” And
he fastens it with nails, so it does not totter.
8 “But you, Yisra’ĕl, are My servant, Ya’aqoḇ, whom
I have chosen, the descendants of Aḇraham whom I
love,
9 whom I have strengthened from the ends of the
earth, and called from its farthest parts, and said to
You, ‘You are My servant, I have chosen you and
have not rejected you.
10 ‘Do not fear, for I am with you. Do not look around,
for I am your Elohim. I shall strengthen you, I shall
also help you, I shall also uphold you with the right
hand of My righteousness.’
11 “See, all those who raged against you are
ashamed and blush, they are as naught. And the men
who strive with you perish.
12 “You seek them but do not find them, those who
struggle with you. Those who fight you are naught, as
less than naught.
13 “For I, hWhY your Elohim, will strengthen your right
hand, saying to you, ‘Do not fear, I shall help you.’
14 “Do not fear, you worm Ya’aqoḇ, you men of
Yisra’ĕl! I shall help you,” declares hWhY and your
Redeemer, the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
15 “See, I shall make you into a new threshing sledge
with sharp teeth, let you thresh mountains and beat
them small, and make hills like chaff.
16 “You winnow them, the wind lifts them up, and the
whirlwind scatters them; but you, you rejoice in hWhY,
and boast in the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
17 “When the poor and needy seek water, and there
is none, and their tongues have failed for thirst, I,
hWhY, do answer them; I, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, do
not forsake them.
1068

YESHAYAHU

“I open rivers on bare hills, and fountains in the
midst of valleys; I make a wilderness become a pool
of water, and a dry land springs of water.
19 “I put in the wilderness cedar, acacia and myrtle
and oil tree; I place in the desert cypress, pine and
box tree together.
20 “So that they see and know, and consider and
understand together, that the hand of hWhY has done
this, and the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl has created it.
21 “Present your case,” says hWhY. “Let your strong
come near,” says the Sovereign of Ya’aqoḇ.
22 “Let them draw near and declare to us what is
going to take place; let them declare the former, what
they were, and we consider them, and know the latter
end of them; or announce to us what is coming.
23 “Declare those that are going to come hereafter,
and we know that you are mighty ones; also, do good
or do evil, and let us be amazed and see it together.
24 “See, you are of naught, and your work a breath;
he who chooses you is an abomination.
25 “I have stirred up one from the north, and he
comes; from the rising of the sun he calls on My
Name. And he comes against princes as mortar, as
the potter treads clay.
26 “Who has declared from the beginning, and we
know? And former times, and we say, ‘He is
righteous’? No, no one is declaring; no, no one is
proclaiming; no, no one is hearing your words.
27 “He who is First said to Tsiyon, ‘See, see them!’
And to Yerushalayim I give one who brings good
news.
28 “And I see that there is no man, and of these, there
is no counsellor, who, when I ask of them, answers a
word.
18

1069

ISAIAH

“See, all of them are useless, their works are
naught, their moulded images are wind and
confusion.

29

42 “See, My Servant whom I uphold, My Chosen
One My being has delighted in! I have put My Ruaḥ
upon Him; He brings forth Right-Ruling to the nations.
2 “He does not cry out, nor lift up, nor causes His
voice to be heard in the street.
3 “A crushed reed He does not break, and smoking
flax He does not quench. He brings forth Right-Ruling
in accordance with truth.
4 “He does not become weak or crushed, until He
has established Right-Ruling in the earth. And the
coastlands wait for His Torah.”
5 Thus said the Ĕl, hWhY, who created the
shamayim and stretched them out, who spread forth
the earth and that which comes from it, who gives
breath to the people on it, and spirit to those who walk
on it:
6 “I, hWhY, have called You in righteousness, and I
take hold of Your hand and guard You, and give You
for a Covenant to a people, for a Light to the gentiles,
7 to open blind eyes, to bring out prisoners from the
prison, those who sit in darkness from the prison
house.
8 “I am hWhY, that is My Name, and My esteem I do
not give to another, nor My praise to idols.
9 “See, the former have come, and new ones I am
declaring; before they spring forth I let you hear
them.”
10 Sing to hWhY a new song; His praise from the ends
of the earth, you who go down to the sea, and all that
is in it, you coastlands and you inhabitants of them!
1070

YESHAYAHU

Let the wilderness and its cities lift up their voice,
the villages where Qĕḏar dwells. Let the inhabitants
of Sela sing, let them shout from the top of the
mountains.
12 Let them give esteem to hWhY, and declare His
praise in the coastlands.
13 hWhY goes forth like a mighty man. He stirs up
ardour like a fighter. He cries out, also shouts aloud.
Over His enemies He shows Himself mighty.
14 “I have kept silent from of old, I have been still and
held Myself back. Like a woman in labour I cry out, I
pant and gasp at once.
15 “I lay waste mountains and hills, and I dry up all
their plants. And I shall make rivers become
coastlands, and I dry up pools.
16 “And I shall lead the blind by a way they have not
known - in paths they have not known I lead them. I
make darkness light before them, and crooked places
straight. These matters I shall do for them, and I shall
not forsake them.
17 “Those who trust in idols, who say to the moulded
images, ‘You are our mighty ones,’ shall be turned
back, utterly ashamed.
18 “Hear, you deaf! And look, you blind, and see.
19 “Who is blind but My servant, or deaf as My
messenger whom I send? Who is blind as he who is
at peace, and blind as servant of HWHY?
20 “You see much, but do not observe; ears are open,
but do not hear.”
21 It has delighted hWhY, for the sake of His
righteousness, to make the Torah great and
esteemed.
22 But this is a people robbed and plundered, all of
them are snared in holes, and they are hidden in
prison houses. They have become a prey, with no
11

1071

ISAIAH

one to deliver - for plunder, and no one to say,
“Restore!”
23 Who among you gives ear to this, pays attention
and hears for the time to come?
24 Who gave Ya’aqoḇ for plunder, and Yisra’ĕl to the
robbers? Was it not hWhY, He against whom we
sinned? For they would not walk in His Ways, and
they did not obey His Torah!
25 So He has poured on him His burning displeasure
and the strength of battle, and it lit him on fire all
around, yet he did not understand. And it burned
against him, yet he did not take it to heart!

43 But now, thus said hWhY, your Creator, O
Ya’aqoḇ, and He who formed you, O Yisra’ĕl, “Do not
fear, for I have redeemed you. I have called you by
your name, you are Mine.
2 “When you pass through the waters, I am with you;
and through rivers, they do not overflow you. When
you walk through fire, you are not scorched, and a
flame does not burn you.
3 “For I am hWhY your Elohim, the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl, your Saviour; I gave Mitsrayim for your
ransom, Kush and Seḇa in your place.
4 “Since you were precious in My eyes, you have
been esteemed, and I have loved you. And I give men
in your place, and peoples for your life.
5 “Do not fear, for I am with you. I shall bring your
seed from the east, and gather you from the west.
6 “I shall say to the north, ‘Give them up!’ And to the
south, ‘Do not keep them back!’ Bring My sons from
afar, and My daughters from the ends of the earth 7 all those who are called by My Name, whom I have
created, formed, even made for My esteem.”
1072

YESHAYAHU

He shall bring out a blind people who have eyes,
and deaf ones who have ears.
9 All the nations shall be assembled, and the
peoples be gathered. Who among them declares this,
and shows us former? Let them give their witnesses,
to be declared right; or let them hear and say, “It is
truth.”
10 “You are My witnesses,” declares hWhY, “And My
servant whom I have chosen, so that you know and
believe Me, and understand that I am He. Before Me
there was no Ĕl formed, nor after Me there is none.
11 “I, I am hWhY, and besides Me there is no saviour.
12 “I, I have declared and saved, and made known,
and there was no foreign mighty one among you. And
you are My witnesses,” declares hWhY, “that I am Ĕl.
13 “Even from the day I am He, and no one delivers
out of My hand. I work, and who turns it back?”
14 Thus said hWhY, your Redeemer, the Qadosh One
of Yisra’ĕl, “For your sake I shall send to Baḇel, and
bring them all down as fugitives, even the Kasdites,
who rejoice in their ships.
15 “I am hWhY, your Qadosh One, Creator of Yisra’ĕl,
your Sovereign.”
16 Thus said hWhY, who makes a way in the sea and
a path through the mighty waters,
17 who brings forth the chariot and horse, the army
and the strong. They lie down together, they do not
rise, they have been extinguished, they have been
quenched like a wick.
18 “Do not remember the former, nor consider that of
old.
19 “See, I am doing what is new, let it now spring
forth. Do you not know it? I am even making a way in
the wilderness and rivers in the desert.
8

1073

ISAIAH

“The beast of the field esteems Me, the jackals
and the ostriches, because I have given waters in the
wilderness and rivers in the desert, to give drink to My
people, My chosen,
21 this people I have formed for Myself, let them
relate My praise.
22 “But you have not called on Me, O Ya’aqoḇ, for
you have been weary of Me, O Yisra’ĕl.
23 “You have not brought Me the sheep for your burnt
offerings, nor have you esteemed Me with your
slaughterings. I have not caused you to serve with
grain offerings, nor wearied you with incense.
24 “You have not bought Me sweet cane with silver,
nor have you satisfied Me with the fat of your
slaughterings. You have only burdened Me with your
sins, you have wearied Me with your wickednesses.
25 “I, I am He who blots out your transgressions for
My own sake, and remember your sins no more.
26 “Remind Me, let us enter into judgment, together;
relate, that you might be declared right.
27 “Your first father sinned, and your interpreters
have transgressed against Me.
28 “So I have profaned the chief ones of the qodesh
place, and I have delivered up Ya’aqoḇ to the curse,
and Yisra’ĕl to scorn.
20

44 “But now hear, O Ya’aqoḇ My servant, and
Yisra’ĕl whom I have chosen.
2 “Thus said hWhY who made you and formed you
from the womb, who helps you, ‘Do not fear, O
Ya’aqoḇ My servant, and Yeshurun, whom I have
chosen.
3 ‘For I pour water on the thirsty, and floods on the
dry ground. I pour My Ruaḥ on your seed, and My
beraḵah on your offspring,
1074

YESHAYAHU

and they shall spring up among the grass like
willows by streams of water.’
5 “One says, ‘I belong to hWhY; another calls himself
by the name of Ya’aqoḇ; another writes with his hand,
‘Unto hWhY,’ and names himself by the name of
Yisra’ĕl.
6 “Thus said hWhY, Sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, and his
Redeemer, hWhY of hosts, ‘I am the First and I am the
Last, besides Me there is no Elohim.
7 ‘And who is like Me? Let him call and declare it,
and lay it before Me, since I appointed the everlasting
people. And the events that are coming and those
that do come, let them declare these to them.
8 ‘Do not fear, nor be afraid. Have I not since made
you hear, and declared it? You are My witnesses. Is
there an Eloah besides Me? There is no other Rock,
I know not one.’ ”
9 Those who make an idol, all of them are
emptiness, and their delights do not profit. And they
are their own witnesses; they neither see nor know,
so that they are put to shame.
10 Who would form a mighty one or cast an idol that
is of no value?
11 See, all his companions are ashamed, and the
workmen, they are but men. Let them all be gathered
together, let them stand up, let them fear, let them be
put to shame, altogether.
12 The craftsman in iron with the tools works one in
the coals, and fashions it with hammers, and works it
with the strength of his arms. Even so, he shall be
hungry, and has no strength; he drinks no water and
is weary.
13 The carpenter stretches out his rule, he outlines it
with chalk; he fashions it with a plane, and he outlines
it with the compass, and makes it like the figure of a
4

1075

ISAIAH

man, according to the comeliness of a man, to remain
in the house.
14 He cuts down cedars for himself, and takes
cypress and oak, which he raised among the trees of
the forest. He has planted a pine, and the rain
nourishes it.
15 And it shall be for a man to burn, for he takes some
of it and warms himself. He also kindles it and shall
bake bread. He also makes a mighty one and bows
himself to it - has made it a carved image and falls
down before it.
16 Half of it he shall burn in the fire; with this half he
eats meat. He roasts a roast, and is satisfied. He also
warms himself and says, “Aha, I am warm, I have
seen the fire.”
17 And the rest of it he makes into a mighty one, his
carved image. He falls down before it and worships,
prays to it and says, “Deliver me, for you are my
mighty one.”
18 They do not know nor understand, for He has
smeared their eyes from seeing, and their hearts from
understanding.
19 And no one recalls it to his heart, nor is there
knowledge nor understanding to say, “I have burned
half of it in the fire, and I have also baked bread on its
coals; I have roasted meat and eaten it. And shall I
make the rest of it an abomination? Should I fall down
before a log of wood?”
20 Feeding on ashes, a deceived heart turns him
aside, and he does not deliver his being, nor says, “Is
there not a lie in my right hand?”
21 “Remember these, O Ya’aqoḇ, and Yisra’ĕl, for
you are My servant! I have formed you, you are My
servant, O Yisra’ĕl, do not forget Me!
1076

YESHAYAHU

“I shall wipe out your transgressions like a cloud,
and your sins like a mist. Return to Me, for I shall
redeem you.”
23 Sing, O shamayim, for hWhY shall do it! Shout, O
depths of the earth! Break forth into singing, O
mountains, forest, and every tree in it! For hWhY shall
redeem Ya’aqoḇ, and make Himself clear in Yisra’ĕl.
24 Thus said hWhY, your Redeemer, and He who
formed you from the womb, “I am hWhY, doing all,
stretching out the shamayim all alone, spreading out
the earth, with none beside Me,
25 frustrating the signs of the babblers, and driving
diviners mad, turning wise men backward, and
making their knowledge foolish,
26 confirming the word of His servant, and
completing the counsel of His messengers, who says
of Yerushalayim, ‘Be inhabited,’ and of the cities of
Yahuḏah, ‘They shall be built, and her ruins raised up
by Me,’
27 who is saying to the deep, ‘Be dry, and your rivers
I dry up,’
28 who is saying of Koresh, ‘He is My shepherd, and
he completes all My pleasure, even saying to
Yerushalayim, “Let her be built,” and to the Hĕyḵal,
“Let her foundation be laid.” ’
22

45 “Thus said hWhY to His anointed, to Koresh,
whose right hand I have grasped, to subdue nations
before him and ungird the loins of sovereigns, to open
before him the double doors, so that gates are not
shut:
2 ‘I go before you and make the crooked places
straight; I shatter the gates of bronze and cut down
the bars of iron.
1077

ISAIAH

‘And I shall give you the treasures of darkness and
hoarded wealth of secret places, so that you know
that I, hWhY, who are calling you by your name, am
the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
4 ‘For the sake of Ya’aqoḇ My servant, and of
Yisra’ĕl My chosen, I also call you by your name, I
give you a title, though you have not known Me.
5 ‘I am hWhY, and there is none else - there are no
mighty ones besides Me. I gird you, though you have
not known Me,
6 so that they know, from the rising of the sun and
from the west, that there is none but Me. I am hWhY,
and there is none else,
7 forming light and creating darkness, making peace
and creating evil. I, HWHY, do all these.’
8 “Rain down, O shamayim, from above, and let
clouds pour down righteousness. Let the earth open,
let them bring forth deliverance, and let righteousness
spring up together. I, hWhY, have created it.
9 “Woe to him who strives with his Maker! - a
potsherd with the potsherds of the earth. Does clay
say to him who forms it, ‘What are you making?’ Or
your handiwork say, ‘He has no hands’?
10 “Woe to him who says to his father, ‘What are you
bringing forth?’ Or to the woman, ‘What are you
labouring over?’ ”
11 Thus said hWhY, the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl, and
his Maker, “Do you ask Me about My sons what is to
come? And about the work of My hands do you
command Me?
12 “I have made the earth, and created man on it. I,
My hands have stretched out the shamayim, and all
their host I have commanded.
13 “I have stirred him up in righteousness, and all his
ways I make straight. He builds My city and lets My
3

1078

YESHAYAHU

exiles go, not for price nor reward,” declares hWhY of
hosts.
14 Thus said hWhY, “The labour of Mitsrayim and
merchandise of Kush and of the Seḇa’ites, men of
size, come over to you and they are yours. They walk
behind you, they come over in chains, and they bow
down to you. They make supplication to you, saying,
‘Indeed, Ĕl is in you, and there is none else, no mighty
one.’ ”
15 Truly You are Ĕl, who hides Yourself, O Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, Saviour!
16 They shall be put to shame, and even be
humiliated, all of them - the makers of idols shall go
away together in humiliation.
17 Yisra’ĕl shall be saved by hWhY with an
everlasting deliverance. You are not to be ashamed
nor hurt, forever and ever.
18 For thus said hWhY, Creator of the shamayim, He
is Elohim, Former of earth and its Maker, He
established it, He did not create it to be empty, He
formed it to be inhabited: “I am HWHY, and there is
none else.
19 “I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the
earth. I have not said to the seed of Ya’aqoḇ, ‘Seek
Me in vain.’ I am hWhY, speaking righteousness,
declaring matters that are straight.
20 “Gather yourselves and come; draw near together,
you who have escaped from the gentiles. No
knowledge have they who are lifting up the wood of
their carved image, and pray to a mighty one that
does not save.
21 “Declare and bring near, let them even take
counsel together. Who has announced this from of
old? Who has declared it from that time? Is it not I,
1079

ISAIAH

hWhY? And there is no mighty one besides Me, a
righteous Ĕl and a Saviour, there is none besides Me.
22 “Turn to Me and be saved, all you ends of the
earth! For I am Ĕl, and there is none else.
23 “I have sworn by Myself, a word has gone out of
My mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, so
that to Me every knee shall bow, every tongue swear.
24 “One shall say, ‘Only in hWhY do I have
righteousness and strength’ - he comes to Him. And
all those displeased with Him shall be put to shame.
25 “In hWhY all the seed of Yisra’ĕl shall be declared
right and boast.”

46 Bĕl has bowed down, Neḇo is stooping, their
idols were on the beasts and on the cattle. That which
is carried is burdensome, a burden to the weary.
2 They have stooped, they have bowed down
together, they were unable to deliver the burden, but
they themselves went into captivity.
3 “Listen to Me, O house of Ya’aqoḇ and all the
remnant of the house of Yisra’ĕl, who are borne from
the body, who are carried from the womb:
4 even to your old age, I am He, and even to grey
hairs I carry! I have made and I bear, and I carry and
rescue.
5 “To whom do you liken Me, and compare Me and
make Me similar, that we should be alike?
6 “They pour gold out of the bag, and weigh silver
on the scale. They hire a goldsmith, and he makes it
a mighty one. They fall down, they also bow
themselves.
7 “They bear it on the shoulder, they carry it and put
it in its place, and it stands - from its place it does not
move. Though one cries out to it, it does not answer,
nor save him from his distress.
1080

YESHAYAHU

“Remember this, and show yourselves men; turn
it back, you transgressors.
9 “Remember the former of long ago, for I am Ĕl,
and there is no one else - Elohim, and there is no one
like Me,
10 declaring the end from the beginning, and from of
old that which has not been done, saying, ‘My counsel
stands, and all My delight I do,’
11 calling a bird of prey from the east, the man who
executes My counsel, from a distant land. Indeed I
have spoken it, I also bring it to pass. I have planned
it, I also do it.
12 “Listen to Me, you stubborn-hearted, who are far
from righteousness:
13 “I shall bring My righteousness near, it is not far
off, and My deliverance, it is not delayed. And I shall
give deliverance in Tsiyon, My esteem to Yisra’ĕl.
8

47 “Come down and sit in the dust, O maiden
daughter of Baḇel. Sit on the ground without a throne,
O daughter of the Kasdites! For no more do they call
you tender and delicate.
2 “Take the millstones and grind flour. Remove your
veil, lift up the skirt, uncover the leg, pass through
rivers.
3 “Let your nakedness be uncovered, let your
shame also be exposed. I take vengeance, and meet
no man.”
4 Our Redeemer, HWHY of hosts is His Name, the
Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
5 “Sit silent, and go into darkness, O daughter of the
Kasdites! For no more do they call you Mistress of
Reigns.
6 “I was wroth with My people, I have profaned My
inheritance and I gave them into your hand. You
1081

ISAIAH

showed them no compassion, you made your yoke
very heavy on the elderly.
7 “And you said, ‘I am mistress forever,’ so that you
did not take these to heart, and did not remember the
latter end of them.
8 “And now, hear this, you who are given to
pleasures, who dwells complacently, who says in
your heart, ‘I am, and there is none but me. I do not
sit as a widow, nor do I know the loss of children.’
9 “Both of these come to you suddenly, in one day:
the loss of children, and widowhood. They shall come
upon you in completeness, because of your many
witchcrafts, for your numerous great potent spells.
10 “And you have trusted in your evil, you have said,
‘No one sees me.’ Your wisdom and your knowledge
have led you astray. And you have said in your heart,
‘I am, and there is none but me.’
11 “But evil shall come upon you, not knowing from
where it arises, and trouble fall upon you, being
unable to put it off, and ruin come upon you suddenly,
which you know not.
12 “Stand now with your potent spells and your many
witchcrafts, in which you have laboured from your
youth, if maybe you are able to profit, if maybe you
find strength.
13 “You are exhausted by your many counsels; let the
astrologers, the stargazers, and those who
prognosticate by the new moons stand up and save
you from what is coming upon you.
14 “See, they shall be as stubble, fire shall burn them,
they do not deliver themselves from the power of the
flame, there is not a coal to be warmed by, nor a fire
to sit before it!
15 “So they shall be to you with whom you have
laboured, your merchants from your youth. They shall
1082

YESHAYAHU

wander, each one his own way, there is none to save
you.

48 “Hear this, O house of Ya’aqoḇ, who are called
by the name of Yisra’ĕl, and have come from the
waters of Yahuḏah, who swear by the Name of hWhY,
and profess the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl - but not in truth or
in righteousness 2 for they call themselves after the qodesh city, and
lean on the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl - HWHY of hosts is His
Name:
3 “I have declared the former from the beginning,
and they went forth from My mouth, and I made you
hear them. Suddenly I acted, and they came to be.
4 “Because I knew that you were hard, and your
neck was an iron sinew, and your forehead bronze,
5 therefore I declared it to you long ago. Before it
came I made you hear, lest you should say, ‘My idol
has done them, and my carved image and my
moulded image commanded them.’
6 “You have heard, look at them all. And do you not
declare it? From now on I shall make you hear new
ones, even hidden ones, which you have not known.
7 “Now they shall be created and not long ago. And
before this day you have not heard them, lest you
should say, ‘Look, I knew them.’
8 “No, you have not heard; no, you have not known;
no, from of old your ear has not been open. Because
I knew that you are indeed treacherous, and are
called ‘a transgressor from the womb.’
9 “For My Name’s sake I postponed My displeasure,
and for My praise I held it back from you, so as not to
cut you off.
10 “See, I have refined you, but not as silver; I have
chosen you in the furnace of affliction.
1083

ISAIAH

“For My own sake, for My own sake, I do it. For
how is it profaned? And My esteem I do not give to
another.
12 “Listen to Me, O Ya’aqoḇ, and Yisra’ĕl, My called:
I am He, I am the First, I am also the Last.
13 “Also, My hand has laid the foundation of the
earth, and My right hand has stretched out the
shamayim. I call to them, let them stand together.
14 “All of you, gather yourselves, and hear! Who
among them has declared these? hWhY has loved
him. Let him do His pleasure on Baḇel, and His arm
be on the Kasdites.
15 “I, I have spoken, I have also called him, I have
brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.
16 “Come near to Me, hear this: I have not spoken in
secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, I
was there. And now the Aḏon hWhY has sent Me, and
His Ruaḥ.”
17 Thus said hWhY, your Redeemer, the Qadosh One
of Yisra’ĕl, “I am hWhY your Elohim, teaching you
what is best, leading you by the way you should go.
18 “If only you had listened to My Commands! Then
your peace would have been like a river, and your
righteousness like the waves of the sea.
19 “And your seed would have been like the sand,
and the offspring of your inward parts like the grains
of sand. His name would not have been cut off nor
destroyed from before Me.
20 “Come out of Baḇel! Flee from the Kasdites!
Declare this with a voice of singing, proclaim it, send
it out to the end of the earth! Say, ‘hWhY has
redeemed His servant Ya’aqoḇ!’ ”
21 And they did not thirst when He led them through
the deserts; He caused waters from a rock to flow for
them; He split the rock, and waters gushed out.
11

1084

YESHAYAHU
22

“There is no peace for the wicked,” said HWHY.”

49 Listen to Me, O coastlands, and hear, you
peoples from afar! hWhY has called Me from the womb,
from My mother’s body He has caused My Name to be
remembered.
2 And He made My mouth like a sharp sword, in the
shadow of His hand He hid Me, and made Me a
polished shaft. In His quiver He hid Me.”
3 And He said to Me, ‘You are My servant, O
Yisra’ĕl, in whom I am adorned.’
4 And I said, ‘I have laboured in vain, I have spent
my strength for emptiness, and in vain. But my RightRuling is with hWhY, and my work with my Elohim.’ ”
5 And now said hWhY - who formed Me from the
womb to be His Servant, to bring Ya’aqoḇ back to
Him, though Yisra’ĕl is not gathered to Him, yet I am
esteemed in the eyes of hWhY, and My Elohim has
been My strength 6 and He says, “Shall it be trivial for You to be My
Servant to raise up the tribes of Ya’aqoḇ, and to bring
back the preserved ones of Yisra’ĕl? And I shall give
You as a light to the gentiles, to be My deliverance to
the ends of the earth!”
7 Thus said hWhY, the Redeemer of Yisra’ĕl, their
Qadosh One, to the despised, to the loathed One of
the nation, to the Servant of rulers, “Sovereigns shall
see and arise, rulers also shall bow themselves,
because of hWhY who is steadfast, the Qadosh One
of Yisra’ĕl. And He has chosen You!”
8 Thus said hWhY, “In a favourable time I shall
answer You, and in the day of deliverance I shall help
You - and I guard You and give You for a Covenant
of the people, to restore the earth, to cause them to
inherit the ruined inheritances,
1085

ISAIAH

to say to the prisoners, ‘Go out,’ to those who are
in darkness, ‘Show yourselves.’ “Let them feed on the
ways, and let their pasture be on all bare hills.
10 “They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither heat or
sun strike them, for He who has compassion on them
shall lead them, even by fountains of water guide
them.
11 “And I shall make all My mountains a way, and My
highways raised up.
12 “See, these come from far away, and see, those
from the north and the west, and these from the land
of Sinim.”
13 Sing, O shamayim, rejoice, O earth! And break out
in singing, O mountains! For hWhY shall comfort His
people and have compassion on His afflicted ones.
14 But Tsiyon says, “hWhY has forsaken me, and
hWhY has forgotten me.”
15 “Would a woman forget her nursing child, and not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Though
they forget, I never forget you.
16 “See, I have inscribed you on the palms of My
hands; your walls are always before Me.
17 “Your sons shall hurry, your destroyers and those
who laid you waste depart from you.
18 “Lift up your eyes round about and see, all of them
gather together and come to you. As I live,” declares
hWhY, “you shall put on all of them as an ornament,
and bind them on you as a bride does.
19 “For your wastes, and your deserted places, and
the land of your destruction, shall soon be too narrow
for the inhabitants, while those who swallowed you up
are far away.
20 “The sons of your bereavement shall yet say in
your ears, ‘The place is too narrow for me, make room
for me to live.’
9

1086

YESHAYAHU

“And you shall say in your heart, ‘Who has brought
forth these for me, since I am bereaved and barren,
an exile, and wandering to and fro? And who reared
them? See, I was left alone - from where did these
come?’ ”
22 Thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “See, I lift My hand up
to the gentiles, and raise My banner for the peoples;
and they shall bring your sons in their arms, and your
daughters carried on their shoulders;
23 “And sovereigns shall be your foster fathers, and
their sovereignesses your nursing mothers. They bow
down to you with their faces to the earth, and lick up
the dust of your feet. And you shall know that I am
hWhY - those who wait for Me shall not be ashamed.”
24 Is prey taken from the mighty, and the captives of
the righteous delivered?
25 Yet thus said hWhY, “Even the captives of the
mighty are taken away, and the prey of the ruthless is
delivered; and I strive with him who strives with you,
and I save your children.
26 “And I shall feed those who oppress you with their
own flesh, and let them drink their own blood as sweet
wine. All flesh shall know that I, hWhY, am your
Saviour, and your Redeemer, the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.”
21

50 “Thus says hWhY, “Where is the certificate of your
mother’s divorce, whom I have put away? Or which of
My creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Look, you
were sold for your wickednesses, and your mother was
put away for your transgressions.
2 “When I came, why was there no man? When I
called, why was there no one to answer? Was My
hand too short to redeem? Or have I no power to
deliver? See, by My rebuke I dry up the sea, I make
1087

ISAIAH

the rivers a wilderness; their fish stink for there is no
water, and die of thirst.
3 “I clothe the shamayim with darkness, and I make
sackcloth their covering.”
4 The Aḏon hWhY has given Me the tongue of
talmidim, that I should know to help the weary with a
word. He wakes Me morning by morning, he wakes
My ear to hear as talmidim.
5 The Aḏon hWhY has opened My ear, and I was not
rebellious, nor did I turn away.
6 I gave My back to those who struck Me, and My
cheeks to those who plucked out the beard, I did not
hide My face from humiliation and spitting.
7 And the Aḏon hWhY helps Me, therefore I shall not
be humiliated. So I have turned My face like a flint,
and I know that I am not put to shame.
8 Near is He who declares Me right. Who would
contend with Me? Let us stand together. Who is My
adversary? Let him come near Me.
9 See, the Aḏon hWhY helps Me. Who would declare
Me wicked? See, all of them wear out like a garment,
a moth eats them.
10 Who among you is revering hWhY, obeying the
voice of His Servant, that has walked in darkness and
has no light? Let him trust in the Name of hWhY and
lean upon his Elohim!
11 See, all you who light a fire, girding on burning
arrows: walk in the light of your fire and in the burning
arrows you have lit. From My hand you shall have
this: you shall lie down in grief!

51 “Listen to Me, you who pursue righteousness,
seeking hWhY: Look to the rock you were hewn from,
and to the hole of the pit you were dug from.
1088

YESHAYAHU

“Look to Aḇraham your father, and to Sarah who
bore you. For he was alone when I called him, and I
baraḵ him and increased him.
3 “For hWhY shall comfort Tsiyon, He shall comfort
all her waste places. For He makes her wilderness
like Ĕḏen, and her desert like the garden of hWhY. Joy
and gladness are found in it, thanksgiving and the
voice of song.
4 “Listen to Me, My people, and give ear to Me, O
My nation, for the Torah goes forth from Me, and My
Right-Ruling I place as a light to peoples.
5 “My righteousness is near, My deliverance shall
go forth, and My arms judge peoples. Coastlands wait
upon Me, and for My arm they wait expectantly.
6 “Lift up your eyes to the shamayim, and look on
the earth beneath, for the shamayim shall vanish like
smoke, and the earth wear out like a garment, and
those who dwell in it die as gnats. But My deliverance
is forever, and My righteousness is not broken.
7 “Listen to Me, you who know righteousness, a
people in whose heart is My Torah: do not fear the
reproach of men, nor be afraid of their revilings.
8 “For a moth eats them like a garment, and a worm
eats them like wool; but My righteousness is forever,
and My deliverance to all generations.”
9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of hWhY!
Awake as in days of old, everlasting generations.
Was it not You who cut pride apart, and pierced the
dragon?
10 Was it not You who dried up the sea, the waters of
the great deep, who made the depths of the sea a
way for the redeemed to pass over?
11 And let the ransomed of hWhY return. And they
shall come to Tsiyon with singing, with everlasting joy
2

1089

ISAIAH

on their heads. Let them attain joy and gladness;
sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
12 “I, I am He who comforts you. Who are you that
you should be afraid of man that dies, and of the son
of man who is made like grass?
13 “And you have forgotten hWhY your Maker who
stretched out the shamayim and laid the foundations
of the earth, and you continually fear, all the day,
because of the rage of the oppressor, as he has
prepared to destroy. And where is the rage of the
oppressor?
14 “Bowed, he hastens to be loosened, that he
should not die in the pit, and that his bread should not
fail.
15 “But I am hWhY your Elohim, stirring up the sea,
and its waves roar. hWhY of hosts is His Name.
16 “And I have put My Words in Your mouth, and with
the shadow of My hand I have covered You, to plant
the shamayim and lay the foundations of the earth,
and to say to Tsiyon, ‘You are My people.’ ”
17 Awake, awake yourself! Rise up, O Yerushalayim,
you who have drunk at the hand of HWHY the cup of
His wrath. You have drunk the dregs of the cup of
reeling, and drained it out.
18 Of all the sons she bore, she has none to guide
her. And of all the sons she has brought up, no one
strengthens her hand.
19 Both these are coming upon you - who is sorry for
you? Ruin and destruction, scarcity of food and
sword. How shall I comfort you?
20 Your sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all
the streets, like a gazelle in a net. They are filled with
the wrath of hWhY, the rebuke of your Elohim.
21 Therefore please hear this, you afflicted and
drunk, but not with wine.
1090

YESHAYAHU

Thus said your Aḏon, hWhY and your Elohim, who
pleads the cause of His people, “See, I shall take out
of your hand the cup of reeling, the dregs of the cup
of My wrath - never again shall you drink it.
23 “And I shall put it into the hand of those who afflict
you, who have said to your being, ‘Bow down, and we
pass over you.’ And you made your back like the
ground, and as the street, to walk over.”
22

52 Awake, awake! Put on your strength, O Tsiyon,
put on your garments of splendour, O Yerushalayim,
the qodesh city! For no more do the uncircumcised and
the unclean come into you.
2 Shake yourself from the dust, arise, and sit down,
O Yerushalayim. Loose yourself from the bonds of
your neck, O captive daughter of Tsiyon!
3 For thus said hWhY, “You have been sold for
naught, and you are redeemed not with silver.”
4 For thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “At first My people
went down into Mitsrayim to sojourn there, and
Ashshur oppressed them without cause.
5 “And now, what have I here,” declares hWhY, “that
My people are taken away for naught? Those who
rule over them make them wail,” declares hWhY, “and
My Name is despised all day continually.
6 “Therefore My people shall know My Name, in that
day, for I am the One who is speaking. See, it is I.”
7 How pleasant upon the mountains are the feet of
him who brings good news, who proclaims peace,
who brings good news, who proclaims deliverance,
who says to Tsiyon, “Your Elohim reigns!”
8 The voice of your watchmen! They shall lift up their
voices, together they shout for joy, because eye to
eye they see the return of hWhY to Tsiyon.
1091

ISAIAH

Break forth into joy, sing together, you waste
places of Yerushalayim! For hWhY shall comfort His
people, He shall redeem Yerushalayim.
10 hWhY shall lay bare His qodesh arm in the eyes of
all the nations. And all the ends of the earth shall see
the deliverance of our Elohim.
11 Turn aside! Turn aside! Come out from there,
touch not the unclean. Come out of her midst, be
clean, you who bear the vessels of hWhY.
12 For you shall not come out in haste, nor go in flight.
For hWhY is going before you, and the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl is your rear guard.
13 See, My Servant shall work wisely, He shall be
exalted and lifted up and very high.
14 As many were astonished at You - so the
disfigurement beyond any man’s and His form
beyond the sons of men 15 He shall likewise startle many nations. Sovereigns
shut their mouths at Him, for what had not been
recounted to them they shall see, and what they had
not heard they shall understand.
9

53 Who has believed our report? And to whom was
the arm of HWHY revealed?
2 For He grew up before Him as a tender plant, and
as a root out of dry ground. He has no form or
splendour that we should look upon Him, nor
appearance that we should desire Him 3 despised and rejected by men, a man of pains and
knowing sickness. And as one from whom the face is
hidden, being despised, and we did not consider Him.
4 Truly, He has borne our sicknesses and carried
our pains. Yet we reckoned Him stricken, smitten by
Elohim, and afflicted.
1092

YESHAYAHU

But He was pierced for our transgressions, He was
crushed for our wickednesses. The chastisement for
our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we are
healed.
6 We all, like sheep, went astray, each one of us has
turned to his own way. And HWHY has laid on Him the
wickedness of us all.
7 He was oppressed and He was afflicted, but He
did not open His mouth. He was led as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before its shearers is silent,
but He did not open His mouth.
8 He was taken from prison and from judgment. And
as for His generation, who considered that He shall
be cut off from the land of the living? For the
transgression of My people He was stricken.
9 And He was appointed a grave with the wicked,
and with the rich at His death, because He had done
no violence, nor was deceit in His mouth.
10 But hWhY was pleased to crush Him, He laid
sickness on Him, that when He made Himself an
offering for guilt, He would see a seed, He would
prolong His days and the pleasure of hWhY prosper in
His hand.
11 From the suffering of His life He would see light
and be satisfied. Through His knowledge My
righteous Servant makes many righteous, and He
bears their wickednesses.
12 Therefore I give Him a portion among the great,
and He divides the spoil with the strong, because He
poured out His being unto death, and He was counted
with the transgressors, and He bore the sin of many,
and made intercession for the transgressors.
5

54 “Sing, O barren one, you who did not bear! Break
forth into singing, and cry aloud, you who have not
1093

ISAIAH

been in labour! For the children of the deserted one
are more than the children of the married woman,” said
HWHY.
2 “Enlarge the place of your tent, and let them
stretch out the curtains of your dwellings, spare not.
Lengthen your cords, and strengthen your stakes.
3 “For you shall break forth to the right and to the
left, and your seed inherit the nations, and make the
deserted cities inhabited.
4 “Do not fear, for you shall not be put to shame, nor
hurt, you shall not be humiliated. For the shame of
your youth you shall forget, and not remember the
reproach of your widowhood any more.
5 “For your Maker is your husband, hWhY of hosts is
His Name, and the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl is your
Redeemer. He is called the Elohim of all the earth.
6 “For hWhY has called you like a woman forsaken
and grieved in spirit, like a wife of youth when you
were refused,” declares your Elohim.
7 “For a little while I have forsaken you, but with
great compassion I shall gather you.
8 “In an overflow of wrath I hid My face from you for
a moment, but with everlasting kindness I shall have
compassion on you,” said hWhY, your Redeemer.
9 “For this is the waters of Noaḥ to Me, in that I have
sworn that the waters of Noaḥ would never again
cover the earth, so have I sworn not to be wroth with
you, nor to rebuke you.
10 “For though the mountains be removed and the
hills be shaken, My kindness is not removed from
you, nor is My Covenant of peace shaken,” said
hWhY, who has compassion on you.
11 “O you afflicted one, tossed with storm, and not
comforted, see, I shall lay your stones in emeralds,
and your foundations with sapphires,
1094

YESHAYAHU

and shall make your battlements of rubies, your
gates of crystal, and all your walls of precious stones,
13 and all your children taught by hWhY, and the
peace of your children great.
14 “In righteousness you shall be established - far
from oppression, for you shall not fear, and from ruin,
for it does not come near you.
15 “See, they shall indeed assemble, but not because
of Me. Whoever shall assemble against you falls for
your sake!
16 “See, I Myself have created the blacksmith who
blows the coals in the fire, who brings forth an
instrument for his work. And I have created the waster
to destroy.
17 “No weapon formed against you shall prosper, and
every tongue which rises against you in judgment you
shall prove wicked. This is the inheritance of the
servants of hWhY, and their righteousness from Me,”
declares HWHY.
12

55 “Oh everyone who thirsts, come to the waters.
And you who have no silver, come, buy and eat. Come,
buy wine and milk without silver and without price.
2 “Why do you weigh out silver for what is not bread,
and your labour for what does not satisfy? Listen,
listen to Me, and eat what is good, and let your being
delight itself in fatness.
3 “Incline your ear, and come to Me. Hear, so that
your being lives. And let Me make an everlasting
Covenant with you, the trustworthy kindnesses of
Dawiḏ.
4 “See, I have given Him as a witness to the people,
a Leader and a Commander for the people.
5 “See, a nation you do not know, you shall call, and
a nation who does not know you runs to you, because
1095

ISAIAH

of hWhY your Elohim, and the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl,
for He has adorned you.”
6 Seek hWhY while He is to be found, call on Him
while He is near.
7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. Let him return to
hWhY, who has compassion on him, and to our
Elohim, for He pardons much.
8 “For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither
are your ways My ways,” declares HWHY.
9 “For as the shamayim are higher than the earth,
so are My ways higher than your ways, and My
thoughts than your thoughts.
10 “For as the rain comes down, and the snow from
the shamayim, and do not return there, but water the
earth, and make it bring forth and bud, and give seed
to the sower and bread to the eater,
11 so is My Word that goes forth from My mouth - it
does not return to Me empty, but shall do what I
please, and shall certainly accomplish what I sent it
for.
12 “For with joy you go out, and with peace you are
brought in - the mountains and the hills break forth
into singing before you, and all the trees of the field
clap the hands.
13 “Instead of the thorn the cypress comes up, and
instead of the nettle the myrtle comes up. And it shall
be to hWhY for a name, for an everlasting sign which
is not cut off.”

56 Thus said HWHY, “Guard Right-Ruling, and do
righteousness, for near is My deliverance to come, and
My righteousness to be revealed.
2 “Baruḵ is the man who does this, and the son of
man who lays hold on it, guarding the Shabbath lest
1096

YESHAYAHU

he profane it, and guarding his hand from doing any
evil.
3 “And let not the son of the foreigner who has joined
himself to hWhY speak, saying, ‘hWhY has certainly
separated me from His people,’ nor let the eunuch
say, ‘Look I am a dry tree.’ ”
4 For thus said hWhY, “To the eunuchs who guard
My Shabbathoth, and have chosen what pleases Me,
and hold fast to My Covenant:
5 to them I shall give in My house and within My
walls a place and a name better than that of sons and
daughters - I give them an everlasting name that is
not cut off.
6 “Also the sons of the foreigner who join
themselves to hWhY, to serve Him, and to love the
Name of hWhY, to be His servants, all who guard the
Shabbath, and not profane it, and holdfast to My
Covenant 7 them I shall bring to My qodesh mountain, and let
them rejoice in My house of prayer. Their burnt
offerings and their slaughterings are accepted on My
altar, for My house is called a house of prayer for all
the peoples.”
8 The Aḏon hWhY, who gathers the outcasts of
Yisra’ĕl, declares, “I still gather to him besides those
who are gathered to him.”
9 All you beasts of the field, come to devour, all you
beasts in the forest.
10 His watchmen are blind, all of them, they have not
known. All of them are dumb dogs, unable to bark,
dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber.
11 And the dogs have a strong appetite, they never
have enough. And they are shepherds! They have not
known understanding. All of them look to their own
way, every one for his own gain, from his own end.
1097

ISAIAH

“Come, let me bring wine and fill ourselves with
strong drink. And tomorrow shall be as today, even
much greater.”

12

57 The righteous one has perished, and no one
takes it to heart. And kind men are taken away, while
no one understands that the righteous one is taken
away from the presence of evil,
2 he enters into peace. They who walk in integrity
rest on their beds.
3 “But come here, you sons of the sorceress, you
offspring of the adulterer and the whore!
4 Against whom are you sporting? Against whom do
you make a wide mouth and stick out the tongue? Are
you not children of transgression, offspring of
falsehood,
5 being inflamed with mighty ones under every
green tree, slaying the children in the valleys, under
the clefts of the rocks?
6 “Among the smooth stones of the stream is your
portion; they, they, are your lot! Also to them you have
poured a drink offering, you have offered a grain
offering. Am I comforted in these?
7 “On a high and lofty mountain you have made your
bed. There, too, you went up to make an offering.
8 “Also behind the doors and their posts you have
made your remembrance. For you have departed
from Me, and have gone up to them. You have made
your bed wide and made a covenant with them. You
have loved their bed, where you saw their hand.
9 “And you went to the sovereign with ointment, and
increased your perfumes. And you sent your
messengers far off, and lowered yourself even to the
grave.
1098

YESHAYAHU

“You have wearied yourselves with your many
wanderings, yet you did not say, ‘I give up!’ You have
found the life of your hand, therefore you were not
grieved.
11 “And of whom have you been afraid, or feared, that
you have lied and not remembered Me, nor taken it to
your heart? Have I not been silent, even from of old,
and you have not revered Me?
12 “Let Me declare your righteousness and your
works, for they do not profit you.
13 “When you cry out, let your collection of idols
deliver you. But the wind shall bear them all away, a
breath take them. But he who takes refuge in Me shall
inherit the land, and possess My qodesh mountain.”
14 And one shall say, “Heap it up! Heap it up! Prepare
the way, take the stumbling-block out of the way of
My people.”
15 For thus declares the high and exalted One who
dwells forever, whose Name is qodesh, “I dwell in the
high and qodesh place, with him who has a bruised
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of bruised ones.
16 “For I would not strive forever, nor am I wroth
forever, for the spirit would grow faint before Me, even
the beings I have made.
17 “For the wickedness of his unfair gain I was wroth
and I smote him. I hid Myself and was wroth, and he
went on backsliding in the way of his heart.
18 “I have seen his ways, but I heal him, and I lead
him, and restore comforts to him and to his mourners,
19 creating the fruit of the lips: peace, peace to him
who is far off and to him who is near,” said hWhY, “and
I shall heal him.”
20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea, for it is
unable to rest, and its waters cast up mud and dirt.
10

1099

ISAIAH

“There is no peace,” said my Elohim, “for the
wicked.”

21

58 “Cry aloud, do not spare. Lift up your voice like a
ram’s horn. Declare to My people their transgression,
and the house of Ya’aqoḇ their sins.
2 “Yet they seek Me day by day, and delight to know
My ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and did
not forsake the Right-Ruling of their Elohim. They ask
of Me rulings of righteousness, they delight in drawing
near to Elohim.
3 ‘Why have we fasted, and You have not seen?
Why have we afflicted our beings, and You took no
note?’ “Look, in the day of your fasting you find
pleasure, and drive on all your labourers.
4 “Look, you fast for strife and contention, and to
strike with the fist of wickedness. You do not fast as
you do this day, to make your voice heard on high.
5 “Is it a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to
afflict his being? Is it to bow down his head like a
bulrush, and to spread out sackcloth and ashes? Do
you call this a fast, and an acceptable day to HWHY?
6 “Is this not the fast that I have chosen: to loosen
the tight cords of wickedness, to undo the bands of
the yoke, to exempt the oppressed, and to break off
every yoke?
7 “Is it not to share your bread with the hungry, and
that you bring to your house the poor who are cast
out; when you see the naked, and cover him, and not
hide yourself from your own flesh?
8 “Then your light would break forth like the morning,
your healing spring forth speedily. And your
righteousness shall go before you, the esteem of
hWhY would be your rear guard.
1100

YESHAYAHU

“Then, when you call, hWhY would answer; when
you cry, He would say, ‘Here I am.’ “If you take away
the yoke from your midst, the pointing of the finger,
and the speaking of unrighteousness,
10 if you extend your being to the hungry and satisfy
the afflicted being, then your light shall dawn in the
darkness, and your darkness be as noon.
11 “Then hWhY would guide you continually, and
satisfy your being in drought, and strengthen your
bones. And you shall be like a watered garden, and
like a spring of water, whose waters do not fail.
12 “And those from among you shall build the old
waste places. You shall raise up the foundations of
many generations. And you would be called the
Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of streets to
dwell in.
13 “If you do turn back your foot from the Shabbath,
from doing your pleasure on My qodesh day, and
shall call the Shabbath ‘a delight,’ the qadosh of hWhY
‘esteemed,’ and shall esteem it, not doing your own
ways, nor finding your own pleasure, nor speaking
your own words,
14 then you shall delight yourself in hWhY. And I shall
cause you to ride on the heights of the earth, and feed
you with the inheritance of Ya’aqoḇ your father. For
the mouth of hWhY has spoken!”
9

59 Look, the hand of HWHY has not become too short
to save, nor His ear too heavy to hear.
2 But your wickednesses separated you from your
Elohim. And your sins have hidden His face from you,
from hearing.
3 For your hands have been defiled with blood, and
your fingers with wickedness; your lips have spoken
falsehood, your tongue mutters unrighteousness.
1101

ISAIAH

No one calls for righteousness, and no one judges
for truth. They trust in emptiness and speak
worthlessness; they conceive trouble and bring forth
wickedness.
5 They have hatched adders’ eggs and they weave
the spider’s web. Whoever eats their eggs dies, and
when one is broken an adder is hatched.
6 Their webs do not become garments, nor do they
cover themselves with their works. Their works are
works of wickedness, and a deed of violence is in
their hands.
7 Their feet run to evil, and they hurry to shed
innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of
wickedness, wasting and ruin are in their highways.
8 The way of peace they have not known, and there
is no right-ruling in their ways. They have made
crooked paths for themselves, whoever treads in
them shall not know peace.
9 Therefore right-ruling has been far from us, and
righteousness does not reach us. We look for light,
but there is darkness; for brightness, but we walk in
thick darkness!
10 We feel for the wall like the blind, and we feel as
without eyes. At noon we stumble as at twilight, in
deserted places, like the dead.
11 All of us growl like bears, and moan sadly like
doves. We look for right-ruling, but there is none; for
deliverance, but it is far from us.
12 For our transgressions have increased before
You, and our sins witnessed against us. For our
transgressions are with us, and as for our
wickednesses, we know them:
13 transgressing, and being untrue to hWhY, and
turning away from our Elohim, speaking oppression
4

1102

YESHAYAHU

and apostasy, conceiving and pondering words of
falsehood from the heart.
14 And right-ruling is driven back, and righteousness
stands far off. For truth has fallen in the street, and
right is unable to enter.
15 And the truth is lacking, and whoever turns away
from evil makes himself a prey. And HWHY saw, and it
displeased Him that there was no right-ruling.
16 And He saw that there was no man, and was
astonished that there was no intercessor. So His own
arm saved for Him, and His righteousness upheld
him.
17 And He put on righteousness as a breastplate,
and a helmet of deliverance on His head. And He put
on garments of vengeance for clothing, and wrapped
Himself with ardour as a mantle.
18 According to their deeds, so He repays, wrath to
His adversaries, recompense to His enemies. He
repays recompense to the coastlands.
19 And they shall revere the Name of hWhY from the
west, and His esteem from the rising of the sun, when
He comes like a distressing stream which the Ruaḥ
of hWhY drives on.
20 “And the Redeemer shall come to Tsiyon, and to
those turning from transgression in Ya’aqoḇ,”
declares HWHY.
21 “As for Me, this is My Covenant with them,” said
hWhY: “My Ruaḥ that is upon you, and My Words that
I have put in your mouth, shall not be withdrawn from
your mouth, nor from the mouth of your descendants,
nor from the mouth of your descendants’
descendants,” said HWHY, “from this time and
forever.”

1103

ISAIAH

60 “Arise, shine, for your light has come! And the
esteem of HWHY has risen upon you.
2 “For look, darkness covers the earth, and
darkness clouds the peoples. But hWhY arises over
you, and His esteem is seen upon you.
3 “And the gentiles shall come to your light, and
sovereigns to the brightness of your rising.
4 “Lift up your eyes all around and see: all of them
have gathered, they have come to you; your sons
come from afar, and your daughters are supported on
the side.
5 “Then you shall see and be bright, and your heart
shall throb and swell, for the wealth of the sea is
turned to you, the riches of the gentiles come to you.
6 “A stream of camels cover your land, the
dromedaries of Miḏyan and Ĕphah; all those from
Sheḇa come, bearing gold and incense, and
proclaiming the praises of hWhY.
7 “All the flocks of Qĕḏar are gathered to you, the
rams of Neḇayoth serve you; they come up for
acceptance on My altar, and I embellish My esteemed
House.
8 “Who are these who fly like a cloud, and like doves
to their windows?
9 “Because the coastlands wait for Me, and the
ships of Tarshish first, to bring your sons from afar,
their silver and their gold with them, to the Name of
hWhY your Elohim, and to the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl,
because He has adorned you.
10 “And the sons of foreigners shall build your walls,
and their sovereigns serve you. For in My wrath I
have smitten you, but in My delight I shall have
compassion on you.
1104

YESHAYAHU

“And your gates shall be open continually, they are
not shut day or night, to bring to you the wealth of the
gentiles, and their sovereigns in procession.
12 “For the nation and the reign that do not serve you
shall perish, and those gentiles shall be utterly laid
waste.
13 “The esteem of Leḇanon shall come to you,
cypress, pine, and the box tree together, to embellish
the place of My Miqdash. And I shall make the place
of My feet esteemed.
14 “And the sons of those who afflicted you come
bowing to you, and all those who despised you shall
bow themselves at the soles of your feet. And they
shall call you: City of hWhY, Tsiyon of the Qadosh One
of Yisra’ĕl.
15 “Instead of you being forsaken and hated, so that
no one passes through you, I shall make you an
everlasting excellence, a joy of many generations.
16 “And you shall drink dry the milk of the gentiles,
and shall milk the breast of sovereigns. And you shall
know that I, hWhY, your Saviour and your Redeemer,
am the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.
17 “Instead of bronze I bring gold, and instead of iron
I bring silver, and bronze instead of wood, and iron
instead of stones. And I shall make your officers
peace, and your magistrates righteousness.
18 “Violence shall no longer be heard in your land,
neither wasting nor ruin within your borders. And you
shall call your walls Deliverance, and your gates
Praise.
19 “No longer is the sun your light by day, nor does
the moon give light to you for brightness, but hWhY
shall be to you an everlasting light, and your Elohim
your comeliness.
11

1105

ISAIAH

“No longer does your sun go down, nor your moon
withdraw itself, for hWhY shall be your everlasting
light, and the days of your mourning shall be ended.
21 “And your people, all of them righteous, shall
inherit the earth forever - a branch of My planting, a
work of My hands, to be adorned.
22 “The little shall become a thousand, and the small
one a strong nation. I, hWhY, shall hasten it in its
time.”
20

61 The Ruaḥ of the Aḏon HWHY is upon Me, because
HWHY has anointed Me to bring good news to the
meek. He has sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted,
to proclaim release to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to those who are bound,
2 to proclaim the acceptable year of hWhY, and the
day of vengeance of our Elohim, to comfort all who
mourn,
3 to appoint unto those who mourn in Tsiyon: to give
them embellishment for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. And they shall be called trees of
righteousness, a planting of hWhY, to be adorned.
4 And they shall rebuild the old ruins, raise up the
former wastes. And they shall restore the ruined
cities, the wastes of many generations.
5 And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks,
and the sons of the foreigner be your ploughmen and
your vinedressers.
6 But you shall be called, ‘Kohenim of hWhY,’
‘Servants of our Elohim’ shall be said of you. You
shall consume the strength of the gentiles, and boast
in their esteem.
7 Instead of your shame and reproach, they rejoice
a second time in their portion. Therefore they take
1106

YESHAYAHU

possession a second time in their land, everlasting joy
is theirs.
8 “For I, hWhY, love right-ruling; I hate robbery for
burnt offering. And I shall give their reward in truth,
and make an everlasting Covenant with them.
9 “And their seed shall be known among the
gentiles, and their offspring in the midst of the
peoples. All who see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the seed HWHY has baraḵ.”
10 I greatly rejoice in hWhY, my being exults in my
Elohim. For He has put garments of deliverance on
me, He has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself with
ornaments, and as a bride adorns herself with her
jewels.
11 For as the earth brings forth its bud, as the garden
causes the seed to shoot up, so the Aḏon hWhY
causes righteousness and praise to shoot up before
all the nations!

62 For Tsiyon’s sake I am not silent, and for
Yerushalayim’s sake I do not rest, until her
righteousness goes forth as brightness, and her
deliverance as a lamp that burns.
2 And the nations shall see your righteousness, and
all sovereigns your esteem. And you shall be called
by a new name, which the mouth of hWhY designates.
3 And you shall be a crown of comeliness in the
hand of hWhY, and a royal head-dress in the hand of
your Elohim.
4 No longer are you called “Forsaken,” and no
longer is your land called “Deserted.” But you shall be
called “I delight in her,” and your land “Married,” for
hWhY shall delight in you, and your land be married.
1107

ISAIAH

For as a young man marries a maiden, so shall
your sons marry you. And as the bridegroom rejoices
over the bride, so shall your Elohim rejoice over you.
6 I have put watchmen on your walls, O
Yerushalayim, all the day and all the night,
continually, who are not silent. You who remember
hWhY, give yourselves no rest,
7 and give Him no rest till He establishes and till He
makes Yerushalayim a praise in the earth.
8 HWHY has sworn by His right hand and by the arm
of His strength, “No more do I give your grain to be
food for your enemies, nor do sons of the foreigner
drink your new wine, for which you have laboured;
9 but those gathering it shall eat it, and halleluhWhY. And those collecting it shall drink it in My
qodesh courts.”
10 Pass through, pass through the gates! Prepare the
way for the people. Build up, build up the highway!
Remove the stones. Lift up a banner for the peoples!
11 See, hWhY has proclaimed to the end of the earth:
“Say to the daughter of Tsiyon, ‘See, your deliverance
has come; see, His reward is with Him, and His work
before Him.”
12 And they shall be called, “The Qodesh people, the
Redeemed of hWhY.” And you shall be called,
“Sought out, a City not forsaken.”
5

63 Who is this coming from Eḏom, with garments of
glowing colours from Botsrah, who is robed in
splendour, striding forward in the greatness of His
strength? “It is I who speak in righteousness, mighty to
save.”
2 Why is there red on Your raiment, and Your
garments like one who treads in the winepress?
1108

YESHAYAHU

“I have trodden the winepress alone, and from the
peoples no one was with Me. And I trod them down in
My displeasure, and I trampled them in My wrath.
Their blood is sprinkled upon My garments, and I
have defiled all My raiment.
4 “For a day of vengeance is in My heart, and the
year of My redeemed has come.
5 “And I looked, but there was none helping, and I
was astonished that there was none upholding. So
My own arm saved for Me, and My wrath upheld Me.
6 “And I trod down peoples in My displeasure, and
made them drunk in My wrath, and brought down their
strength to earth.”
7 Let me recount the kindnesses of hWhY and the
praises of hWhY, according to all that hWhY has done
for us, and the great goodness toward the house of
Yisra’ĕl, which He has done for them according to His
compassion, and according to His many kindnesses.
8 And He said, “They are My people, children who
do not act falsely.” And He became their Saviour.
9 In all their distress He was distressed, and the
Messenger of His Presence saved them. In His love
and in His compassion He redeemed them, and He
lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.
10 But they rebelled and grieved His Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh, so He turned against them as an enemy,
and He fought against them.
11 Then He remembered the days of old, Mosheh,
His people, “Where is He who brought them up out of
the sea with the shepherd of His flock? Where is He
who put His Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh within him,
12 who led them by the right hand of Mosheh, with
His comely arm, dividing the water before them to
make for Himself an everlasting Name,
3

1109

ISAIAH

who led them through the deep? Like a horse in
the wilderness they did not stumble.”
14 As a beast goes down into the valley, and the
Ruaḥ of hWhY causes him to rest, so You led Your
people, to make Yourself a comely Name.
15 Look down from the shamayim, and see from Your
qodesh and comely dwelling. Where are Your ardour
and Your might, the stirring of Your inward parts and
Your compassion toward me? Are they withheld?
16 For You are our Father, though Aḇraham does not
know us, and Yisra’ĕl does not recognise us. You, O
hWhY, are our Father, our Redeemer - Your Name is
from of old.
17 O HWHY, why do You make us stray from Your
ways, and harden our heart from Your reverence?
Turn back, for the sake of Your servants, the tribes of
Your inheritance.
18 For a little while Your qodesh people possessed it
- our adversaries have trodden down Your Miqdash.
19 We have become like those over whom You never
ruled - Your Name is not called on them!
13

64 Oh, that You would tear the shamayim open,
come down, that mountains shall shake before You 2 as when fire burns twigs, as fire makes water boil
- to make Your Name known to Your adversaries, so
that nations tremble before You.
3 When You did fearfully, which we did not expect,
You came down, mountains shook before You!
4 Since the beginning of the ages they have not
heard nor perceived by the ear, nor has the eye seen
any Elohim besides You, who acts for those who wait
for Him.
5 You shall meet him who rejoices and does
righteousness, who remembers You in Your ways.
1110

YESHAYAHU

See, You were wroth when we sinned in them a long
time. And should we be saved?
6 And all of us have become as one unclean, and all
our righteousnesses are as soiled rags. And all of us
fade like a leaf, and our wickednesses, like the wind,
have taken us away.
7 And there is no one who calls on Your Name, who
stirs himself up to take hold of You; for You have
hidden Your face from us, and have consumed us
because of our wickednesses.
8 And now, O hWhY, You are our Father. We are the
clay, and You our potter. And we are all the work of
Your Hand.
9 Do not be wroth, O hWhY, nor remember
wickedness forever. See, please look, all of us are
Your people!
10 Your qodesh cities have become a wilderness,
Tsiyon has become a wilderness, Yerushalayim a
waste.
11 Our qodesh and comely House, where our fathers
praised You, has been burned up with fire. And all
that we treasured has become a ruin.
12 In view of all this, would You restrain Yourself, O
HWHY? Would You keep silent and afflict us beyond
measure?

65 “I have let Myself be inquired of, not by those
who asked; I was found, not by those who sought Me.
I said, ‘Here I am, here I am,’ to a nation not calling
on My Name.
2 “I have held out My hands all day long to a
stubborn people, who walk in a way that is not good,
after their own thoughts;

1111

ISAIAH

the people who provoke Me continually to My face,
who slaughter in gardens, and burn incense on altars
of brick;
4 who sit among the graves, and spend the night in
secret places, who eat flesh of pigs, and the broth of
uncleanness is in their pots,
5 who say, ‘Keep to yourself, do not come near me,
for I am qodesh to you!’ These are smoke in My
nostrils, a fire that burns all day.
6 “See, it is written before Me: I am not silent, but
shall repay, and I shall repay into their bosom,
7 your wickednesses and the wickednesses of your
fathers together,” said hWhY, “who burned incense on
the mountains and reproached Me on the hills. And I
shall measure their former work into their bosom.”
8 Thus said hWhY, “As the new wine is found in the
cluster, and one shall say, ‘Do not destroy it, for there
is beraḵah in it,’ so I do for My servants’ sake, not to
destroy them all.
9 “And I shall bring forth a seed from Ya’aqoḇ, and
from Yahuḏah an heir of My mountains. And My
chosen ones shall inherit it, and My servants dwell
there.
10 “And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the
Valley of Aḵor a place for herds to lie down, for My
people who have sought Me.
11 “But you are those who forsake hWhY, who forget
My qodesh mountain, who prepare a table for Gaḏ,
and who fill a drink offering for Meni.
12 “And I shall allot you to the sword, and let you all
bow down to the slaughter, because I called and you
did not answer, I spoke and you did not hear, and you
did evil before My eyes and chose that in which I did
not delight.”
3

1112

YESHAYAHU

Therefore thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “See, My
servants eat, but you hunger; see, My servants drink,
but you thirst; see, My servants rejoice, but you are
put to shame;
14 see, My servants sing for joy of heart, but you cry
for sorrow of heart, and wail for breaking of spirit.
15 “And you shall leave your name as a curse to My
chosen, for the Aḏon hWhY shall put you to death, and
call His servants by another name,
16 so that he who baraḵ himself in the earth, baraḵ
himself in the Elohim of truth. And he who swears in
the earth swears by the Elohim of truth. Because the
former distresses shall be forgotten, and because
they shall be hidden from My eyes.
17 “For look, I am creating new shamayim and a new
earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come to heart.
18 “But be glad and rejoice forever in what I create;
for look, I create Yerushalayim a rejoicing, and her
people a joy.
19 “And I shall rejoice in Yerushalayim, and shall joy
in My people, and let the voice of weeping no more
be heard in her, nor the voice of crying.
20 “No more is an infant from there going to live but a
few days, nor an old man who does not complete his
days, for the youth dies one hundred years old, but
the sinner being one hundred years old shall be lightly
esteemed.
21 “And they shall build houses and inhabit them, and
plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
22 “They shall not build and another inhabit; they
shall not plant and another eat. For the days of My
people are going to be as the days of a tree, and My
chosen ones outlive the work of their hands.
13

1113

ISAIAH

“They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth
children for trouble. For they are the seed of the baruḵ
of hWhY, and their offspring with them.
24 “And it shall be that before they call, I answer. And
while they are still speaking, I hear.
25 “Wolf and lamb feed together, a lion eats straw as
an ox, and dust is the snake’s food. They shall do no
evil, nor destroy in all My qodesh mountain,” said
hWhY.
23

66 Thus said HWHY, “The shamayim are My throne,
and the earth is My footstool. Where is this house that
you build for Me? And where is this place of My rest?
2 “And all these My hand has made, and all these
that exist,” declares hWhY. “Yet to such a one I look:
on him who is poor and bruised of spirit, and who
trembles at My Word.
3 “Whoever slaughters the bull slays a man;
whoever slaughters the lamb breaks a dog’s neck;
whoever brings a grain offering - pig’s blood; whoever
burns incense baraḵ an idol. Indeed, they have
chosen their own ways, and their being delights in
their abominations.
4 “I shall also choose their punishments, and bring
their fears on them. Because I called, but no one
answered. I spoke and they did not hear, and they did
evil before My eyes, and chose what was displeasing
to Me.”
5 Hear the Word of HWHY, you who tremble at His
Word, “Your brothers who hate you, who cast you out
for My Name’s sake, said, ‘Let hWhY be esteemed, so
that we see your joy.’ But they are put to shame.”
6 “A roaring sound from the city, a voice from the
Hĕyḵal, the voice of hWhY, repaying His enemies!
1114

YESHAYAHU

“Before she laboured, she gave birth; before a
pain came to her, she was delivered of a male child.
8 “Who has heard the like of this? Who has seen the
like of these? Is a land brought forth in one day? Is a
nation born at once? For as soon as Tsiyon laboured,
she gave birth to her children.
9 “Shall I bring to birth, and not give delivery?” says
hWhY. “Shall I who give delivery restrain birth?” said
your Elohim.
10 “Rejoice with Yerushalayim, and be glad with her,
all you who love her; rejoice greatly with her, all you
who mourn for her;
11 so that you feed, and shall be satisfied with the
breast of her comforts, so that you drink deeply, and
shall delight yourselves in her overflowing esteem.”
12 For thus said hWhY, “See, I am extending peace
to her like a river, and the esteem of the gentiles like
a flowing stream. And you shall feed; you shall be
carried on the side, and be fondled on her knees.”
13 “As one whom his mother comforts, so I comfort
you. And in Yerushalayim you are comforted.”
14 “And you shall see, and your heart shall rejoice,
and your bones flourish as tender grass. And the
hand of hWhY shall be known to His servants, and His
displeasure to His enemies.
15 “For look, hWhY comes with fire and with His
chariots, like a whirlwind, to render His displeasure
with burning, and His rebuke with flames of fire.
16 “For by fire and by His sword hWhY shall judge all
flesh, and the slain of hWhY shall be many 17 those who qadosh themselves and cleanse
themselves at the gardens after ‘one’ in the midst,
eating flesh of pigs and the abomination and the
mouse, come to an end, altogether,” declares hWhY.
7

1115

ISAIAH

“And I, because of their works and their
imaginations, am coming to gather all nations and
tongues. And they shall come and see My esteem.
19 “And I shall appoint a sign among them, and shall
send some of those who escape to the nations Tarshish and Pul and Luḏ, who draw the bow, and
Tuḇal and Yawan, the coastlands far off who have not
heard My report nor seen My esteem. And they shall
declare My esteem among the gentiles.
20 “And they shall bring all your brothers as an
offering to hWhY out of all the gentiles, on horses and
in chariots and in litters, on mules and on camels, to
My qodesh mountain Yerushalayim,” declares hWhY,
“as the children of Yisra’ĕl bring an offering in a clean
vessel into the House of HWHY.
21 “And from them too I shall take for kohenim - for
Lĕwites,” declares hWhY.
22 “For as the new shamayim and the new earth that
I make stand before Me,” declares hWhY, “so your
seed and your name shall stand.
23 “And it shall be that from New Moon to New Moon,
and from Shabbath to Shabbath, all flesh shall come
to worship before Me,” declares HWHY.
24 “And they shall go forth and look upon the corpses
of the men who have transgressed against Me. For
their worm shall not die, and their fire not be
quenched. And they shall be repulsive to all flesh!”
18

1116

JEREMIAH

YIRMEYAHU
‫ ירמיהו‬WHYmRY

1 The words of Yirmeyahu the son of Ḥilqiyahu, of the
kohenim who were in Anathoth in the land of Binyamin,
2 to whom the word of hWhY came in the days of
Yoshiyahu son of Amon, sovereign of Yahuḏah, in the
thirteenth year of his reign.
3 And it came in the days of Yahoyaqim, son of
Yoshiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, until the end of the
eleventh year of Tsiḏqiyahu, son of Yoshiyahu,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, until the exile of Yerushalayim
in the fifth month.
4 Now the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
5 “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and
before you came out of the womb I qadosh you - I
appointed you a naḇi to nations.”
6 And I said, “Ah, Aḏonai hWhY! See, I do not know
how to speak, for I am a youth.”
7 And hWhY said to me, “Do not say, ‘I am a youth,’
but go to all to whom I send you, and speak whatever
I command you.
8 “Do not fear their faces, for I am with you to deliver
you,” declares HWHY.
9 Then HWHY put forth His hand and touched my
mouth, and hWhY said to me, “See, I have put My
words in your mouth.
10 “See, I have this day appointed you over the
nations and over the reigns, to root out and to pull
down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to
plant.”
11 And the word of hWhY came to me, saying, “What
do see, Yirmeyahu?” And I said, “I see a branch of an
almond tree.”
1117

YIRMEYAHU

And hWhY said to me, “You have seen well, for I
am watching over My word to do it.”
13 And the word of hWhY came to me a second time,
saying, “What do you see?” And I said, “I see a boiling
pot, and it is facing from the north.”
14 And hWhY said to me, “Out of the north evil is let
loose on all the inhabitants of the land.
15 “For look, I am calling all the clans of the reigns of
the north,” declares hWhY. “And they shall come and
each one put his throne at the entrance of the gates
of Yerushalayim, against all its walls all around, and
against all the cities of Yahuḏah.
16 “And I shall pronounce My judgments against
them concerning all their evil, because they have
forsaken Me, burned incense to other mighty ones,
and bowed themselves to the works of their own
hands.
17 “Now, gird up your loins and arise, and speak to
them all that I command you. Do not break down
before their faces, lest I break you before them.
18 “For look, I have made you this day a walled city
and an iron column, and bronze walls against all the
land, against the sovereigns of Yahuḏah, against her
heads, against her kohenim, and against the people
of the land.
19 “And they shall fight against you, but not prevail
against you. For I am with you,” declares hWhY, “to
deliver you.”
12

2 And the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
“Go, and you shall cry in the hearing of
Yerushalayim, saying, ‘Thus said hWhY, “I remember
you, the kindness of your youth, the love of your
bridehood, when you went after Me in the wilderness,
in a land that was not sown.

2

1118

JEREMIAH

“Yisra’ĕl was qodesh to hWhY, the first-fruits of His
increase. All who ate of it became guilty - evil came
upon them,” declares hWhY.’ ”
4 Hear the word of hWhY, O house of Ya’aqoḇ and
all the clans of the house of Yisra’ĕl.
5 Thus said hWhY, “What unrighteousness have
your fathers found in Me, that they have gone far from
Me, and went after worthlessness, became
worthless?
6 “And did not they say, ‘Where is hWhY, who
brought us up out of the land of Mitsrayim, who led us
through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and
pits, through a land of drought and the shadow of
death, a land that no one passed through and where
no one dwelt?’
7 “Then I brought you into a garden land, to eat its
fruit and its goodness. But when you entered, you
defiled My land and made My inheritance an
abomination.
8 “The kohenim did not say, ‘Where is hWhY?’ And
those who handle the Torah did not know Me, and the
shepherds transgressed against Me, and the neḇi’im
naḇu by Ba’al, and walked after no value.
9 “Therefore I still contend with you,” declares hWhY,
“and with your children’s children I contend.
10 “For, pass beyond the isles of Kittim and see, and
send to Qĕḏar and observe well, and see if there has
been any like this.
11 “Has a nation changed its mighty ones, which are
not mighty ones? But My people have changed My
esteem for that which does not profit.
12 “Be amazed, O shamayim, at this, and be
frightened, be utterly dried up,” declares hWhY.
13 “For My people have done two evils: they have
forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, to hew out
3

1119

YIRMEYAHU

for themselves cisterns, cracked cisterns, which do
not hold water.
14 “Is Yisra’ĕl a servant? Was he born in the house?
Why is he given to plunder?
15 “The young lions roared at him, they growled, and
made his land waste; his cities have been burned,
without inhabitant.
16 “Even the sons of Noph and of Taḥpanḥes have
shaven the crown of your head.
17 “Have you not done this to yourself, by forsaking
hWhY your Elohim when He led you in the way?
18 “And now why take the way to Mitsrayim, to drink
the waters of Shiḥor? Or why take the way to
Ashshur, to drink the waters of the River?
19 “Your own evil instructs you, and your backslidings
reprove you. Know therefore and see that it is evil and
bitter that you have forsaken hWhY your Elohim, and
that My reverence is not in you,” declares the Aḏon
hWhY of hosts.
20 “For of old you have broken your yoke and tore off
your bonds. And you said, ‘I am not serving!’ When
on every high hill and under every green tree you lay
down, a whore.
21 “Yet I had planted you a choice vine, all of it a true
seed. How then have you turned before Me into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine?
22 “Although you wash yourself with lye, and use
much soap, yet your wickedness is ingrained before
Me,” declares the Aḏon hWhY.
23 “How do you say, ‘I am not defiled, I have not gone
after the Ba’als’? See your way in the valley, know
what you have done: a swift dromedary breaking
loose in her ways,
24 a wild donkey used to the wilderness, sniffing the
wind in the desire of her being - in her time of mating,
1120

JEREMIAH

who turns her away? All those who seek her need not
weary themselves; in her month they find her.
25 “Keep your foot from being bare, and your throat
from thirst. But you said, ‘It is useless, because I love
strangers, and after them I go.’
26 “As the thief is ashamed when he is found out, so
is the house of Yisra’ĕl ashamed - they and their
sovereigns and their heads, and their kohenim and
their neḇi’im,
27 saying to a tree, ‘You are my father,’ and to a
stone, ‘You gave birth to me.’ For they have turned
their back to Me, and not their face. But in the time of
their calamity they say, ‘Arise and save us.’
28 “But where are your mighty ones that you have
made for yourselves? Let them arise if they save you
in the time of your calamity. Because your mighty
ones have become as many as your cities, O
Yahuḏah.
29 “Why do you complain to Me? You all have
transgressed against Me,” declares hWhY.
30 “In vain have I smitten your children - they
received no instruction. Your sword has devoured
your neḇi’im like a destroying lion.
31 “O generation, see the word of hWhY! Have I been
a wilderness to Yisra’ĕl, or a land of darkness? Why
do My people say, ‘We have broken loose; we come
to You no more’?
32 “Would a maiden forget her ornaments, or a bride
her headband? Yet My people have forgotten Me,
days without number.
33 “Why do you embellish your way to seek love?
Therefore you have even taught the evil women your
ways.
34 “Even on your skirts is found the blood of the lives
of the poor innocents. You did not find them breaking
in, but in spite of all these,
1121

YIRMEYAHU

you say, ‘Because I am innocent, certainly His
displeasure shall turn from me.’ See, I shall bring
judgment on you, because you say, ‘I have not
sinned.’
36 “Why do you go about so much to change your
way? Even of Mitsrayim you are to be ashamed, as
you were ashamed of Ashshur.
37 “Even from this one you shall go forth, with your
hands on your head. For hWhY has rejected those you
trust, and you shall not prosper by them,
35

3 saying, “If a man puts away his wife, and she goes
from him and becomes another man’s, does he return
to her again? Would not that land be made greatly
unclean? But you have committed whoring with many
lovers. And would you return to Me?” declares hWhY.
2 “Lift up your eyes to the bare heights and see:
where have you not lain with men? Beside the ways
you have sat for them like an Araḇian in the
wilderness. And you made the land unclean with your
whorings and your evil.
3 “Therefore the showers have been withheld, and
there has been no latter rain. You have had a whore’s
forehead, you refuse to be ashamed.
4 “Shall you not from now on cry to Me, ‘My father,
You are the guide of my youth?
5 ‘Does one bear a grudge forever? Does one keep
it to the end?’ See, you have spoken and done the
evils that you could.”
6 And hWhY said to me in the days of Yoshiyahu the
sovereign, “Have you seen what backsliding Yisra’ĕl
has done? She has gone up on every high mountain
and under every green tree, and there committed
whoring.
1122

JEREMIAH

“And after she had done all these, I said ‘Return to
Me.’ But she did not return. And her treacherous
sister Yahuḏah saw it.
8 “And I saw that for all the causes for which
backsliding Yisra’ĕl had committed adultery, I had put
her away and given her a certificate of divorce; yet
her treacherous sister Yahuḏah did not reverence,
but went and committed whoring too.
9 “And it came to be, through her frivolous whoring,
that she defiled the land and committed adultery with
stones and wood.
10 “And yet for all this her treacherous sister Yahuḏah
has not turned to Me with all her heart, but falsely,”
declares hWhY.
11 And hWhY said to me, “Backsliding Yisra’ĕl has
shown herself more righteous than treacherous
Yahuḏah.
12 “Go and proclaim these words toward the north,
and say, ‘Return, O backsliding Yisra’ĕl,’ declares
HWHY, ‘I shall not look on you in displeasure, for I am
kind,’ declares hWhY, ‘and I do not bear a grudge
forever.
13 ‘Only, acknowledge your wickedness, because
you have transgressed against hWhY your Elohim,
and have scattered your ways to strangers under
every green tree, and you have not obeyed My voice,’
declares hWhY.
14 “Return, O backsliding children,” declares hWhY,
“for I shall rule over you, and shall take you, one from
a city and two from a clan, and shall bring you to
Tsiyon.
15 “And I shall give you shepherds according to My
heart, and they shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding.
16 “And it shall be, when you have increased, and
shall bear fruit in the land in those days, declares
7

1123

YIRMEYAHU

hWhY, “that they no longer say, ‘The ark of the
Covenant of hWhY.’ Neither would it come to heart,
nor would they remember it, nor would they visit it, nor
would it be made again.
17 “At that time Yerushalayim shall be called the
throne of hWhY, and all the nations shall be gathered
to it, to the Name of hWhY, to Yerushalayim, and no
longer walk after the stubbornness of their evil heart.
18 “In those days the house of Yahuḏah shall go to
the house of Yisra’ĕl, and they shall come together
out of the land of the north to the land that I have given
as an inheritance to your fathers.
19 “But I said, ‘How would I put you among the
children and give you a pleasant land, a splendid
inheritance of the hosts of nations?’ ”And I said, ‘Call
Me, “My Father,” and do not turn away from Me.’
20 “But indeed as a wife betrays her husband, so
have you betrayed Me, O house of Yisra’ĕl,” declares
hWhY.
21 A voice was heard on the bare heights, weeping
supplications of the children of Yisra’ĕl, because they
have perverted their way, they have forgotten hWhY
their Elohim.
22 “Return, O backsliding children, I shall make your
backslidings cease.” “See, we have come to You, for
You are hWhY our Elohim.
23 “Truly, delusion comes from the high hills, the
noisy throng on the mountains. Truly, in hWhY our
Elohim is the deliverance of Yisra’ĕl.
24 “For shame has devoured the labour of our fathers
from our youth, their flocks and their herds, their sons
and their daughters.
25 “We shall lie down in our shame, while our
reproach covers us. For we have sinned against
hWhY our Elohim, we and our fathers, from our youth
1124

JEREMIAH

even to this day, and have not obeyed the voice of
hWhY our Elohim.”

4 “If you do return, O Yisra’ĕl,” declares hWhY, “return
to Me. And if you remove your abominations from My
presence, and cease straying,
2 and shall swear, ‘As hWhY lives,’ in truth, in rightruling, and in righteousness - then nations shall baraḵ
themselves in Him, and they shall boast in Him!”
3 For this is what hWhY said to the men of Yahuḏah
and Yerushalayim, “Break up your tillable ground, and
do not sow among thorns.
4 “Circumcise yourselves unto hWhY, and take away
the foreskins of your hearts, you men of Yahuḏah and
inhabitants of Yerushalayim, lest My wrath come forth
like fire and burn, with none to quench it, because of
the evil of your deeds.”
5 Declare in Yahuḏah and let it be heard in
Yerushalayim, and say, “Blow the ram’s horn in the
land. Cry aloud and say, ‘Gather yourselves, and let
us go into the walled city.’
6 “Lift up the banner toward Tsiyon. Be strong, do
not stand still! For I am bringing evil from the north,
and great destruction.”
7 “A lion has come up from his bush, and the
destroyer of nations is on his way. He has departed
from his place to make your land a ruin. Your cities
are laid waste, without inhabitant.
8 “For this, gird yourself with sackcloth, lament and
wail. For the burning displeasure of hWhY has not
turned back from us.
9 “And in that day it shall be,” declares hWhY, “that
the heart of the sovereign shall perish, and the heart
of the heads. And the kohenim shall be astonished,
and the neḇi’im wonder.”
1125

YIRMEYAHU

Then I said, “Ah, Aḏonai hWhY! Truly, You have
greatly deceived this people and Yerushalayim,
saying, ‘Peace is for you,’ whereas the sword reaches
to the heart.”
11 At that time it shall be said to this people and to
Yerushalayim, “A scorching wind of the bare heights
blows in the wilderness toward the daughter of My
people, not to fan or to cleanse.
12 “A wind too strong for this shall come for Me. Now
it is I who speak judgments against them.
13 “See, he comes up like clouds, and his chariots
like a whirlwind. His horses shall be swifter than
eagles. Woe to us, for we shall be ravaged!”
14 O Yerushalayim, wash your heart from evil, and be
saved. Till when would your wicked thoughts remain
within you?
15 For a voice is declaring from Dan, and is
proclaiming trouble from Mount Ephrayim:
16 “Announce to the nations, look, proclaim against
Yerushalayim, that besiegers are coming from a
distant land and raise their voice against the cities of
Yahuḏah.
17 “Like keepers of a field they are against her all
around, because she has rebelled against Me,”
declares hWhY.
18 “Your ways and your deeds have brought this
upon you. This is your evil, because it is bitter,
because it has reached into your heart.”
19 O my inward parts, my inward parts! I am in pain!
O the walls of my heart! My heart pounds in me, I am
not silent. For you have heard, O my being, the sound
of the ram’s horn, a shout of battle!
20 Destruction upon destruction is cried, for all the
land is ravaged. Suddenly my tents are ravaged - my
curtains in a moment.
10

1126

JEREMIAH

How long shall I see a banner, and hear the sound
of the ram’s horn?
22 “For My people are foolish, they have not known
Me. They are stupid children, and they have no
understanding. They are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge.”
23 I looked at the earth, and saw it was formless and
empty. And the shamayim, they had no light.
24 I looked at the mountains, and saw they shook,
and all the hills were swaying.
25 I looked, and saw there was no man, and all the
birds of the shamayim had fled.
26 I looked, and saw the garden land was a
wilderness, and all its cities were broken down at the
presence of hWhY, by His burning displeasure.
27 For thus said hWhY, “All the earth shall be a ruin,
but I shall not make a complete end.
28 “On account of this, let the earth mourn and the
shamayim above be dark, because I have spoken,
because I have purposed and shall not relent, nor do
I turn back from it.”
29 All the city is fleeing from the noise of the
horsemen and bow archers. They shall go into
bushes and climb up on the rocks. All the city is
forsaken, and no one is dwelling in it.
30 And when you are ravaged, what would you do?
Though you put on crimson, though you adorn
yourself with ornaments of gold, though you enlarge
your eyes with paint, you adorn yourself in vain. Your
lovers despise you, they seek your life.
31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in labour,
the distress as of her who brings forth her first child,
the voice of the daughter of Tsiyon! She bewails
herself, she spreads out her hands, saying, “Woe to
me, for my being faints because of murderers!”
21

1127

YIRMEYAHU

5 “Diligently search the streets of Yerushalayim, and
please look, and know and seek in her open places if
you find a man, if there is anyone doing Right-Ruling,
seeking the truth, then I shall pardon her.
2 “Even when they say, ‘As hWhY lives,’ they swear
falsely, for certain.”
3 O hWhY, are Your eyes, not on truth? You have
smitten them, but they have not grieved. You have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive
instruction. They made their faces harder than rock,
they refused to turn back.
4 Then I said, “These are only the poor. They have
been foolish, for they have not known the Way of
hWhY, the Right-Ruling of their Elohim.
5 “Let me go to the great men and speak to them,
for they have known the Way of hWhY, the RightRuling of their Elohim.” But these have altogether
broken the yoke and torn off the bonds.
6 Therefore a lion from the forest shall smite them,
a wolf of the deserts ravage them. A leopard is
watching over their cities, whoever comes out of them
is torn in pieces. For their transgressions have been
many, their backslidings have been numerous.
7 “Why should I pardon you for this? Your children
have forsaken Me and sworn by those that are not
mighty ones. When I had filled them up, they then
committed adultery and they thronged to the house of
a whore.
8 “They were like well-fed horses, each one neighed
after his neighbour’s wife.
9 “Would I not punish them for this?” declares hWhY.
“And would I not revenge Myself on such a nation as
this?
1128

JEREMIAH

“Go up on her walls and destroy, but do not make
a complete end. Take away her branches, for they do
not belong to hWhY.
11 “For the house of Yisra’ĕl and the house of
Yahuḏah have utterly betrayed Me,” declares hWhY.
12 They have been untrue to hWhY and said, “It is not
He. No evil comes upon us, nor do we see sword or
scarcity of food.”
13 And the neḇi’im have become wind, and the Word
is not in them. Thus shall be done to them:
14 Therefore thus said hWhY Elohim of hosts,
“Because you speak this word, see, I am making My
words in your mouth fire, and this people wood, and
it shall devour them.
15 “See, I am bringing a nation against you from afar,
O house of Yisra’ĕl,” declares hWhY. “It is an enduring
nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose
language you do not know, nor do you understand
what they say.
16 “Their quiver is like an open tomb, all of them are
mighty men.
17 “And they shall eat up your harvest and your
bread, which your sons and daughters should eat.
They shall eat up your flocks and your herds, they
shall eat up your vines and your fig trees. With the
sword they shall demolish your walled cities, in which
you are trusting.
18 “But even in those days,” declares hWhY, “I shall
not make a complete end of you.
19 “And it shall be, when they say, ‘Why does hWhY
our Elohim do all this to us?’ then you shall answer
them, ‘As you have forsaken Me and served foreign
mighty ones in your land, so you shall serve
foreigners in a land that is not yours.’
20 “Declare this in the house of Ya’aqoḇ and proclaim
it in Yahuḏah, saying,
10

1129

YIRMEYAHU

‘Hear this now, O foolish people without heart, who
have eyes and see not, and who have ears and hear
not:
22 ‘Do you not revere Me?’ declares hWhY. ‘Do you
not tremble at My presence, who have placed the
sand as the boundary of the sea, by an everlasting
law, and it does not pass over it? Though its waves
toss to and fro, they are not able; though they roar,
they do not pass over it.
23 ‘But this people has a backsliding and rebellious
heart, they have turned aside and gone away.
24 ‘And they do not say in their heart, “Let us now
revere hWhY our Elohim, who gives rain, both the
former and the latter, in its season. He guards for us
the Law: the Shaḇuoth of harvest.”
25 ‘Your wickednesses have turned these away, and
your sins have kept the good from you.
26 ‘For among My people are found wicked men who
lie in wait as one who lays snares. They have laid up
a trap, they catch men.
27 ‘As a cage is filled with birds, so their houses are
filled with deceit. Therefore they have become great
and grown rich.
28 ‘They have become fat, they are sleek. They also
overlook the deeds of the wicked. They did not rightly
rule the cause of the fatherless, so that they prosper.
And the right of the needy they did not rightly rule.
29 ‘Would I not punish them for this?’ declares hWhY.
‘Would I not revenge Myself on such a nation as this?’
30 “An astounding and horrible matter has come to
be in the land:
31 The neḇi’im have naḇu falsely, and the kohenim
rule by their own hand, and My people have loved it
so. And what are you going to do at the end of it?
21

1130

JEREMIAH

6 “O children of Binyamin, gather yourselves to flee
out of the midst of Yerushalayim! Blow the ram’s horn
in Teqowa, and put up a signal-fire in Bĕyth
ha’Kkerem, for evil has been seen from the north, and
great destruction.
2 “I shall cut off the lovely and delicate one, the
daughter of Tsiyon.
3 “The shepherds with their flocks shall come to her,
they shall pitch their tents against her all around. They
shall pasture, each one in his own place.”
4 “Declare battle against her. Arise, and let us go up
at noon. Woe to us, for the day goes away, for the
shadows of the evening are lengthening.
5 “Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy
her palaces.”
6 For thus said hWhY of hosts, “Cut down her trees,
and cast up a siege mound against Yerushalayim.
She is the city to be punished, in whose midst there
is only oppression.
7 “As a well flows with water, so she flows with her
evil. Violence and destruction are heard in her. Before
Me continually are suffering and smiting.
8 “Be instructed, O Yerushalayim, lest My being be
torn from you, lest I make you a waste, a land not
inhabited.”
9 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “Let them thoroughly
glean as a vine the remnant of Yisra’ĕl; pass your
hand again over the branches like a grape-gatherer.”
10 To whom shall I speak and give warning, so that
they hear? See, their ear is uncircumcised, and they
are unable to listen. See, the word of hWhY is a
reproach to them, they do not delight in it.
11 Therefore I am filled with the wrath of hWhY. I have
become weary of containing it. “Pour it out on the
children outside, and on the company of young men
1131

YIRMEYAHU

together, for even husband and wife shall be taken,
the aged and the very old.
12 “And their houses shall be turned over to others,
fields and wives together. For I shall stretch out My
hand against the inhabitants of the land,” declares
hWhY.
13 “For from the least of them even to the greatest of
them, they are all greedy for gain. And from the naḇi
even to the kohĕn, all act falsely.
14 “And they heal the breach of My people slightly,
saying, ‘Peace, peace,’ when there is no peace.
15 “Were they ashamed when they had done
abomination? No! They were not at all ashamed, nor
did they know how to blush. Therefore they shall fall
among those who fall. They shall stumble at the time
I visit them,” said hWhY.
16 Thus said hWhY, “Stand in the ways and see, and
ask for the old paths, where the good way is, and walk
in it; and find rest for yourselves. But they said, ‘We
do not walk.’
17 “And I raised up watchmen over you, ‘Listen to the
sound of the ram’s horn!’ But they said, ‘We do not
listen.’
18 “Therefore hear, you nations, and know, O
congregation, what is upon them!
19 “Hear, O earth! See, I am bringing evil upon this
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they
have not listened to My Words, nor My Torah - and
they rejected it.
20 “What need have I of frankincense from Sheḇa,
and sweet cane from a distant land? Your burnt
offerings are not acceptable, and your slaughterings
have not been sweet to Me.”
21 Therefore thus said hWhY, “See, I am laying
stumbling-blocks before this people. And the fathers
1132

JEREMIAH

and the sons together shall stumble on them, the
neighbour and his friend shall perish.”
22 Thus said hWhY, “See, a people shall come from
the land of the north, and a great nation is stirred up
from the farthest parts of the earth,
23 they seize bow and spear, they are cruel and have
no compassion, their voice roars like the sea. And
they ride on horses, put in array as a man for battle
against you, O daughter of Tsiyon.”
24 We have heard the report of it, our hands grow
weak. Distress has taken hold of us, pain as of a
woman in labour.
25 Do not go out into the field, nor walk by the way.
Because of the sword of the enemy, fear is on every
side.
26 O daughter of my people, gird on sackcloth, and
roll about in ashes! Make mourning as for an only son,
most bitter lamentation because suddenly the
ravager shall come upon us.
27 “I have made you a trier and a stronghold among
My people, so that you know, and shall try their way.
28 “All of them are rebels of rebels, walking as
slanderers. They are bronze and iron, all of them are
corrupters.
29 “The bellows have burned, the lead has been
consumed by fire. The refiner has refined in vain, for
those who are evil have not been separated.
30 “They shall call them rejected silver, because
hWhY has rejected them.”

7 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from hWhY,
saying,
2 “Stand in the gate of the House of hWhY, and you
shall proclaim there this word, and shall say, ‘Hear the
word of hWhY, all you of Yahuḏah who enter in at
these gates to bow before hWhY!’ ”‘
1133

YIRMEYAHU

Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“Make your ways and your deeds good, then I let you
dwell in this place.
4 “Do not trust in these false words, saying, ‘This is
the Hĕyḵal of hWhY, the Hĕyḵal of hWhY, the Hĕyḵal
of hWhY!’
5 “For if you truly make your ways and your deeds
good, if you truly do right-ruling between a man and
his neighbour,
6 if you do not oppress the stranger, the fatherless,
and the widow, and do not shed innocent blood in this
place, or walk after other mighty ones to your own
evil,
7 then I shall let you dwell in this place, in the land
that I gave to your fathers forever and ever.
8 “See, you are trusting in false words, which do not
profit 9 stealing, murdering, and committing adultery, and
swearing falsely, and burning incense to Ba’al, and
walking after other mighty ones you have not known.
10 “And you came and stood before Me in this house
which is called by My Name, and said, ‘We have been
delivered’ - in order to do all these abominations!
11 “Has this house, which is called by My Name,
become a den of robbers in your eyes? Look, I, even
I Myself have seen it,” declares hWhY.
12 “But go now to My place at Shiloh, where I put My
Name at the first, and see what I did to it because of
the evil of My people Yisra’ĕl.
13 “And now, because you have done all these
works,” declares hWhY, “and I spoke to you, rising up
early and speaking, but you did not hear, and I called
you, but you did not answer,
3

1134

JEREMIAH

“I shall also do to this house, which is called by My
Name, in which you trust, and to this place which I
gave to you and your fathers, as I did to Shiloh.
15 “And I shall cast you out of My presence, as I have
cast out all your brothers, all the seed of Ephrayim.
16 “And you, do not pray for this people, nor lift up a
cry or prayer for them, nor make intercession to Me,
for I do not hear you.
17 “Do you not see what they are doing in the cities
of Yahuḏah and in the streets of Yerushalayim?
18 “The children are gathering wood, the fathers are
lighting the fire, and the women are kneading their
dough, to make cakes for the sovereigness of the
heavens, and to pour out drink offerings to other
mighty ones, to provoke Me.
19 “Is it Me they are provoking?” declares hWhY. “Is it
not themselves - unto the shame of their own faces?”
20 Therefore, thus said the Aḏon hWhY, “See, My
displeasure and My wrath is poured out on this place,
on man and on beast, and on the trees of the field and
on the fruit of the ground. And it shall burn and not be
quenched.”
21 Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“Add your burnt offerings to your slaughterings and
eat meat.
22 “For I did not speak to your fathers, or command
them in the day that I brought them out of the land of
Mitsrayim, about matters of burnt offerings or
slaughterings.
23 “But this Word I commanded them, saying, ‘Obey
My voice, and I shall be your Elohim, and you be My
people. And walk in all the Ways that I have
commanded you, so that it be well with you.’
24 “But they did not obey or incline their ear, but
walked in the counsels, in the stubbornness of their
evil heart, and went backward and not forward.
14

1135

YIRMEYAHU

“From the day that your fathers came out of the
land of Mitsrayim until this day, I have even sent to
you all My servants the neḇi’im, daily rising up early
and sending them.
26 “But they did not obey Me or incline their ear, but
stiffened their neck. They did evil, more than their
fathers.
27 “And you shall speak all these words to them,
though they do not listen to you. And you shall also
call to them, though they do not answer you.
28 “But you shall say to them, ‘This is a nation that
did not obey the voice of hWhY their Elohim, nor did
they accept instruction. Truth has perished and has
been cut off from their mouth.
29 ‘Cut off your hair and throw it away, and take up a
lamentation on the bare heights, for hWhY has
rejected and forsaken the generation of His wrath.’
30 “For the children of Yahuḏah have done what is
evil in My eyes,” declares hWhY. “They have put their
abominations in the House which is called by My
Name, to defile it.
31 “And they have built the high places of Topheth,
which is in the Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, to burn their
sons and their daughters in the fire, which I did not
command, nor did it come into My heart.
32 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “when it shall no longer be called Topheth, or
the Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter,
for they shall bury in Topheth until no room is left.
33 “And the corpses of this people shall be food for
the birds of the shamayim and for the beasts of the
earth, with none to frighten them away.
34 “And in the cities of Yahuḏah and in the streets of
Yerushalayim I shall make to cease the voice of
rejoicing and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
25

1136

JEREMIAH

bridegroom and the voice of the bride. For the land
shall become a waste!

8 “At that time,” declares hWhY, “they shall bring the
bones of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah, and the bones of
its heads, and the bones of the kohenim, and the
bones of the neḇi’im, and the bones of the inhabitants
of Yerushalayim, out of their graves,
2 and shall spread them before the sun and the
moon and all the host of the heavens, which they
have loved and which they have served and after
which they have walked, which they have sought, and
to which they have bowed themselves. They shall not
be gathered nor buried, they shall be for dung on the
face of the earth.
3 “And death shall be preferred to life by all the rest
of those who remain of this evil people, who remain
in all the places where I have driven them,” declares
hWhY of hosts.
4 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY,
“Would they fall, and not rise? Does one turn away
and not return?
5 “Why then has this people, Yerushalayim, turned
away in a continual backsliding? They seize upon
deceit, they refuse to turn back.
6 “I have listened and heard - they do not speak
right. No man has repented of his evil, saying, ‘What
have I done?’ They all turned to their own course, like
a horse rushing into battle.
7 “Even a stork in the shamayim knows her
appointed times. And a turtledove, and a swallow,
and a thrush guard the time of their coming. But My
people do not know the Right-Ruling of hWhY.
8 “How do you say, ‘We are wise, and the Torah of
hWhY is with us’? But look, the false pen of the scribe
has worked falsehood.
1137

YIRMEYAHU

“The wise shall be put to shame, they shall be
broken down and caught. See, they have rejected the
Word of hWhY, so what wisdom do they have?
10 “Therefore I give their wives to others, and their
fields to possessing ones. For from the least even to
the greatest, they are all greedy for gain. From the
naḇi to the kohĕn, all act falsely.
11 “And they heal the breach of the daughter of My
people slightly, saying, ‘Peace, peace!’ when there is
no peace.
12 “Were they ashamed when they had done
abomination? No! They were not at all ashamed, nor
did they know how to blush. So they shall fall among
those who fall. They shall stumble in the time of their
visitation,” said hWhY.
13 “I shall snatch them away,” declares hWhY. “There
are no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and
the leaf has faded. And what I gave them shall pass
away from them.” ’ ”
14 Why are we sitting still? Gather yourselves, and let
us go into the walled cities, and let us be silent there.
For hWhY our Elohim has let us perish and given us
poisoned water to drink, because we have sinned
against hWhY.
15 We looked for peace, but there was no good; for a
time of healing, but see - fear!
16 The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan. All
the land shook at the sound of the neighing of his
strong ones. They came and devoured the land and
all that fills it, the city and those who dwell in it.
17 “For look, I am sending among you serpents,
adders, which have no enchanter, and they shall bite
you,” declares hWhY.
18 When in grief I would seek comfort; my heart is
sick within me.
9

1138

JEREMIAH

Observe! The voice, the cry of the daughter of my
people from a distant land, “Is hWhY not in Tsiyon? Is
her Sovereign not in her?” “Why have they provoked
Me with their carved images, and with foreign
worthlessnesses?”
20 “The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we
have not been saved!”
21 For the breach of the daughter of my people I have
been broken. I have grown sad; astonishment has
seized me.
22 Is there no balm in Gil’aḏ, is there no healer there?
Why has the healing of the daughter of my people not
come?
19

9 Oh, that my head were waters, and my eyes a
fountain of tears, and I would weep day and night for
the slain of the daughter of my people!
2 Oh, that I had in the wilderness lodging place for
wayfaring men, and I would leave my people, and go
from them! For they are all adulterers, an assembly of
treacherous men.
3 “And they bend their tongue like a bow.
Falsehood, and not truth, prevails on the earth. For
they proceed from evil to evil, and they have not
known Me,” declares hWhY.
4 “Let everyone beware of his neighbour and not
trust any brother. For every brother catches by the
heel, and every neighbour walks with slanderers.
5 “And everyone deceives his neighbour, and no
one speaks the truth. They have taught their tongue
to speak falsehood, and have wearied themselves to
do wickedly.
6 “You live in the midst of deceit; through deceit they
have refused to know Me,” declares hWhY.

1139

YIRMEYAHU

Therefore thus said hWhY of hosts, “See, I shall
refine them, and shall try them, for what shall I do
because of the daughter of My people?
8 “Their tongue is a slaying arrow. It speaks deceit speaks peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth,
but in his heart he makes his ambush.
9 “Would I not punish them for this?” declares hWhY.
“Would I not revenge Myself on such a nation as
this?”
10 “I shall take up a weeping and wailing for the
mountains, and for the pastures of the wilderness a
lamentation, because they have been burned up,
without any passing over, nor has the voice of cattle
been heard. Both the birds of the shamayim and the
beasts have fled, they have gone.
11 “And I shall make Yerushalayim a heap of ruins, a
habitation for jackals; and the cities of Yahuḏah I shall
make a waste, without an inhabitant.”
12 Who is the wise man, that he understands this?
And to whom has the mouth of hWhY spoken, that he
declares it? Why has the land perished, has it been
burned up like a wilderness, with none passing
through?
13 And hWhY says, “Because they have forsaken My
Torah which I put before them, and have not obeyed
My voice, nor walked according to it,
14 but
they have walked according to the
stubbornness of their own heart and after the Ba’als,
which their fathers had taught them.”
15 Therefore thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am making this people eat
wormwood, and I shall make them drink poisoned
water.
16 “And I shall scatter them among the gentiles,
whom neither they nor their fathers have known. And
7

1140

JEREMIAH

I shall send a sword after them until I have consumed
them.”
17 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “Discern! And call for the
mourning women, that they come. And send for the
wise women, that they come.
18 “And let them hasten and take up a wailing for us,
and let our eyes run with tears and our eyelids gush
with water.
19 “For a voice of wailing is heard from Tsiyon, ‘How
we are ravaged! We are greatly ashamed, because
we have forsaken the land, because we have been
thrown out of our dwellings.’ ”
20 But hear the word of hWhY, O women, and let your
ear receive the word of His mouth. And teach your
daughters wailing, and each one her neighbour a
lamentation.
21 For death has come through our windows, has
entered our palaces, cutting off the children from the
streets, and the young men from the squares.
22 Speak, “Thus declares hWhY, ‘The corpses of men
shall fall as dung on the face of the field, like cuttings
after the reaper, with none to gather them.’ ”
23 Thus said hWhY, “Let not the wise boast in his
wisdom, let not the mighty boast in his might, nor let
the rich boast in his riches,
24 but let him who boasts boast of this, that he
understands and knows Me, that I am hWhY, doing
kindness, right-ruling, and righteousness in the earth.
For in these I delight,” declares hWhY.
25 “See, the days are coming,” declares hWhY, “when
I shall punish all circumcised with the uncircumcised
26 “Mitsrayim, and Yahuḏah, and Eḏom, and the
children of Ammon, and Mo’aḇ, and all those trimmed
on the edges, who dwell in the wilderness. For all the
1141

YIRMEYAHU

gentiles are uncircumcised, and all the house of
Yisra’ĕl are uncircumcised in heart!”

10 Hear the word which HWHY speaks to you, O
house of Yisra’ĕl.
2 Thus said hWhY, “Do not learn the way of the
gentiles, and do not be frightened by the signs of the
shamayim, for the gentiles are frightened by them.
3 “For the prescribed customs of these peoples are
worthless, for one cuts a tree from the forest, work for
the hands of a craftsman with a cutting tool.
4 “They adorn it with silver and gold, they fasten it
with nails and hammers so that it does not topple.
5 “They are like a rounded post, and they do not
speak. They have to be carried, because they do not
walk. Do not be afraid of them, for they do no evil, nor
is it in them to do any good.”
6 There is none like You, O hWhY. You are great,
and great is Your Name in might.
7 Who would not revere You, O Sovereign of the
nations? For this is Your due, for among all the wise
men of the nations, and in all their reigns, there is
none like You.
8 They are both brutish and foolish, an instruction of
worthlessness is the tree.
9 Silver is beaten into plates; it is brought from
Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the
craftsman and of the hands of the smith; draped in
blue and purple; all of them are the work of skilled
ones.
10 But hWhY is truly Elohim. He is the living Elohim
and the everlasting Sovereign. At His wrath the earth
shakes, and nations are unable to stand His
displeasure.
1142

JEREMIAH

Say to them this, “The elah that did not make the
shamayim and the earth shall perish from the earth
and from under these shamayim.”
12 He has made the earth by His power, He has
established the world by His wisdom, and has
stretched out the shamayim by His understanding.
13 When He makes His voice heard, there is a
roaring of waters in the shamayim. And He makes
vapours rise from the ends of the earth. The lightnings
for rain He has made, and brings wind from His
treasuries.
14 Everyone is brutish in knowledge; every smith is
put to shame by his idol. For his moulded image is
falsehood, and there is no spirit in them.
15 They are worthless, a work of mockery. In the time
of their punishment they perish.
16 The Portion of Ya’aqoḇ is not like these, for He is
the Maker of all, and Yisra’ĕl is the tribe of His
inheritance - hWhY of hosts is His Name.
17 Gather up your bundle from the ground, you who
live under siege!
18 For thus said hWhY, “See, at this time I am hurling
out the inhabitants of the land, and shall distress
them, so that they feel it.”
19 Woe to me for my breaking! My wound is grievous,
but I say, “This is my sickness, and I bear it.
20 “My tent has been ravaged, and all my cords have
been broken. My children have gone from me, and
they are no more. There is no one to pitch my tent any
more, or to put up my curtains.
21 For the shepherds have become brutish, and they
have not sought hWhY. Therefore they did not
understand, and all their flock scattered.”
22 See, it has come, the voice of a report, and a great
shaking out of the land of the north, to make the cities
of Yahuḏah a waste, a habitation of jackals.
11

1143

YIRMEYAHU

O HWHY, I know the way of man is not in himself, it
is not for man who walks to direct his own steps.
24 O HWHY, chastise me, but with right-ruling - not in
Your displeasure, lest You bring me to naught.
25 Pour out Your wrath on the gentiles who do not
know You, and on the tribes who do not call on Your
Name. For they have eaten up Ya’aqoḇ, devoured
him and consumed him, and laid waste his home.
23

11 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from hWhY,
saying,
2 “Hear the words of this Covenant, and speak to
the men of Yahuḏah and to the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim.
3 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “Cursed is the man who does not
obey the words of this Covenant,
4 which I commanded your fathers in the day when
I brought them out of the land of Mitsrayim, from the
iron furnace, saying, ‘Obey My voice, and you shall
do according to all that I command you, and you shall
be My people, and I be your Elohim,’
5 in order to establish the oath which I have sworn
to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk
and honey, as it is this day.” ’ ” And I answered and
said, “Amĕn, hWhY.”
6 And hWhY said to me, “Proclaim all these words in
the cities of Yahuḏah and in the streets of
Yerushalayim, saying, ‘Hear the words of this
Covenant and do them.
7 ‘For I earnestly warned your fathers in the day that
I brought them up out of the land of Mitsrayim, until
this day, rising early and warning, saying, “Obey My
voice.”
1144

JEREMIAH

‘But they did not obey or incline their ear, but
everyone walked in the stubbornness of his evil heart.
So I brought on them all the words of this Covenant,
which I commanded them to do, and they did not do.’
”
9 And hWhY said to me, “There is a conspiracy
among the men of Yahuḏah and among the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim.
10 “They have turned back to the wickednesses of
their forefathers who refused to hear My Words, and
they have gone after other mighty ones to serve them.
The house of Yisra’ĕl and the house of Yahuḏah have
broken My Covenant I made with their fathers.”
11 Therefore thus said hWhY, “See, I am bringing evil
on them which they are unable to escape. Then they
shall cry out to Me, but I shall not listen to them.
12 “And the cities of Yahuḏah and the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim shall go and cry out to the mighty ones
to whom they burn incense, but they shall bring no
deliverance to them at all in the time of their evil.
13 “For your mighty ones have become as many as
your cities, O Yahuḏah. And you have put up as many
altars to shame as there are streets in Yerushalayim
- altars to burn incense to Ba’al.
14 “And you, do not pray for this people, or lift up a
cry or prayer for them, for I do not hear them in the
time that they cry out to Me because of their evil.
15 “Why should My beloved be in My house - she has
done wickedness with many. And does the qodesh
flesh remove your evil from you? Then you rejoice?
16 “hWhY has named you, ‘Green Olive Tree, Lovely,
of Pleasant Fruit.’ With the noise of a great sound He
has lit it on fire, and its branches shall be broken.
17 “And hWhY of hosts, who planted you, has spoken
evil against you for the evil of the house of Yisra’ĕl
and of the house of Yahuḏah, which they have done
8

1145

YIRMEYAHU

against themselves to provoke Me, by burning
incense to Ba’al.”
18 And hWhY made it known to me, and I know it.
Then You showed me their deeds.
19 But I was like a gentle lamb brought to the
slaughter. And I did not know that they had plotted
against me, saying, “Let us destroy the tree with its
fruit, and let us cut him off from the land of the living,
and let his name be remembered no more.”
20 But, O hWhY of hosts, who judges righteously, who
tries kidneys and heart, let me see Your vengeance
upon them, for unto You I have revealed my cause.
21 “Therefore thus said hWhY concerning the men of
Anathoth who are seeking your life, saying, ‘Do not
naḇa in the Name of hWhY, lest you die by our hand’
22 therefore thus said hWhY of hosts, ‘See, I am
punishing them, the young men shall die by the
sword, their sons and their daughters shall die by
scarcity of food.
23 ‘And there shall be no remnant of them, for I bring
evil on the men of Anathoth - the year of their
punishment.’ ”

12 Righteous are You, O hWhY, when I plead with
You. Indeed, let me speak with You about right-rulings.
Why has the way of the wicked prospered? All the
workers of treachery are at ease?
2 You have planted them and they have taken root,
they grow and they bear fruit. You are near in their
mouth but far from their kidneys.
3 But You have known me, O hWhY. You see me,
and You have tried my heart toward You. Draw them
away like sheep for slaughter, and qadosh them for
the day of slaughter.
1146

JEREMIAH

How long shall the land mourn, and the plants of
every field wither? The beasts and birds are
consumed, for the evil of those who dwell there,
because they said, “He does not see our latter
ending.”
5 “If you have run with the footmen, and they have
wearied you, then how do you contend with horses?
And if in the land of peace, you feel safe, then how do
you manage in the pride of the Yardĕn?
6 “For even your brothers, the house of your father,
even they have betrayed you, even they have cried
aloud after you. Do not believe them, even though
they speak smooth words to you.
7 “I have forsaken My house, I have left My
inheritance, I have given the beloved of My being into
the hand of her enemies.
8 “My inheritance has become to Me like a lion in the
forest. It cries out against Me, therefore I have hated
it.
9 “My inheritance is to Me like a speckled bird of
prey, the birds of prey all around are against her. Go,
gather all the beasts of the field, bring them to devour!
10 “Many shepherds have destroyed My vineyard,
they have trodden My portion under foot, they have
made My pleasant portion become a deserted
wilderness.
11 “They have laid it waste - a waste, it mourns to Me.
All the land is laid waste, because no one takes it to
heart.
12 “The ravagers have come on all the bare heights
in the wilderness, for the sword of hWhY is devouring
from one end of the land to the other end of the land.
There is no peace to any flesh.
13 “They have sown wheat but reaped thorns, they
have exhausted themselves - they do not profit. And
4

1147

YIRMEYAHU

they shall be ashamed of your harvest because of the
burning displeasure of hWhY.”
14 Thus said hWhY, “As for all My evil neighbours who
touch the inheritance which I have caused My people
Yisra’ĕl to inherit; see, I am plucking them out of their
land, and I shall pluck out the house of Yahuḏah from
their midst.
15 “And it shall be, after My plucking them out, I shall
return, and have compassion on them and bring them
back, everyone to his inheritance and everyone to his
land.
16 “And it shall be, if they learn well the Ways of My
people, to swear by My Name, ‘As hWhY lives,’ as
they taught My people to swear by Ba’al, then they
shall be established in the midst of My people.
17 “But if they do not obey, I shall pluck up, pluck up
and destroy that nation,” declares HWHY.

13 Thus hWhY said to me, “Go and get yourself a
linen girdle, and put it on your loins, but do not put it in
water.”
2 So I bought a girdle according to the word of hWhY,
and put it on my loins.
3
And the word of hWhY came to me the second
time, saying,
4 “Take the girdle that you have bought, which is on
your loins, and arise, go to Perath, and hide it there in
a hole in the rock.”
5 And I went and hid it by Perath, as hWhY
commanded me.
6 And it came to be after many days that hWhY said
to me, “Arise, go to Perath, and take from there the
girdle which I commanded you to hide there.”

1148

JEREMIAH

So I went to Perath and dug, and I took the girdle
from the place where I had hidden it. And there was
the girdle, ruined. It was completely useless.
8 And the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
9 “Thus said hWhY, ‘Thus I ruin the pride of Yahuḏah
and the great pride of Yerushalayim.
10 ‘This evil people, who refuse to hear My Words,
who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and walk
after other mighty ones to serve them and to bow
themselves to them, is like this girdle which is
completely useless.
11 ‘For as the girdle clings to the loins of a man, so I
have caused all the house of Yisra’ĕl and all the
house of Yahuḏah to cling to Me,’ declares hWhY, ‘to
become Mine - for a people, and for a name, and for
a praise, and for an adorning. But they did not listen.’
12 “And you shall speak to them this word, ‘Thus said
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “Every pitcher is to be filled
with wine.” ’ And when they say to you, ‘Do we not
know that every pitcher should be filled with wine?’
13 “Then say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY, “See, I am
filling all the inhabitants of this land, and the
sovereigns who sit on the throne of Dawiḏ, and the
kohenim, and the neḇi’im, and all the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim with drunkenness!
14 “And I shall dash them one against another, both
the fathers and the sons together,” declares hWhY. “I
do not spare nor pardon nor have compassion, that I
should not destroy them.” ’ ”
15 Listen and give ear, do not be proud, for hWhY has
spoken.
16 Give esteem to hWhY your Elohim before He
brings darkness, and before your feet stumble on the
dark mountains, and while you are looking for light,
He turns it into the shadow of death, makes it dense
darkness.
7

1149

YIRMEYAHU

And if you do not listen, my being shall weep in
secret for your pride, and my eyes bitterly weep and
run down with tears, because the flock of hWhY shall
be taken captive.
18 Say to the sovereign and to the sovereigness
mother, “Humble yourselves. Sit down, for your rule,
the crown of your comeliness, has come down.”
19 The cities of the South shall be shut up, with no
one to open them. Yahuḏah shall be taken into exile,
all of it. She shall be taken into exile, completely.
20 Lift up your eyes and see those who come from
the north. Where is the flock that was given to you,
your lovely sheep?
21 What would you say when He visits you? For you
have taught them to be chiefs, to be head over you.
Do not pangs seize you, like a woman in labour?
22 And when you say in your heart, “Why has this
come upon me?” It is because of your great
wickedness that your skirts have been uncovered,
your heels made bare.
23 Does a Kushite change his skin and a leopard its
spots? You who are taught to do evil are also unable
to do good!
24 “So I shall scatter them like stubble that passes
away by the wind of the wilderness.
25 “This is your lot, your measured portion from Me,”
declares hWhY, “because you have forgotten Me, and
trust in falsehood.
26 “I shall even draw your skirts over your face, and
your shame shall be seen,
27 your
adulteries and your neighings, the
wickedness of your whoring! I have seen your
abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe to you, O
Yerushalayim! How long before you would be made
clean?”
17

1150

JEREMIAH

14 The word of hWhY that came to Yirmeyahu
concerning the matter of droughts.
2 “Yahuḏah has mourned, and her gates have
languished. They have mourned on the ground, and
the cry of Yerushalayim has gone up.
3 “And their nobles have sent their little ones for
water, they went to the cisterns and found no water,
they returned with their vessels empty. They were put
to shame, and blushed and covered their heads.
4 “Because the ground became cracked, for there
has been no rain in the land. The ploughmen were put
to shame, they covered their heads.
5 “Even the deer gave birth in the field, but left
because there was no grass.
6 “And wild donkeys stood in the bare heights, they
sniffed at the wind like jackals. Their eyes have failed
because there was no grass.”
7 O hWhY, though our wickednesses witness
against us, act, for Your Name’s sake. For our
backslidings have been many, we have sinned
against You.
8 O Expectation of Yisra’ĕl, its Saviour in time of
distress, why should You be like a stranger in the
land, or like a traveller who turns aside to lodge?
9 Why should You be as one who is stunned, as a
mighty man that is unable to save? Yet You, O hWhY,
are in our midst, and Your Name has been called on
us. Do not leave us!
10 Thus said hWhY to this people, “So they have
loved to wander, they have not restrained their feet.
Therefore hWhY has not accepted them. Now He
remembers their wickedness and punishes their
sins.”
11 And hWhY said to me, “Do not pray for this people
for their good.
1151

YIRMEYAHU

“When they fast, I do not hear their cry. And when
they offer burnt offering and grain offering, I do not
accept them. Instead, I am consuming them by
sword, and by scarcity of food, and by pestilence.”
13 But I said, “Ah, Aḏonai hWhY! See, the neḇi’im say
to them, ‘You are not to see a sword, nor have
scarcity of food, for I give you true peace in this place.’
”
14 Then hWhY said to me, “The neḇi’im naḇa
falsehood in My Name. I have not sent them, nor
commanded them, nor spoken to them. They naḇa to
you a false vision, worthless divination, and the deceit
of their own heart.
15 “Therefore thus said hWhY concerning the neḇi’im
who naḇa in My Name, whom I did not send, and who
say, ‘Sword and scarcity of food shall not be in this
land.’ ‘By sword and scarcity of food those neḇi’im
shall be consumed!
16 ‘And the people to whom they naḇa shall be
thrown out in the streets of Yerushalayim because of
the scarcity of food and the sword, with no one to bury
them - them nor their wives, their sons nor their
daughters. For I shall pour their evil on them.’
17 “And you shall say this word to them, ‘Let my eyes
flow with tears night and day, and let them not cease;
for the maiden daughter of my people has been
crushed with a mighty blow, with a very severe
wound.
18 ‘If I go out to the field, then see those slain with the
sword! And if I enter the city, then see those sick from
scarcity of food! For both naḇi and kohĕn go about in
a land they do not know.’ ”
19 Have You completely rejected Yahuḏah? Has
Your being loathed Tsiyon? Why have You smitten us
so that there is no healing for us? We looked for
12

1152

JEREMIAH

peace, but there was no good; and for the time of
healing, but see - fear!
20 O hWhY, we know our wickedness and the
wickedness of our fathers, for we have sinned against
You.
21 Do not scorn us, for Your Name’s sake. Do not
despise the throne of Your esteem. Remember, do
not break Your Covenant with us.
22 Are there among the worthless idols of the nations
any causing rain? And do the shamayim give
showers? Are You not He, O hWhY our Elohim? And
we wait for You, for You are the One who does all
this.

15 And HWHY said to me, “Even Mosheh and
Shemu’ĕl were to stand before Me, My being is not
toward this people. Send them away from My
presence, let them go.
2 “And it shall be, when they say to you, ‘Where do
we go?’ then you shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY,
“Those for death, to death. And those for the sword,
to the sword. And those for scarcity of food, to scarcity
of food. And those for captivity, to captivity.” ’
3 “And I shall appoint over them four kinds,”
declares hWhY, “the sword to slay, the dogs to drag,
the birds of the shamayim and the beasts of the earth
to devour and destroy.
4 “And I shall make them for a horror to all the reigns
of the earth, on account of Menashsheh son of
Ḥizqiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, because of what
he did in Yerushalayim.
5 “For
who has compassion on you, O
Yerushalayim? And who mourns for you? And who
turns aside to ask how you are doing?
6 “You who have forsaken Me,” declares hWhY, “you
have gone backward. Therefore I shall stretch out My
1153

YIRMEYAHU

hand against you and destroy you. I have been weary
of relenting!
7 “And I shall winnow them with a winnowing fan in
the gates of the land. I shall bereave, I shall destroy
My people. They would not turn back from their ways.
8 “Their widows shall be more numerous than the
sand of the seas. I shall bring against them, against
the mother of the young men, a ravager at noon. I
shall cause terror and sudden alarm to fall on her,
suddenly.
9 “She who has borne seven shall pine away. She
shall breathe her last. Her sun shall go down while it
is yet day. She shall be put to shame and be
humiliated. And their remnant I give up to the sword
before their enemies,” declares hWhY.
10 Woe to me, my mother, that you have borne me,
a man of strife and a man of contention to all the
earth! I have neither lent for interest, nor have men
lent to me for interest. All of them are reviling me.
11 hWhY said, “Did I not direct you for good? Did I not
intercede for you in a time of evil and in a time of
distress against the enemy?
12 “Does one break iron, iron or bronze from the
north?
13 “Your wealth and your treasures I give as plunder,
not for price, because of all your sins, even in all your
borders.
14 “And I shall cause them to pass over with your
enemies into a land which you did not know, for a fire
is kindled in My displeasure, which burns upon you.”
15 You Yourself know, O hWhY. Remember me and
visit me, and take vengeance for me on these who
persecute me. In Your patience, do not take me away.
Know that for You I have suffered reproach.
1154

JEREMIAH

Your Words were found, and I fed on them, and
Your Word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my
heart. For Your Name is called on me, O hWhY Elohim
of hosts.
17 I have not sat in the company of the mockers, nor
do I exult. I have sat alone because of Your hand, for
You have filled me with displeasure.
18 Why is my pain without end and my wound
incurable, which refuses to be healed? Are You to me
like a failing stream, as waters not steadfast?
19 Therefore thus said hWhY, “If you turn back, then I
shall bring you back. Before Me you shall stand. And
if you take out the precious from the worthless, you
shall become as My mouth. Let them return to you,
but do not return to them.
20 “And I shall make you to this people a strong
bronze wall. And they shall fight against you, but not
overcome you. For I am with you to save you and
deliver you,” declares hWhY.
21 “And I shall deliver you from the hand of evil-doers,
and I shall ransom you from the grip of the ruthless.”
16

16 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Do not take a wife, nor have sons or daughters in
this place.”
3 For thus said hWhY concerning the sons and
daughters who are born in this place, and concerning
their mothers who bear them and their fathers who
bring them forth in this land,
4 “They shall die of deaths from diseases, they shall
not be lamented nor be buried, but be like dung on
the face of the earth, and be consumed by sword and
by scarcity of food. And their corpses shall be meat
for the birds of the shamayim and for the beasts of the
earth.”
2

1155

YIRMEYAHU

For thus said hWhY, “Do not enter the house of
mourning, neither go to lament or mourn for them, for
I have withdrawn My peace from this people,”
declares hWhY, “even the kindness and the
compassions.
6 “Both great and small shall die in this land. They
shall not be buried, and no one shall lament for them,
or cut themselves, or make themselves bald for them.
7 “Neither shall they break bread in mourning for
them to comfort them for the dead, nor give them the
cup of comfort to drink for their father or their mother.
8 “Do not enter the house of feasting to sit with them,
to eat and drink.”
9 For thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“See, before your eyes and in your days, I am making
the voice of rejoicing and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride to
cease in this place.
10 “And it shall be, when you declare to this people
all these words, and they shall say to you, ‘Why has
hWhY pronounced all this great evil against us? And
what is our wickedness, and what is our sin that we
have committed against hWhY our Elohim?’
11 then you shall say to them, ‘Because your fathers
have forsaken Me,’ declares hWhY, ‘and have walked
after other mighty ones and served them and bowed
themselves to them, and have forsaken Me, and did
not guard My Torah.
12 ‘And you have done more evil than your fathers,
for look, each one walks according to the
stubbornness of his own evil heart, without listening
to Me.
13 ‘So I shall throw you out of this land into a land that
you do not know, neither you nor your fathers. And
5

1156

JEREMIAH

there you shall serve other mighty ones day and
night, where I show you no favour.’
14 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “when it is no longer said, ‘hWhY lives who
brought up the children of Yisra’ĕl from the land of
Mitsrayim,’
15 but, ‘hWhY lives who brought up the children of
Yisra’ĕl from the land of the north and from all the
lands where He had driven them.’ For I shall bring
them back into their land I gave to their fathers.
16 “See, I am sending for many fishermen,” declares
hWhY, “and they shall fish them. And after that I shall
send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from
every mountain and every hill, and out of the holes of
the rocks.
17 “For My eyes are on all their ways; they have not
been hidden from My face, nor has their wickedness
been hidden from My eyes.
18 “And first I shall repay double for their wickedness
and their sin, because they have defiled My land with
the dead bodies of their filthiness, and have filled My
inheritance with their abominations.”
19 O hWhY, my strength and my stronghold and my
refuge, in the day of distress the gentiles shall come
to You from the ends of the earth and say, “Our
fathers have inherited only falsehood, futility, and
there is no value in them.”
20 Would a man make mighty ones for himself, which
are not mighty ones?
21 “Therefore see, I am causing them to know, this
time I cause them to know My hand and My might.
And they shall know that My Name is hWhY!”

17 “The sin of Yahuḏah is written with a pen of iron,
engraved with the point of a diamond on the tablet of
their heart, and on the horns of your altars,
1157

YIRMEYAHU

while their children remember their altars and their
Ashĕrim by the spreading trees on the high hills.
3 “My mountain in the field, I give as plunder, your
wealth, all your treasures, your high places of sin,
throughout all your borders.
4 “And you, even of yourself, shall let go of your
inheritance which I gave you. And I shall make you
serve your enemies in a land which you have not
known, for you have kindled a fire in My displeasure
which burns forever.”
5 Thus said hWhY, “Cursed is the man who trusts in
man and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart turns
away from hWhY.
6 “For he shall be like a shrub in the desert, and not
see when good comes, and shall inhabit the parched
places in the wilderness, a salt land that is not
inhabited.
7 “Baruḵ is the man who trusts in hWhY, and whose
trust is hWhY.
8 “For he shall be like a tree planted by the waters,
which spreads out its roots by the river, and does not
see when heat comes. And his leaf shall be green,
and in the year of drought he is not anxious, nor does
he cease from yielding fruit.
9 “The heart is crooked above all, and desperately
sick - who shall know it?
10 “I, hWhY, search the heart, I try the kidneys, and
give every man according to his ways, according to
the fruit of his deeds.
11 “As a partridge that broods but does not hatch, so
is he who gets riches, but not by right. It leaves him in
the midst of his days, and at his end he is a fool.”
12 An esteemed throne, exalted from the beginning,
is the place of our Miqdash.
2

1158

JEREMIAH

O hWhY, the expectation of Yisra’ĕl, all who
forsake You are put to shame. “Those who depart
from Me shall be written in the earth, because they
have forsaken hWhY, the Fountain of living waters.”
14 Heal me, O hWhY, so that I am healed. Save me,
so that I am saved, for You are my praise.
15 See, they say to me, “Where is the word of hWhY?
Let it come now!”
16 And I have not run away from being a shepherd
who follows You, nor have I longed for the woeful day.
You Yourself have known, that which came out of my
lips was before You.
17 Do not be a ruin to me, You are my shelter in the
day of evil.
18 Let these who persecute me be put to shame, but
do not let me be put to shame. Let them be broken,
but do not let me be broken. Bring on them the day of
evil, and destroy them with double destruction!
19 Thus hWhY said to me, “Go and stand in the gate
of the children of the people, by which the sovereigns
of Yahuḏah come in and by which they go out, and in
all the gates of Yerushalayim.
20 “And you shall say to them, ‘Hear the word of
hWhY, you sovereigns of Yahuḏah, and all Yahuḏah,
and all the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, who enter by
these gates.
21 ‘Thus said hWhY, “Guard yourselves, and bear no
burden on the Shabbath day, nor bring it in by the
gates of Yerushalayim,
22 nor take a burden out of your houses on the
Shabbath day, nor do any work. And you shall qadosh
the Shabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.
23 “But they did not obey, or incline their ear, and they
made their neck stiff not to hear and not to receive
instruction.
13

1159

YIRMEYAHU

“And it shall be, if you diligently obey Me,” declares
hWhY, “to bring in no burden through the gates of this
city on the Shabbath day, and qadosh the Shabbath
day, to do no work in it,
25 then sovereigns and heads sitting on the throne of
Dawiḏ shall enter in through the gates of this city,
riding in chariots and on horses, they and their heads
- the men of Yahuḏah and the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim. And this city shall be inhabited forever.
26 “And they shall come from the cities of Yahuḏah
and from the places around Yerushalayim, and from
the land of Binyamin and from the low country, from
the mountains and from the Negeḇ, bringing burnt
offerings and slaughterings, grain offerings and
incense, bringing offerings of praise to the House of
hWhY.
27 “But if you do not obey Me to qadosh the Shabbath
day, and not to bear a burden when entering the
gates of Yerushalayim on the Shabbath day, then I
shall kindle a fire in its gates, and it shall consume the
palaces of Yerushalayim, and not be quenched.” ’ ”
24

18 The word which came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY,
saying,
2 “Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, and
there I let you hear My words.”
3 So I went down to the potter’s house, and saw him
doing a piece of work on the wheel.
4 And the vessel that he made of clay was ruined in
the hand of the potter, so he remade it into another
vessel, as it seemed good to the potter to do.
5 Then the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
6 “O house of Yisra’ĕl, am I not able to do with you
as this potter?” declares hWhY. “Look, as the clay is
1160

JEREMIAH

in the hand of the potter, so are you in My hand, O
house of Yisra’ĕl!
7 “The moment I speak concerning a nation and
concerning a reign, to pluck up, to pull down, and to
destroy it,
8 and that nation shall turn from its evil because I
have spoken against it, then I shall repent of the evil
that I thought to do to it.
9 “And the moment I speak concerning a nation and
concerning a reign, to build and to plant it,
10 and it shall do evil in My eyes in not obeying My
voice, then I shall repent concerning the good with
which I spoke of doing to it.
11 “And now, speak to the men of Yahuḏah and to
the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, saying, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “See, I am forming evil and devising a plan
against you. Return now every one from his evil way,
and make your ways and your deeds good.” ’ ”
12 But they shall say, “It is no use! For we walk
according to our own plans, and we do each one the
stubbornness of his evil heart.”
13 Therefore thus said hWhY, “Ask now among the
nations, who has heard the like of this? The maiden
of Yisra’ĕl has done what is most horrible.
14 “Does the snow of Leḇanon cease from the rock
of the field? Or the cool flowing waters from afar dry
up?
15 “But My people have forgotten Me, they have
burned incense to what is false, and they have
stumbled from their ways, from the ancient paths, to
walk in bypaths and not on a highway,
16 to make their land become a ruin, a hissing forever
- everyone who passes by it is appalled and shakes
his head.

1161

YIRMEYAHU

“I shall scatter them as with an east wind before
the enemy; I shall show them the back and not the
face in the day of their calamity.”
18 Then they said, “Come and let us devise plans
against Yirmeyahu, for the Torah shall not perish from
the kohĕn, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word
from the naḇi. Come and let us smite him with the
tongue, and let us not listen to any of his words.”
19 Attend to me, O hWhY, and listen to the voice of
my adversaries!
20 Should good be repaid with evil? For they have
dug a pit for my life. Remember that I stood before
You to speak good for them, and to turn away Your
wrath from them.
21 So give their children over to scarcity of food, and
hand them over to the power of the sword. Let their
wives become widows and bereaved of their children.
Let their men be put to death, their young men be
smitten by the sword in battle.
22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, when You
bring a raiding party suddenly upon them. For they
have dug a pit to take me, and laid snares for my feet.
23 But You, O hWhY, You know all their counsel
against me, to slay me. Do not pardon their
wickedness, nor blot out their sin from Your presence,
and let them be overthrown before You. Deal with
them in the time of Your displeasure.
17

19 Thus said hWhY, “Go and get a potter’s earthen
jug, and take some of the elders of the people and
some of the elders of the kohenim.
2 “Then you shall go out to the Valley of Bĕn
Hinnom, which is by the entry of the Potsherd Gate,
and shall proclaim there the words that I speak to you,
1162

JEREMIAH

and shall say, ‘Hear the word of hWhY, sovereigns
of Yahuḏah and inhabitants of Yerushalayim. Thus
said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am
bringing evil on this place, that makes the ears tingle
of all who hear it.
4 “Because they have forsaken Me and have
profaned this place, and have burned incense in it to
other mighty ones whom neither they, their fathers,
nor the sovereigns of Yahuḏah have known, and they
have filled this place with the blood of the innocents,
5 and have built the high places of Ba’al, to burn
their sons with fire for burnt offerings to Ba’al, which I
did not command or speak, nor did it come into My
heart.
6 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “that this place shall no more be called Topheth
or the Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, but the Valley of
Slaughter.
7 “And I shall pour out the counsel of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim in this place, and I shall make them fall
by the sword before their enemies and by the hands
of those who seek their lives. And I shall give their
corpses as meat for the birds of the shamayim and
for the beasts of the earth.
8 “And I shall make this city a ruin, and a hissing everyone who passes by it is appalled and hisses
because of all its plagues.
9 “And I shall make them to eat the flesh of their
sons and the flesh of their daughters, and eat one
another’s flesh in the siege and in the distress with
which their enemies and those who seek their lives
distress them.” ’
10 “And you shall break the jug before the eyes of the
men who go with you,
11 and shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY of hosts,
“Even so I break this people and this city, as one
3

1163

YIRMEYAHU

breaks a potter’s vessel, which one is unable to repair
again. And let them bury them in Topheth till there is
no place to bury.
12 “This is what I shall do to this place,” declares
hWhY, “and to its inhabitants, so as to make this city
like Topheth.
13 “And the houses of Yerushalayim and the houses
of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah shall be as unclean as
the place of Topheth, because of all the houses on
whose roofs they have burned incense to all the host
of the shamayim, and poured out drink offerings to
other mighty ones.” ’ ”
14 And when Yirmeyahu returned from Topheth,
where hWhY had sent him to naḇa, he stood in the
courtyard of the House of hWhY and said to all the
people,
15 “Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘See, I am bringing on this city and on all her towns
all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because
they have stiffened their necks so as not to hear My
Words.’ ”

20 And Pashḥur son of Immĕr, the kohĕn who was
also chief governor in the House of HWHY, heard that
Yirmeyahu naḇu these words.
2 And Pashḥur struck Yirmeyahu the naḇi, and put
him in the stocks that were in the high gate of
Binyamin, which was by the House of HWHY.
3 And it came to be on the next day that Pashḥur
brought Yirmeyahu out of the stocks, and Yirmeyahu
said to him, “hWhY has not called your name Pashḥur,
but Maḡor-Missaḇiḇ.
4 “For thus said hWhY, ‘See, I am making you a fear
to yourself and to all your loved ones. And they shall
fall by the sword of their enemies, while your eyes see
1164

JEREMIAH

it. And I shall give all Yahuḏah into the hand of the
sovereign of Baḇel, and he shall exile them to Baḇel
and smite them with the sword.
5 ‘And I shall give all the wealth of this city and all its
labour, and all its valuables, and all the treasures of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah, I give into the hand of
their enemies, who shall plunder them, seize them,
and shall bring them to Baḇel.
6 ‘And you, Pashḥur, and all who dwell in your
house, shall go into captivity, and enter into Baḇel.
And there you shall die, and be buried there, you and
all your friends, to whom you have naḇu falsehood.’ ”
7 O HWHY, You deluded me, and I was deluded. You
are stronger than I, and have prevailed. I have been
ridiculed all day long, everyone mocks me.
8 For when I speak, I cry out, proclaiming violence
and ruin. Because the word of hWhY was made to me
a reproach and a mockery daily.
9 Whenever I said, “Let me not mention Him, nor
speak in His Name again,” it was in my heart like a
burning fire shut up in my bones. And I became weary
of holding it back, and was helpless.
10 For I heard many mocking, “Fear on every side!”
“Expose,” they say, “let us expose him!” All my friends
watched for my stumbling, “He might be lured away,
so that we prevail against him, and take our revenge
on him.”
11 But hWhY is with me like a mighty, awesome One.
Therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and not
prevail. They shall be greatly ashamed, for they have
not acted wisely - an everlasting reproach never to be
forgotten.
12 But, O hWhY of hosts, trying the righteous, and
seeing the kidneys and heart, let me see Your
vengeance on them, for I have revealed my cause to
You.
1165

YIRMEYAHU

Sing to hWhY! Hallelu-hWhY! For He has delivered
the being of the poor from the hand of evil ones.
14 Cursed be the day in which I was born! Let the day
not be baruḵ in which my mother bore me!
15 Let the man be cursed who brought news to my
father, saying, “A male child has been born to you,”
making him very glad.
16 And let that man be like the cities which hWhY
overthrew, and repented not. Let him hear the cry in
the morning and the shouting at noon,
17 because I was not slain from the womb, so that my
mother should have been my grave and her womb
forever great.
18 Why did I come forth from the womb to see toil and
sorrow, and spend my days in shame?
13

21 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from hWhY
when Sovereign Tsiḏqiyahu sent to him Pashḥur son
of Malkiyah, and Tsephanyah the son of Ma’asĕyah,
the kohĕn, saying,
2 “Please inquire of hWhY on our behalf, for
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel is fighting
against us. It might be that hWhY deals with us
according to all His wondrous works, so that he
withdraws from us.”
3 But Yirmeyahu said to them, “Say this to
Tsiḏqiyahu,
4 ‘Thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am
turning back the weapons of battle that are in your
hands, with which you fight against the sovereign of
Baḇel and the Kasdites who besiege you outside the
wall. And I shall gather them inside this city.
5 “And I Myself shall fight against you with an
outstretched hand, and with a strong arm, even in
displeasure and rage and great wrath.
1166

JEREMIAH

“And I shall smite the inhabitants of this city, both
man and beast - let them die of a great pestilence.
7 “And afterward,” declares hWhY, “I give Tsiḏqiyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah, his servants and the people,
and such as are left in this city from the pestilence
and the sword and the scarcity of food, into the hand
of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, into the hand
of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek
their life. And he shall smite them with the edge of the
sword. He shall not pardon them, nor spare nor have
compassion.” ’
8 “You shall also say to this people, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “See, I lay before you the way of life and the
way of death.
9 “Whoever stays in this city dies by the sword, by
scarcity of food, and by pestilence. But whoever goes
out and shall go over to the Kasdites who besiege
you, is going to live, and his life shall be as a prize to
him.
10 “For I have turned My face against this city for evil
and not for good,” declares hWhY. “It is given into the
hand of the sovereign of Baḇel, and he shall burn it
with fire.” ’
11 “And to the house of the sovereign of Yahuḏah,
‘Hear the word of hWhY,
12 ‘O house of Dawiḏ! Thus said hWhY, “Render rightruling in the morning, and deliver him who has been
robbed out of the hand of the oppressor, lest My wrath
go out like fire and burn, with no one to quench it,
because of the evil of your deeds.
13 “See, I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,
rock of the plain,” declares hWhY, “who are saying,
‘Who would come down against us? And who would
come into our dwellings?’
14 “And I shall punish you according to the fruit of
your deeds,” declares hWhY., “And I shall kindle a fire
6

1167

YIRMEYAHU

in its forest, and it shall consume all that is around
her.” ’ ”

22 Thus said HWHY, “Go down to the house of the
sovereign of Yahuḏah. And there you shall speak this
word,
2 and shall say, ‘Hear the word of hWhY, O
sovereign of Yahuḏah, you who sit on the throne of
Dawiḏ, you and your servants and your people who
enter these gates!
3 ‘Thus
said hWhY, “Do right-ruling and
righteousness, and deliver him who is robbed out of
the hand of the oppressor. Do not maltreat nor do
violence to the stranger, the fatherless, or the widow,
nor shed innocent blood in this place.
4 “For if you certainly do this word, then there shall
enter in by the gates of this house sovereigns sitting
on the throne of Dawiḏ, riding on horses and in
chariots, he and his servants and his people.
5 “But if you do not obey these words, I swear by
Myself,” declares hWhY, “that this house shall become
a ruin.” ’ ”
6 For thus said hWhY to the house of the sovereign
of Yahuḏah, “You are as Gil’aḏ to Me, the head of
Leḇanon. But I shall make you a wilderness, and
cities which are not inhabited.
7 “And I shall prepare destroyers against you, each
with his weapons. And they shall cut down your
choice cedars and throw them into the fire.
8 “And many gentiles shall pass by this city, and
they shall say to one another, ‘Why has hWhY done
so to this great city?’
9 “Then they shall say, ‘Because they have forsaken
the Covenant of hWhY their Elohim, and bowed
themselves to other mighty ones and served them.’ ”
1168

JEREMIAH

Do not weep for the dead, nor mourn for him.
Weep bitterly for him who goes away, for he shall
never come back nor see the land of his birth.
11 For thus said hWhY concerning Shallum son of
Yoshiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, who reigned
instead of Yoshiyahu his father, who went from this
place, “He shall never come back,
12 but he shall die in the place where they have exiled
him, and not see this land again.
13 “Woe to him who builds his house without
righteousness and his rooms without Right-Ruling,
who uses his neighbour’s service without wages and
does not give him his wages,
14 who says, ‘I am going to build myself a wide house
with spacious rooms, and cut out windows for it,
panelling it with cedar and painting it in red.’
15 “Do you reign because you enclose yourself in
cedar? Did not your father eat and drink, and do rightruling and righteousness? Then it was well with him.
16 “He defended the cause of the poor and needy then it was well. Was this not to know Me?” declares
hWhY.
17 “But your eyes and your heart are only upon your
own greedy gain, and on shedding innocent blood,
and on oppression and on doing violence.”
18 Therefore thus said hWhY concerning Yahoyaqim
son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, “Let them
not lament for him: ‘Alas, my brother!’ or ‘Alas, my
sister!’ Let them not lament for him: ‘Alas, master!’ or
‘Alas, his excellency!’
19 “He shall be buried with the burial of a donkey,
dragged and thrown outside the gates of
Yerushalayim.
20 “Go up to Leḇanon, and cry out, and lift up your
voice in Bashan. And cry from Aḇarim, for all your
lovers are destroyed.
10

1169

YIRMEYAHU

“I have spoken to you in your ease, but you said,
‘I do not listen.’ This has been your way from your
youth, for you did not obey My voice.
22 “Let all your shepherds be devoured by the wind,
and your lovers go into captivity. Then you shall be
ashamed and humiliated for all your evil.
23 “You who dwell in Leḇanon, being nested in the
cedars, how you shall groan when pangs come upon
you, like the pains of a woman giving birth!
24 “As I live,” declares hWhY, “though Konyahu son
of Yahoyaqim, sovereign of Yahuḏah, were the signet
on My right hand, I would still pull you off from there;
25 and I shall give you into the hand of those who
seek your life, and into the hand of those whose face
you fear, into the hand of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign
of Baḇel and the hand of the Kasdites.
26 “And I shall hurl you out, and your mother who
bore you, into another land where you were not born,
and there you shall die.
27 “But they shall not return to the land to which their
being yearns to return.
28 “Is this man Konyahu a despised broken pot, or an
undesirable vessel? Why are they hurled out, he and
his descendants, and cast into a land which they do
not know?
29 “O land, land, land! Hear the word of hWhY!
30 “Thus said hWhY, ‘Write this man down as
childless, a strong man who is not to prosper in his
days, for none of his descendants shall prosper,
sitting on the throne of Dawiḏ, or rule any more in
Yahuḏah.’ ”
21

23 “Woe to the shepherds destroying and scattering
the sheep of My pasture!” declares HWHY.
1170

JEREMIAH

Therefore thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
against the shepherds who feed My people, “You
have scattered My flock, driven them away, and have
not tended them. See, I am punishing you for the evil
of your deeds,” declares HWHY.
3 “Therefore I shall gather the remnant of My flock
out of all the lands where I have driven them, and
shall bring them back to their fold. And they shall bear
and increase.
4 “And I shall raise up shepherds over them, and
they shall feed them. And they shall fear no more, nor
be discouraged, nor shall they be lacking,” declares
hWhY.
5 “See, the days are coming,” declares hWhY, “when
I shall raise for Dawiḏ a Branch of righteousness, and
a Sovereign shall reign and act wisely, and shall do
right-ruling and righteousness in the earth.
6 “In His days Yahuḏah shall be saved, and Yisra’ĕl
dwell safely. And this is His Name whereby He shall
be called: ‘hWhY Tsidqĕnu.’
7 “Therefore, see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “when they shall say no more, ‘As hWhY lives
who brought up the children of Yisra’ĕl out of the land
of Mitsrayim,’
8 but, ‘As hWhY lives who brought up and led the
seed of the house of Yisra’ĕl out of the land of the
north and from all the lands where I had driven them.’
And they shall dwell on their own land.”
9 My heart within me is broken because of the
neḇi’im; all my bones shake. I am like a drunken man,
and like a man overcome by wine, because of hWhY,
and because of His qodesh words.
10 For the land is filled with adulterers; for the land
mourns because of a curse. The pastures of the
wilderness are dried up. And their course is evil, and
their might is not right.
2

1171

YIRMEYAHU

“For both naḇi and kohĕn have become defiled.
Even in My house I have found their evil,” declares
hWhY.
12 “Therefore their way is to them like slippery ways
in the dark. They are driven on and they shall fall in
them. For I bring evil on them, the year of their
punishment,” declares hWhY.
13 “And I have seen folly in the neḇi’im of Shomeron:
they naḇu by Ba’al and led My people Yisra’ĕl astray.
14 “And among the neḇi’im of Yerushalayim I have
seen a horrible matter: committing adultery and
walking in falsehood. And they strengthen the hands
of evil ones, so that no one turns back from his evil.
All of them are like Seḏom to Me, and her inhabitants
like Amorah.
15 “Therefore thus said hWhY of hosts concerning the
neḇi’im, ‘See, I am making them eat wormwood, and
shall make them drink poisoned water. For defilement
has gone out into all the land from the neḇi’im of
Yerushalayim.’ ”
16 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “Do not listen to the
words of the neḇi’im who naḇa to you, they lead you
astray. They speak a vision of their own heart, not
from the mouth of hWhY.
17 “They keep on saying to those who despise Me,
‘hWhY has said you shall have peace.’ And to all who
walk according to the stubbornness of their own
heart, ‘No evil comes upon you.’ ”
18 For who has stood in the counsel of hWhY, and has
seen and heard His word? Who has listened to His
word and obeyed it?
19 See, a storm of hWhY shall go forth in a rage, a
whirling storm! It whirls on the head of the wicked.
20 The displeasure of hWhY shall not turn back until
He has done and established the purposes of His
11

1172

JEREMIAH

heart. In the latter days you shall understand it
perfectly.
21 “I did not send these neḇi’im, yet they ran. I have
not spoken to them, yet they naḇu.
22 “But if they had stood in My counsel, then they
would have let My people hear My Words, and they
would have turned them from their evil way and from
the evil of their deeds.
23 “Am I an Elohim close by,” declares hWhY, “and
not an Elohim afar off?
24 “If anyone is hidden in secret places, would I not
see him?” declares hWhY. “Do I not fill the shamayim
and earth?” declares hWhY.
25 “I have heard what the neḇi’im have said who naḇa
falsehood in My Name, saying, ‘I have dreamed, I
have dreamed!’
26 “Till when shall it be in the heart of the neḇi’im? the neḇi’im of falsehood and neḇi’im of the deceit of
their own heart,
27 who try to make My people forget My Name by
their dreams which everyone relates to his neighbour,
as their fathers forgot My Name for Ba’al.
28 “The naḇi who has a dream, let him relate the
dream, and he who has My Word, let him speak My
Word in truth. What is the chaff to the wheat?”
declares hWhY.
29 “Is not My Word like a fire?” declares hWhY, “and
like a hammer that shatters a rock?
30 “Therefore see, I am against the neḇi’im,” declares
HWHY, “who steal My Words every one from his
neighbour.
31 “See, I am against the neḇi’im,” declares HWHY,
“who use their tongues and say, ‘He declares hWhY.’
32 “See, I am against those who naḇa false dreams,”
declares hWhY, “and relate them, and lead My people
astray by their falsehoods and by their reckless
1173

YIRMEYAHU

boasting. But I Myself did not send them nor have I
commanded them. And they do not profit this people
at all,” declares hWhY.
33 “And when these people or the naḇi or the kohĕn
ask you, saying, ‘What is the message of hWhY?’ then
you shall say to them, ‘What message?’ I shall
forsake you,” declares hWhY.
34 “As for the naḇi and the kohĕn and the people who
say, ‘The message of hWhY,’ I shall punish that man
and his house.
35 “This is what each one says to his neighbour, and
each one to his brother, ‘What has hWhY answered?’
and, ‘What has hWhY spoken?’
36 “But the message of hWhY you no longer
remember! For every man’s message is his own
word, for you have changed the Words of the living
Elohim, HWHY of hosts, our Elohim!
37 “This is what you say to the naḇi, ‘What has hWhY
answered you?’ and, ‘What has hWhY spoken?’
38 “But since you say, ‘The message of hWhY!’
therefore thus said hWhY, ‘Because you say this word,
“The message of hWhY!” and I have sent to you,
saying, “Do not say, ‘The message of hWhY!’ ”
39 therefore see, I, I shall utterly forget you and cast
you away from My presence, along with the city that I
gave you and your fathers.
40 ‘And I shall put an everlasting reproach on you,
and an everlasting shame that is not forgotten.’ ”

24 HWHY showed me, and look, there were two
baskets of figs put before the Hĕyḵal of hWhY, after
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel had exiled
Yeḵonyahu son of Yahoyaqim, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, and the heads of Yahuḏah with the
1174

JEREMIAH

craftsmen and smiths, from Yerushalayim, and had
brought them to Baḇel.
2 One basket had very good figs, like the figs that
are first ripe. And the other basket had very spoilt figs
which could not be eaten, they were so spoilt.”
3 And hWhY said to me, “What do you see,
Yirmeyahu?” And I said, “Figs, the good figs, very
good. And the spoilt, very spoilt, which could not be
eaten, they are so spoilt.”
4 Again the word of hWhY came to me, saying,
5 “Thus said hWhY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Like
these good figs, so do I acknowledge the exiles of
Yahuḏah, whom I have sent out of this place for their
own good, into the land of the Kasdites.
6 ‘And I shall lay My eyes on them for good, and
shall bring them back to this land. And I shall build
them and not pull them down, and shall plant them
and not pluck them up.
7 ‘And I shall give them a heart to know Me, that I
am hWhY. And they shall be My people and I shall be
their Elohim, for they shall turn back to Me with all
their heart.
8 ‘And as the spoilt figs that could not be eaten
because they are so spoilt,’ for thus said hWhY, ‘so do
I give up Tsiḏqiyahu, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, his
heads, the rest of Yerushalayim who remain in this
land, and those who dwell in the land of Mitsrayim.
9 ‘And I shall make them a horror to all the reigns of
the earth, for evil, to be a reproach and a byword, a
mockery and a curse, in all the places to which I drive
them.
10 ‘And I shall send the sword, the scarcity of food,
and the pestilence among them, till they are
consumed from the land that I gave to them and their
fathers.’ ”
1175

YIRMEYAHU

25 The word that came to Yirmeyahu concerning
all the people of Yahuḏah, in the fourth year of
Yahoyaqim son of Yoshiyahu, the sovereign of
Yahuḏah,
which
was
the
first
year
of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel,
2 which Yirmeyahu the naḇi spoke to all the people
of Yahuḏah and to all the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim, saying,
3 “From the thirteenth year of Yoshiyahu son of
Amon, sovereign of Yahuḏah, even to this day, this is
the twenty-third year in which the word of hWhY has
come to me. And I have spoken to you, rising early
and speaking, but you have not listened.
4 “Moreover, hWhY has sent to you all His servants
the neḇi’im, rising early and sending them, but you
have not listened nor inclined your ear to hear,
5 saying, ‘Turn back now everyone from his evil way
and from the evil of your deeds, and dwell on the land
which hWhY has given to you and your fathers forever
and ever.
6 ‘And do not go after other mighty ones to serve
them and to bow down to them. And do not provoke
Me with the works of your hands, so that I do you no
evil.’
7 “But you did not listen to Me,” declares hWhY, “so
as to provoke Me with the works of your hands, for
your own evil.
8 “Therefore thus said hWhY of hosts, ‘Because you
did not obey My Words,
9 see, I am sending and taking all the tribes of the
north,’ declares hWhY, ‘and Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the
sovereign of Baḇel, My servant, and shall bring them
against this land and against its inhabitants, and
against these nations all around, and shall put them
1176

JEREMIAH

under the ban, and make them an astonishment, and
a hissing, and everlasting ruins.
10 ‘And I shall banish from them the voice of rejoicing
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of
the millstones and the light of the lamp.
11 ‘And all this land shall be a ruin and a waste, and
these nations shall serve the sovereign of Baḇel
seventy years.
12 ‘And it shall be, when seventy years are
completed, that I shall punish the sovereign of Baḇel
and that nation, the land of the Kasdites, for their
wickedness,’ declares hWhY, ‘and shall make it
everlasting ruins.
13 ‘And I shall bring on that land all My words which I
have pronounced against it, all that is written in this
book, which Yirmeyahu has naḇu concerning all the
nations.
14 ‘For they too shall be enslaved by many nations
and great sovereigns. And I shall repay them
according to their deeds and according to the works
of their hands.’ ”
15 For thus said hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl to me, “Take
this wine cup of wrath from My hand, and make all the
nations, to whom I send you, drink it.
16 “And they shall drink, and shake, and go mad
because of the sword that I am sending among them.”
17 I then took the cup from the hand of hWhY, and
made all the nations drink, to whom hWhY had sent
me;
18 Yerushalayim and the cities of Yahuḏah, and its
sovereigns, its heads, to make them a ruin, an object
of astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it is this
day;
19 Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, and his servants,
and his heads, and all his people;
1177

YIRMEYAHU

and all the mixed multitude, and all the sovereigns
of the land of Uts, and all the sovereigns of the land
of the Pelishtites - even Ashqelon, and Azzah, and
Eqron, and the remnant of Ashdoḏ;
21 Eḏom, and Mo’aḇ, and the children of Ammon;
22 and all the sovereigns of Tsor, and all the
sovereigns of Tsiḏon, and the sovereigns of the
coastlands which are beyond the sea;
23 Deḏan, and Tĕma, and Buz, and all who are in the
farthest corners;
24 and all the sovereigns of Araḇia and all the
sovereigns of the mixed multitude who dwell in the
wilderness;
25 and all the sovereigns of Zimri, and all the
sovereigns of Ĕylam, and all the sovereigns of the
Maḏites;
26 and all the sovereigns of the north, far and near,
one with another, and all the reigns of the earth which
are on the face of the ground. Also the sovereign of
Shĕshaḵ shall drink after them.
27 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY of
hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “Drink, be drunk, and
vomit! Fall and rise no more, because of the sword
which I am sending among you.” ’
28 “And it shall be, when they refuse to take the cup
from your hand to drink, then you shall say to them,
‘Thus said hWhY of hosts, “You shall drink!
29 “For look, I am beginning to bring evil upon the city
which is called by My Name, and should you be
entirely unpunished? You are not going unpunished,
for I am calling for a sword on all the inhabitants of the
earth,” declares hWhY of hosts.’
30 “And you shall naḇa against them all these words,
and say to them, ‘hWhY roars from on high, and utters
His voice from His qodesh dwelling place. He roars
20

1178

JEREMIAH

mightily over His fold, a shout as those who tread the
grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.
31 “Tumult shall come to the ends of the earth, for
hWhY has a controversy with the nations. He shall
enter into judgment with all flesh. The wicked He shall
give to the sword,’ declares hWhY.”
32 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “See, evil is going forth
from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind is raised
up from the farthest parts of the earth.
33 “And in that day the slain of hWhY shall be from
one end of the earth even to the other end of the
earth. They shall not be lamented, or gathered, or
buried, for they are dung on the face of the ground.
34 “Howl, you shepherds, and cry! And roll
yourselves in ashes, you leaders of the flock! For the
days of your slaughter and your scatterings are
completed, and you shall fall like a choice vessel.
35 “And a place of refuge shall perish from the
shepherds, and escape from the leaders of the flock.
36 “Hear the cry of the shepherds, and a wailing of
the leaders of the flock, for hWhY is ravaging their
pasture!
37 “And the pastures of peace shall be cut down
because of the burning displeasure of hWhY.
38 “Like a lion He shall leave His hiding place, for
their land shall become a waste because of the sword
of oppressors, and because of His burning
displeasure.”

26 In the beginning of the reign of Yahoyaqim the
son of Yoshiyahu, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, this word
came from hWhY, saying,
2 “Thus said hWhY, ‘Stand in the courtyard of the
House of hWhY, and speak to all the cities of
Yahuḏah, which come to bow themselves in the
1179

YIRMEYAHU

House of hWhY, all the words that I command you to
speak to them. Do not diminish a word.
3 ‘If so be that they listen and each turn from his evil
way, then I shall repent of the evil that I plan to do to
them, because of the evil of their deeds.’
4 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said hWhY, “If
you do not listen to Me, to walk in My Torah which I
put before you,
5 to listen to the words of My servants the neḇi’im I
am sending you, even rising up early and sending
them - though you have not listened 6 then I shall make this House like Shiloh, and make
this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.” ’ ”
7 And the kohenim and the neḇi’im and all the
people heard Yirmeyahu speaking these words in the
House of hWhY.
8 And it came to be, when Yirmeyahu had ended
speaking all that hWhY had commanded him to speak
to all the people, that the kohenim and the neḇi’im and
all the people seized him, saying, “You shall certainly
die!
9 “Why have you naḇu in the Name of hWhY, saying,
‘This House shall be like Shiloh, and this city be dried
up, without an inhabitant’?” And all the people were
gathered against Yirmeyahu in the House of hWhY.
10 And the heads of Yahuḏah heard this, and they
came up from the sovereign’s house to the House of
hWhY and sat down in the entrance of the new gate of
the House of hWhY.
11 And the kohenim and the neḇi’im spoke to the
heads and all the people, saying, “A death sentence
for this man! For he has naḇu against this city, as you
have heard with your ears.”
12 And Yirmeyahu spoke to all the heads and all the
people, saying, “hWhY sent me to naḇa against this
1180

JEREMIAH

house and against this city with all the words you
heard.
13 “And now, make good your ways and your deeds,
and obey the voice of hWhY your Elohim, then hWhY
shall relent concerning the evil He has pronounced
against you.
14 “And I, look I am in your hand. Do with me as
seems good and right to you.
15 “But know for certain that if you put me to death,
you are bringing innocent blood on yourselves, and
on this city, and on its inhabitants. For truly hWhY has
sent me to you to speak all these words in your
hearing.”
16 Then the heads and all the people said to the
kohenim and the neḇi’im, “No death sentence for this
man. For he has spoken to us in the Name of hWhY
our Elohim.”
17 And some of the elders of the land rose up and
spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying,
18 “Miḵayah of Moresheth naḇu in the days of
Ḥizqiyahu the sovereign of Yahuḏah, and he spoke to
all the people of Yahuḏah, saying, ‘Thus said hWhY of
hosts, “Tsiyon shall become a ploughed field, and
Yerushalayim be heaps, and the mountain of the
House like the bare hills of the forest.” ’
19 “Did Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah and all
Yahuḏah indeed put him to death? Did he not revere
hWhY and seek the favour hWhY? And the Aḏon
relented concerning the evil which He had
pronounced against them. But we are doing great evil
against ourselves.”
20 There was however a man who naḇu in the Name
of hWhY, Uriyahu the son of Shemayahu of Qiryath
Ye’arim, who naḇu against this city and against this
land according to all the words of Yirmeyahu.
1181

YIRMEYAHU

And when Yahoyaqim the sovereign, with all his
mighty men and all the heads, heard his words, the
sovereign sought to put him to death. But Uriyahu
heard of it, and was afraid and fled, and went to
Mitsrayim.
22 Then Yahoyaqim the sovereign sent men to
Mitsrayim: Elnathan the son of Aḵbor, and some men
who went with him to Mitsrayim.
23 And they brought Uriyahu from Mitsrayim and
brought him to Yahoyaqim the sovereign, who smote
him with the sword and threw his dead body into the
graves of the common people.
24 However, the hand of Aḥiqam son of Shaphan was
with Yirmeyahu, so as not to give him into the hand of
the people to put him to death.
21

27 In the beginning of the reign of Yahoyaqim son of
Yoshiyahu, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, this word came
to Yirmeyahu from hWhY, saying,
2 “This is what hWhY said to me, ‘Make for
yourselves bands and yokes. Then you shall put them
on your neck,
3 and shall send them to the sovereign of Eḏom, and
the sovereign of Mo’aḇ, and the sovereign of the
Ammonites, and the sovereign of Tsor, and the
sovereign of Tsiḏon, by the hand of the messengers
who come to Yerushalayim to Tsiḏqiyahu, the
sovereign of Yahuḏah.
4 ‘And you shall command them to say to their
masters, “Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘Say this to your masters,’
5 ‘I have made the earth, the man and the beast that
are on the face of the earth, by My great power and
by My outstretched arm. And I shall give it to whom it
seemed right in My eyes.
1182

JEREMIAH

‘And now, I have given all these lands into the
hand of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel, My
servant. And the beasts of the field I have also given
him to serve him.
7 ‘And all nations shall serve him and his son and
his son’s son, until the time of his land comes. And
then many nations and great sovereigns shall make
him serve them.
8 ‘And it shall be, the nation and reign that do not
serve Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel, and
the one that does not put its neck under the yoke of
the sovereign of Baḇel, that nation I shall punish,’
declares hWhY, ‘with the sword, and the scarcity of
food, and the pestilence, until I have consumed them
by his hand.
9 ‘So do not listen to your neḇi’im, or to your
diviners, or to your dreamers, or to your observers of
clouds, or your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying,
“Do not serve the sovereign of Baḇel.”
10 ‘For they naḇa falsehood to you, to remove you far
from your land. And I shall drive you out, and you shall
perish.
11 ‘But the nations that bring their necks under the
yoke of the sovereign of Baḇel and serve him, I shall
leave in their own land,’ declares hWhY, ‘and they
shall till it and dwell in it.’ ”
12 And I spoke to Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign of
Yahuḏah according to all these words, saying, “Bring
your necks under the yoke of the sovereign of Baḇel,
and serve him and his people, and live!
13 “Why should you die, you and your people, by the
sword, by the scarcity of food, and by the pestilence,
as hWhY has spoken against the nation that does not
serve the sovereign of Baḇel?
6

1183

YIRMEYAHU

“Do not listen to the words of the neḇi’im who
speak to you, saying, ‘Do not serve the sovereign of
Baḇel,’ for they naḇa falsehood to you,
15 for I have not sent them,” declares hWhY, “yet they
naḇa falsehood in My Name, in order that I drive you
out. Then you shall perish, you and the neḇi’im who
naḇa to you.”
16 Then I spoke to the kohenim and to all this people,
saying, “Thus said hWhY, ‘Do not listen to the words
of your neḇi’im who naḇa to you, saying, “See, the
vessels of the House of hWhY, are brought back from
Baḇel soon now,” for they naḇa falsehood to you.
17 ‘Do not listen to them. Serve the sovereign of
Baḇel, and live! Why should this city become a ruin?
18 ‘But if they are neḇi’im, and if the word of hWhY is
with them, let them now make intercession to hWhY of
hosts, that the vessels which are left in the House of
hWhY, and in the house of the sovereign of Yahuḏah,
and at Yerushalayim, shall not go to Baḇel.’
19 “For thus said hWhY of hosts concerning the
columns, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
stands, and concerning the remainder of the vessels
which are left in this city,
20 which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel did
not take, when he exiled Yeḵonyahu the son of
Yahoyaqim, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, from
Yerushalayim to Baḇel, and all the nobles of Yahuḏah
and Yerushalayim 21 thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
concerning the vessels that remain in the House of
hWhY, and in the house of the sovereign of Yahuḏah
and of Yerushalayim:
22 ‘They shall be brought to Baḇel, and be there until
the day that I visit them,’ declares hWhY. ‘Then I shall
bring them back and restore them to this place.’ ”
14

1184

JEREMIAH

28 And it came to be in that year, at the beginning of
the reign of Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, in the
fourth year and in the fifth month, that Ḥananyah son
of Azzur the naḇi, who was from Giḇ’on, spoke to me
in the House of hWhY in the presence of the kohenim
and of all the people, saying,
2 “Thus spoke hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, ‘I have broken the yoke of the sovereign of
Baḇel.
3 Within two years I am going to bring back to this
place all the vessels of the House of hWhY, that
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel removed from
this place and took to Baḇel.
4 ‘And I am going to bring back to this place
Yeḵonyahu son of Yahoyaqim, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, with all the exiles of Yahuḏah who went to
Baḇel,’ declares hWhY, ‘for I am going to break the
yoke of the sovereign of Baḇel.’ ”
5 Then the naḇi Yirmeyahu spoke to the naḇi
Ḥananyah in the presence of the kohenim and in the
presence of all the people who stood in the House of
hWhY,
6 and the naḇi Yirmeyahu said, “Amĕn! hWhY do so!
hWhY establish your words which you have naḇu, to
bring back the vessels of the House of hWhY and all
the exiles from Baḇel to this place!
7 “Only, hear now this word that I speak in your
hearing and in the hearing of all the people:
8 “The neḇi’im who have been before me and before
you of old naḇu against many lands and great reigns,
of battle and of evil and of pestilence.
9 “The naḇi who naḇa of peace - when the word of
the naḇi comes to pass, that naḇi is known as one
whom hWhY has truly sent.”
1185

YIRMEYAHU

And Ḥananyah the naḇi took the yoke off the naḇi
Yirmeyahu’s neck and broke it.
11 And Ḥananyah spoke in the presence of all the
people, saying, “Thus said hWhY, ‘So I shall break the
yoke of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel from the
neck of all nations within two years.’ ” And the naḇi
Yirmeyahu went his way.
12 And the word of hWhY came to Yirmeyahu, after
Ḥananyah the naḇi had broken the yoke from the
neck of the naḇi Yirmeyahu, saying,
13 “Go and speak to Ḥananyah, saying, ‘Thus said
hWhY, “You have broken the yokes of wood, but you
shall make yokes of iron instead.”
14 ‘For thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “I have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all
these nations, to serve Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of
Baḇel. And they shall serve him. And I have also
given him the beasts of the field.” ’ ”
15 And the naḇi Yirmeyahu said to Ḥananyah the
naḇi, “Listen, please, Ḥananyah, hWhY has not sent
you, but you have made this people trust in falsehood.
16 “Therefore thus said hWhY, ‘See, I am sending you
away from the face of the earth. This year you shall
die, for you have spoken apostasy against hWhY.’ ”
17 And Ḥananyah the naḇi died the same year, in the
seventh month.
10

29 And these are the words of the letter which
Yirmeyahu the naḇi sent from Yerushalayim to the rest
of the elders of the exile, and to the kohenim, and to
the neḇi’im and to all the people whom
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had exiled from Yerushalayim to
Baḇel 2 after
Yeḵonyah the sovereign, and the
sovereigness mother, and the eunuchs, and the
1186

JEREMIAH

heads of Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, and the
craftsmen, and the smiths had gone from
Yerushalayim 3 by the hand of El’asah son of Shaphan, and
Gemaryah the son of Ḥilqiyah, whom Tsiḏqiyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah sent to Baḇel, to
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel, saying,
4 “Thus said hWhY of hosts, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, to all
the exiles whom I exiled from Yerushalayim to Baḇel,
5 ‘Build houses and dwell, plant gardens and eat
their fruit.
6 ‘Take wives and bring forth sons and daughters.
And take wives for your sons and give your daughters
to husbands, and let them bear sons and daughters,
and be increased there, and not diminished.
7 ‘And seek the peace of the city where I have exiled
you, and pray to hWhY for it, for in its peace you have
peace.’
8 “For thus said hWhY of hosts, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘Let not your neḇi’im and your diviners who are in your
midst deceive you, neither listen to the dreams which
you are dreaming.
9 ‘For they naḇa falsely to you in My Name. I have
not sent them,’ declares hWhY.
10 “For thus said hWhY, ‘When seventy years are
completed, at Baḇel I shall visit you and establish My
good word toward you, to bring you back to this place.
11 ‘For I know the plans I am planning for you,’
declares hWhY, ‘plans of peace and not of evil, to give
you an expectancy and a latter end.
12 ‘Then you shall call on Me, and shall come and
pray to Me, and I shall listen to you.
13 ‘And you shall seek, and shall find Me, when you
search for Me with all your heart.
14 ‘And I shall be found by you,’ declares hWhY, ‘and
I shall turn back your captivity, and shall gather you
1187

YIRMEYAHU

from all the gentiles and from all the places where I
have driven you, declares hWhY. And I shall bring you
back to the place from which I have exiled you.’
15 “Because you have said, ‘hWhY has raised up
neḇi’im for us in Baḇel’ 16 thus said hWhY concerning the sovereign who sits
on the throne of Dawiḏ, concerning all the people who
dwell in this city, and concerning your brothers who
have not gone out with you into exile,
17 thus said hWhY of hosts, ‘See, I am sending on
them the sword, the scarcity of food, and the
pestilence. And I shall make them like spoilt figs, so
spoilt as to be inedible.
18 ‘And I shall pursue them with the sword, with
scarcity of food, and with pestilence. And I shall make
them a horror among all the reigns of the earth, to be
a curse, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a
reproach among all the gentiles where I have driven
them.
19 ‘For they did not heed My words,’ declares hWhY,
‘which I sent to them by My servants the neḇi’im,
rising up early and sending them, yet you did not
listen,’ declares hWhY.
20 “You, therefore, hear the word of hWhY, all you
exiles whom I have sent from Yerushalayim to Baḇel.
21 “Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
concerning Aḥaḇ son of Qolayah, and Tsiḏqiyahu son
of Ma’asĕyah, who are naḇa falsely to you in My
Name, ‘See, I am giving them into the hand of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, and he shall
smite them before your eyes.
22 ‘And because of them all the exiles of Yahuḏah
who are in Baḇel shall use a curse, saying, “HWHY
make you like Tsiḏqiyahu and Aḥaḇ, whom the
sovereign of Baḇel roasted in the fire,”
1188

JEREMIAH

because they have done wickedness in Yisra’ĕl,
and committed adultery with their neighbours’ wives,
and have spoken a word in My Name falsely which I
have not commanded them. And I am He who knows,
and a witness,’ declares hWhY.
24 “And speak to Shemayahu the Neḥelamite,
saying,
25 “Thus speaks hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘Because you have sent letters in
your name to all the people who are at Yerushalayim,
to Tsephanyah son of Ma’asĕyah the kohĕn, and to
all the kohenim, saying,
26 “HWHY has made you kohĕn instead of Yahoyaḏa
the kohĕn, so that there are overseers in the House
of hWhY over everyone who is mad and makes
himself a naḇi, that you should put him in the stocks
and in the iron collar.
27 “So why have you not reproved Yirmeyahu of
Anathoth who makes himself a naḇi to you?
28 “For he has sent to us in Baḇel, saying, ‘This is
long - build houses and dwell, and plant gardens and
eat their fruit.’ ” ’ ”
29 And Tsephanyah the kohĕn read this letter in the
hearing of Yirmeyahu the naḇi.
30 Then the word of hWhY came to Yirmeyahu,
saying,
31 “Send to all those in exile, saying, ‘Thus said hWhY
concerning Shemayah the Neḥelamite, “Because
Shemayah has naḇu to you, and I have not sent him,
and he has made you to trust on falsehood,”
32 therefore thus said hWhY, “See, I am bringing
punishment upon Shemayah the Neḥelamite and his
seed: he shall have no one to dwell among this
people, nor is he to see the good that I am about to
do for My people,” declares hWhY, “because he has
spoken apostasy against HWHY.” ’ ”
23

1189

YIRMEYAHU

30 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY,
saying,
2 “Thus spoke HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, saying,
‘Write in a book for yourself all the words that I have
spoken to you.
3 ‘For look, the days are coming,’ declares HWHY,
‘when I shall turn back the captivity of My people
Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah,’ declares hWhY, ‘and I shall
bring them back to the land that I gave to their fathers,
and let them possess it.’ ”
4 And these are the words HWHY spoke concerning
Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.
5 “For this is what hWhY said, ‘We have heard a
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.
6 ‘Ask now, and see if a man is giving birth. Why do
I see every man with his hands on his loins like a
woman in labour, and all faces turned pale?
7 ‘Oh! For great is that day, there is none like it. And
it is the time of Ya’aqoḇ’s distress, but he shall be
saved out of it.
8 ‘And it shall be in that day,’ declares HWHY of
hosts, ‘that I break his yoke from your neck, and tear
off your bonds, and foreigners no more enslave them.
9 ‘And they shall serve HWHY their Elohim and Dawiḏ
their sovereign, whom I raise up for them.
10 ‘And you, do not fear, O Ya’aqoḇ My servant,’
declares HWHY, ‘nor be discouraged, O Yisra’ĕl. For
look, I am saving you from afar, and your seed from
the land of their captivity. And Ya’aqoḇ shall return,
and have rest and be at ease, with no one to trouble
him.
11 ‘For I am with you,’ declares hWhY, ‘to save you.
Though I make a complete end of all gentiles where I
have scattered you, yet I do not make a complete end
1190

JEREMIAH

of you. But I shall reprove you in judgment, and by no
means leave you unpunished.’
12 “For thus said hWhY, ‘Your breach is incurable,
your wound is grievous.
13 ‘No one pleads your cause, to bind up. There are
no healing medicines for you.
14 ‘All those loving you have forgotten you, they do
not seek you. For I smote you as an enemy smites,
with cruel chastisement, because your wickedness is
great, your sins have increased.
15 ‘Why do you cry about your breach? Your pain is
incurable. Because of your many wickednesses,
because your sins have increased, I have done this
to you.
16 ‘However, all those who devour you shall be
devoured. And all your adversaries, every one of
them, shall go into captivity. And those who exploit
you shall be exploited, and all who prey upon you I
shall make a prey.
17 ‘For I restore health to you and heal you of your
wounds,’ declares HWHY, ‘for they have called you an
outcast saying, “This is Tsiyon, no one is seeking
her.” ’
18 “Thus said HWHY, ‘See, I turn back the captivity of
Ya’aqoḇ’s tents, and have compassion on his
dwelling places. And the city shall be built upon its
own mound, and the palace stand on its right place.
19 ‘And out of them shall arise thanksgiving and the
voice of those who are laughing. And I shall increase
them, and they shall not diminish. And I shall esteem
them, and they shall not be small.
20 ‘And his children shall be as before, and his
congregation shall be established before Me. And I
shall punish all who oppress them.
21 ‘And his Prince shall be from him, and his Ruler
shall come from among him. And I shall bring him
1191

YIRMEYAHU

near, and he shall approach Me, for who is this who
pledged his heart to approach Me?’ declares HWHY.
22 ‘And you shall be My people, and I shall be your
Elohim.’ ”
23 See, the storm of HWHY shall go forth in a rage, a
whirling storm! It bursts upon the head of the wicked.
24 The burning displeasure of hWhY shall not turn
back until He has done and established the purposes
of His heart. In the latter days you shall understand it.

31 “At that time,” declares hWhY, “I shall be the
Elohim of all the clans of Yisra’ĕl, and they shall be My
people.”
2 Thus said HWHY, “A people escaped from the
sword found favour in the wilderness, Yisra’ĕl, when
it went to find rest.”
3 HWHY appeared to me from afar, “I have loved you
with an everlasting love, therefore I shall draw you
with kindness.
4 “I am going to build you again. And you shall be
rebuilt, O maiden of Yisra’ĕl! Again you shall take up
your tambourines, and go forth in the dances of those
who rejoice.
5 “Again you shall plant vines on the mountains of
Shomeron. The planters shall plant and treat them as
common.
6 “For there shall be a day when the watchmen cry
on Mount Ephrayim, ‘Arise, and let us go up to Tsiyon,
to HWHY our Elohim.’ ”
7 For thus said HWHY, “Sing with gladness for
Ya’aqoḇ, and shout among the chief of the nations.
Cry out, give praise, and say, ‘O hWhY, save Your
people, the remnant of Yisra’ĕl!’
8 “See, I am bringing them from the land of the
north, and shall gather them from the ends of the
1192

JEREMIAH

earth, among them the blind and the lame, those with
child and those in labour, together - a great assembly
returning here.
9 “With weeping they shall come, and with prayers I
bring them. I shall make them walk by rivers of waters,
in a straight way in which they do not stumble. For I
shall be a Father to Yisra’ĕl, and Ephrayim - he is My
first-born.
10 “Hear the word of hWhY, O gentiles, and declare it
in the isles afar off, and say, ‘He who scattered
Yisra’ĕl gathers him, and shall guard him as a
shepherd, his flock.’
11 “For HWHY shall ransom Ya’aqoḇ, and redeem him
from the hand of one stronger than he.
12 “And they shall come in and shall sing on the
height of Tsiyon, and flow toward the goodness of
HWHY, for grain and for new wine and for oil, and for
the young of the flock and the herd. And their being
shall be like a well-watered garden, and never
languish again.
13 “Then shall a maiden rejoice in a dance, and
young men and old, together. And I shall turn their
mourning to joy, and shall comfort them, and shall
make them rejoice from their sorrow,
14 and shall fill the being of the kohenim with fatness.
And My people shall be satisfied with My goodness,”
declares hWhY.
15 Thus said HWHY, “A voice was heard in Ramah,
wailing, bitter weeping, Raḥĕl weeping for her
children, refusing to be comforted for her children,
because they are no more.”
16 Thus said HWHY, “Hold back your voice from
weeping, and your eyes from tears, for there is a
reward for your work,” declares HWHY, “and they shall
return from the land of the enemy.
1193

YIRMEYAHU

“And there is expectancy for your latter end,”
declares HWHY, “and your children shall return to their
own country.
18 “I have clearly heard Ephrayim lamenting, ‘You
have chastised me, and I was chastised, like an
untrained calf. Turn me back, and I shall turn back,
for You are hWhY my Elohim.
19 ‘For after my turning back, I repented. And after I
was instructed, I struck myself on the thigh. I was
ashamed, even humiliated, for I bore the reproach of
my youth.’
20 “Is Ephrayim a precious son to Me, a child of
delights? For though I spoke against him, I still
remembered him. That is why My affections were
deeply moved for him. I have great compassion for
him,” declares HWHY.
21 “Put up signposts, make landmarks; lay your heart
toward the highway, the way in which you went. Turn
back, O maiden of Yisra’ĕl, turn back to these cities
of yours!
22 “Till when would you turn here and there, O
backsliding daughter? For HWHY has created what is
new on earth: a woman encompasses a man!”
23 Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“Let them once again say this word in the land of
Yahuḏah and in its cities, when I turn back their
captivity, ‘HWHY baraḵ you, O home of righteousness,
mountain of qodeshah!’
24 “And in Yahuḏah and all its cities farmers and
those who journey with flocks, shall dwell together.
25 “For I shall fill the weary being, and I shall
replenish every grieved being.”
26 At this I awoke and looked around, and my sleep
was sweet to me.
17

1194

JEREMIAH

“See, the days are coming,” declares HWHY, “that I
shall sow the house of Yisra’ĕl and the house of
Yahuḏah with the seed of man and the seed of beast.
28 “And it shall be, that as I have watched over them
to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down,
and to destroy, and to afflict, so I shall watch over
them to build and to plant,” declares HWHY.
29 “In those days they shall no longer say, ‘The
fathers ate sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are
blunted.’
30 “But each one shall die for his own wickedness whoever eats sour grapes, his teeth shall be blunted.
31 “See, the days are coming,” declares hWhY, “when
I shall make a new Covenant with the house of
Yisra’ĕl and with the house of Yahuḏah,
32 not like the Covenant I made with their fathers in
the day when I took them by the hand to bring them
out of the land of Mitsrayim, My Covenant which they
broke, though I was a husband to them,” declares
hWhY.
33 “For this is the Covenant I shall make with the
house of Yisra’ĕl after those days, declares HWHY: I
shall put My Torah in their inward parts, and write it
on their hearts. And I shall be their Elohim, and they
shall be My people.
34 “And no longer shall they teach, each one his
neighbour, and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know
HWHY,’ for they shall all know Me, from the least of
them to the greatest of them,” declares hWhY. “For I
shall forgive their wickedness, and remember their sin
no more.”
35 Thus said HWHY, who gives the sun for a light by
day, and the laws of the moon and the stars for a light
by night, who stirs up the sea, and its waves roar hWhY of hosts is His Name:
27

1195

YIRMEYAHU

“If these laws vanish from before Me,” declares
HWHY, “then the seed of Yisra’ĕl shall also cease from
being a nation before Me forever.”
37 Thus said HWHY, “If the shamayim above could be
measured, and the foundations of the earth searched
out beneath, I would also cast off all the seed of
Yisra’ĕl for all that they have done,” declares hWhY.
38 “See, the days are coming,” declares HWHY, “that
the city shall be built for HWHY from the Tower of
Ḥanane’ĕl to the Corner Gate.
39 “And the measuring line shall again extend
straight ahead to the hill Garĕḇ, then it shall turn
toward Go’ah.
40 “And all the valley of the dead bodies and of the
ashes, and all the fields as far as the wadi Qiḏron, to
the corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, is to be
qodesh to HWHY. It shall not be plucked up or thrown
down any more forever.”
36

32 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY in
the tenth year of Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah,
which was the eighteenth year of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar.
2 Now at that time the army of the sovereign of
Baḇel besieged Yerushalayim, and Yirmeyahu the
naḇi was shut up in the court of the guard, which was
in the house of the sovereign of Yahuḏah.
3 For Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah had shut
him up, saying, “Why do you neḇuah, saying, ‘Thus
said HWHY, “See, I am giving this city into the hand of
the sovereign of Baḇel, and he shall take it,
4 and Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah shall not
escape from the hand of the Kasdites, but certainly
be given into the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel, and
shall speak with him face to face, and see him eye to
eye,
1196

JEREMIAH

and he shall lead Tsiḏqiyahu to Baḇel, and be
there until I visit him,” declares HWHY, “though you
fight with the Kasdites, you shall not prosper” ’?”
6 And Yirmeyahu said, “The word of hWhY came to
me, saying,
7 ‘See, Ḥaname’ĕl son of Shallum your uncle is
coming to you saying, “Buy my field which is in
Anathoth, for the right of redemption is yours to buy
it.” ’
8 “So Ḥaname’ĕl my uncle’s son came to me in the
court of the guard according to the word of HWHY, and
said to me, ‘Please buy my field that is in Anathoth,
which is in the land of Binyamin, for the right of
inheritance is yours, and the redemption. Buy it for
yourself.’ And I knew that this was the word of HWHY.
9 “And I bought the field which was at Anathoth from
Ḥaname’ĕl, my uncle’s son, and weighed out to him
the silver, seventeen sheqels of silver.
10 “And I signed the deed and sealed it, took
witnesses, and weighed the silver in the scales.
11 “Then I took the deed of purchase - that which was
sealed according to the command and law, and that
which was open 12 and I gave the deed of purchase to Baruḵ son of
Nĕriyah, son of Maḥsĕyah, in the presence of
Ḥaname’ĕl my uncle’s son, and in the presence of the
witnesses who signed the deed of purchase, before
all the Yahuḏim who sat in the court of the guard.
13 “And I commanded Baruḵ before their eyes,
saying,
14 ‘Thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“Take these deeds, both this deed of purchase which
is sealed and this deed which is open, and put them
in an earthen vessel, so that they remain many days.”
5

1197

YIRMEYAHU

‘For thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “Houses and fields and vineyards shall again
be bought in this land.” ’
16 “And after I had given the deed of purchase to
Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah, I prayed to HWHY, saying,
17 ‘Ah, Aḏonai HWHY! See, You have made the
shamayim and the earth by Your great power and
outstretched arm. There is no matter too hard for You,
18 who show kindness to thousands, and repay the
wickedness of the fathers into the bosom of their
children after them - the Great, the Mighty Ĕl, hWhY of
hosts is His Name,
19 great in counsel and mighty in work, for Your eyes
are open to all the ways of the sons of men, to give
everyone according to his ways and according to the
fruit of his deeds.
20 ‘For You have put signs and wonders in the land
of Mitsrayim, to this day, and in Yisra’ĕl and among
other men. And You have made Yourself a Name, as
it is this day.
21 ‘And You have brought Your people Yisra’ĕl out of
the land of Mitsrayim with signs and wonders, with a
strong hand and an outstretched arm, and with great
fearsome deeds.
22 ‘And You gave them this land, of which You swore
to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk
and honey.
23 ‘And they came in and possessed it, but they did
not obey Your voice nor did they walk in Your Torah.
They did not do all that You commanded them to do,
so You brought all this evil upon them.
24 ‘See the siege mounds! They have come to the
city to take it. And the city has been given into the
hand of the Kasdites who fight against it, because of
the sword and the scarcity of food and the pestilence.
15

1198

JEREMIAH

And what You have spoken has come about, and
look, You see it!
25 ‘Yet You, O Aḏonai HWHY, have said to me, “Buy
the field for silver, and take witnesses”! although the
city has been given into the hand of the Kasdites.’ ”
26 Then the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu,
saying,
27 “See, I am HWHY, the Elohim of all flesh. Is there
any matter too hard for Me?”
28 Therefore thus said HWHY, “See, I am giving this
city into the hand of the Kasdites, into the hand of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, and he shall
take it.
29 “And the Kasdites who fight against this city shall
come and light fire to this city and burn it, with the
houses on whose roofs they burned incense to Ba’al
and poured out drink offerings to other mighty ones,
to provoke Me.
30 “For the children of Yisra’ĕl and the children of
Yahuḏah have done only evil before Me, from their
youth. For the children of Yisra’ĕl have only provoked
Me with the work of their hands,” declares HWHY.
31 “For this city has been a cause for My displeasure
and My wrath from the day that they built it, even to
this day that I should remove it from before My face,
32 because of all the evil of the children of Yisra’ĕl
and the children of Yahuḏah, which they have done
to provoke Me - they, their sovereigns, their heads,
their kohenim, their neḇi’im, and the men of Yahuḏah,
and the inhabitants of Yerushalayim.
33 “And they have turned their back to Me, and not
their face - though I taught them, rising up early and
teaching them, they did not listen to receive
instruction.
34 “And they put their abominations in the House
which is called by My Name, to defile it.
1199

YIRMEYAHU

“And they built the high places of Ba’al which are
in the Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, to offer up their sons and
their daughters to Moleḵ, which I did not command
them, nor did it come into My heart, that they should
do this abomination, to make Yahuḏah sin.
36 “And now, thus said HWHY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
concerning this city of which you say, ‘It shall be given
into the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel by the sword,
and by scarcity of food, and by pestilence’:
37 ‘See, I am gathering them out of all the lands
where I have driven them in My displeasure, and in
My wrath, and in great rage. And I shall bring them
back to this place, and shall let them dwell in safety.
38 ‘And they shall be My people, and I shall be their
Elohim.
39 ‘And I shall give them one heart and one Way, to
revere Me all the days, for the good of them and of
their children after them.
40 ‘And I shall make an everlasting Covenant with
them, that I do not turn back from doing good to them.
And I shall put My reverence in their hearts so as not
to turn aside from Me.
41 ‘And I shall rejoice over them to do good to them,
and shall plant them in this land in truth, with all My
heart and with all My being.’
42 “For thus said HWHY, ‘As I have brought all this
great evil on this people, so I am bringing on them all
the good that I am speaking to them.
43 ‘And fields shall be bought in this land of which you
are saying, “It is a wasteland, without man or beast. It
has been given into the hand of the Kasdites.”
44 ‘Fields shall be bought for silver, and deeds signed
and sealed, and witnesses be called, in the land of
Binyamin, and in the places around Yerushalayim,
and in the cities of Yahuḏah, and in the cities of the
35

1200

JEREMIAH

mountains, and in the cities of the low country, and in
the cities of the Negeḇ. For I shall turn back their
captivity,’ declares HWHY.”

33 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu a
second time, while he was still shut up in the court of
the guard, saying,
2 “Thus said hWhY who made it, HWHY who formed
it to establish it, hWhY is His Name,
3 ‘Call unto Me, and I shall answer you, and show
you greatness and unknowns, which you have not
known.’
4 “For thus said HWHY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
concerning the houses of this city and the houses of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah, which are thrown down
against the siege mounds and the sword,
5 while coming to fight with the Kasdites, and to fill
their places with the corpses of men whom I shall slay
in My displeasure and My wrath, all for whose evil I
have hidden My face from this city.
6 ‘See, I am bringing to it relief and healing. And I
shall heal them and reveal to them the riches of peace
and truth.
7 ‘And I shall turn back the captivity of Yahuḏah and
the captivity of Yisra’ĕl, and shall build them as at the
first,
8 and shall cleanse them from all their wickedness
that they have sinned against Me. And I shall pardon
all their wickednesses that they have sinned and by
which they have transgressed against Me.
9 ‘And it shall be to Me a name of joy, a praise, and
a pride before all nations of the earth, who hear all the
good I am doing to them, and they shall revere and
quiver for all the goodness and all the peace I am
doing to it.’
1201

YIRMEYAHU

“Thus said HWHY, ‘In this place of which you say,
“It is dried up, without man and without beast,” in the
cities of Yahuḏah, in the streets of Yerushalayim that
are deserted, without man and without inhabitant and
without beast, there shall once again be heard
11 the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the
voice of those who are saying, “Praise HWHY of hosts,
for hWhY is good, for His kindness is forever,” of those
who are bringing the offering of praise into the House
of HWHY. For I shall turn back the captivity of the land,
as at the first,’ declares hWhY.
12 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘In this place which is
dried up, without man and without beast, and in all its
cities, there shall once again be a home of shepherds
causing their flocks to lie down.
13 ‘In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the
low country, and in the cities of the Negeḇ, and in the
land of Binyamin, and in the places around
Yerushalayim, and in the cities of Yahuḏah, the flocks
once again pass under the hands of him who counts
them,’ declares hWhY.
14 ‘See, the days are coming,’ declares HWHY, ‘when
I shall establish the good word which I have promised
to the house of Yisra’ĕl and to the house of Yahuḏah:
15 ‘In those days and at that time I cause a Branch of
righteousness to spring forth for Dawiḏ. And He shall
do right-ruling and righteousness in the earth.
16 ‘In those days Yahuḏah shall be saved, and
Yerushalayim dwell in safety. And this is that which
shall be proclaimed to her: ‘hWhY our Righteousness.’
17 “For thus said HWHY, ‘For Dawiḏ there is not to
cease a man to sit on the throne of the house of
Yisra’ĕl.
10

1202

JEREMIAH

‘And for the kohenim, the Lĕwites, there is not to
cease a man to offer burnt offerings before Me, to
kindle grain offerings, and to slaughter continually.’ ”
19 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu, saying,
20 “Thus said HWHY, ‘If you could break My covenant
with the day and My covenant with the night, so that
there be not day and night in their season,
21 then My covenant could also be broken with Dawiḏ
My servant - so that he shall not have a son to reign
upon his throne - and with the Lĕwites, the kohenim,
My attendants.
22 ‘As the host of the shamayim is not counted, nor
the sand of the sea measured, so I increase the
descendants of Dawiḏ My servant and the Lĕwites
who attend upon Me.’ ”
23 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu, saying,
24 “Have you not observed what these people have
spoken, saying, ‘The two clans which HWHY has
chosen have been rejected by Him’? So they have
despised My people, no more to be a nation before
them.
25 “Thus said HWHY, ‘If My covenant is not with day
and night, and if I have not appointed the laws of the
shamayim and earth,
26 then I would also reject the descendants of
Ya’aqoḇ and Dawiḏ My servant, so that I should not
take of his descendants to be rulers over the
descendants of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Ya’aqoḇ. For
I shall turn back their captivity, and have compassion
on them.’ ”
18

34 The word which came to Yirmeyahu from hWhY,
when Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel and all his
army, and all the reigns of the earth under his rule, and
all the people, fought against Yerushalayim and all its
cities, saying,
1203

YIRMEYAHU

“Thus said hWhY the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Go and
speak to Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah and say
to him, “Thus said HWHY, ‘See, I am giving this city
into the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel. And he shall
burn it with fire,
3 and you shall not escape out of his hand, but
certainly be taken and given into his hand. And your
eyes shall see the eyes of the sovereign of Baḇel, and
his mouth shall speak with your mouth, and you shall
go to Baḇel.’ ” ’
4 “But hear the word of HWHY, O Tsiḏqiyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah! Thus HWHY said concerning
you, ‘You shall not die by the sword.
5 ‘In peace you are to die, and as in the burnings of
spices for your fathers, the former sovereigns who
were before you, so they shall burn spices for you and
lament for you, saying, “Alas, master!” ’ For I have
spoken the word,” declares HWHY.
6 And Yirmeyahu the naḇi spoke all these words to
Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign of Yahuḏah in
Yerushalayim,
7 while the sovereign of Baḇel’s army was fighting
against Yerushalayim and all the cities of Yahuḏah
that were left, against Laḵish and Azĕqah. For only
these walled cities remained of the cities of Yahuḏah.
8 The word which came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY,
after Sovereign Tsiḏqiyahu had made a covenant with
all the people who were at Yerushalayim to proclaim
release to them:
9 that everyone was to let his male and female slave
go free, the Iḇri man and the Iḇri woman, no one was
to keep a Yahuḏi, his brother, enslaved.
10 And when all the heads and all the people who had
come into the covenant heard that each one was to
let his male and female slaves go free, and not keep
2

1204

JEREMIAH

them enslaved any longer, they obeyed and released
them.
11 But afterward they changed their minds and made
the male and female slaves return, whom they had let
go free, and brought them into subjection as male and
female slaves.
12 Therefore the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu
from HWHY, saying,
13 “Thus said HWHY the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘I Myself
made a Covenant with your fathers in the day that I
brought them out of the land of Mitsrayim, out of the
house of bondage, saying,
14 “At the end of seven years each one should let his
Iḇri brother go free, who has been sold to him. And
when he has served you six years, you shall let him
go free from you.” But your fathers did not obey Me
nor incline their ear.
15 ‘And you recently turned and did what was right in
My eyes, each man proclaiming release to his
neighbour. And you made a covenant before Me in
the House which is called by My Name.
16 ‘But you turned back and profaned My Name, and
each one of you took back his male and female
slaves, whom he had let go free, at their pleasure,
and brought them into subjection, to be your male and
female slaves.’
17 “Therefore thus said HWHY, ‘You have not obeyed
Me in proclaiming release, each one to his brother
and each one to his neighbour. See, I am proclaiming
release to you,’ declares HWHY, ‘to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the scarcity of food! And I shall
make you a horror to all reigns of the earth.
18 ‘And I shall give the men who are transgressing
My Covenant, who have not established the words of
the covenant which they made before Me, when they
cut the calf in two and passed between the parts of it:
1205

YIRMEYAHU

the heads of Yahuḏah, and the heads of
Yerushalayim, the eunuchs, and the kohenim, and all
the people of the land who passed between the parts
of the calf.
20 ‘And I shall give them into the hand of their
enemies and into the hand of those who seek their
life. And their corpses shall be for food to the birds of
the shamayim and the beasts of the earth.
21 ‘And I shall give Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah
and his heads into the hand of their enemies, and into
the hand of those who seek their life, and into the
hand of the sovereign of Baḇel’s army that has
withdrawn from you.
22 ‘See, I am commanding,’ declares HWHY, ‘and
shall bring them back to this city, and they shall fight
against it and take it and burn it with fire. And I shall
make the cities of Yahuḏah a ruin without inhabitant.’
”
19

35 The word which came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY
in the days of Yahoyaqim son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign
of Yahuḏah, saying,
2 “Go to the house of the Rĕḵaḇites. And you shall
speak to them, and bring them into the House of
HWHY, into one of the rooms, and give them wine to
drink.”
3 And I took Ya’azanyah the son of Yirmeyahu, the
son of Ḥaḇatstsinyah, and his brothers and all his
sons, and all the house of the Rĕḵaḇites,
4 and brought them into the House of HWHY, into the
room of the sons of Ḥanan son of Yiḡdalyahu, a man
of Elohim, which was by the chamber of the heads,
above the room of Ma’asĕyahu son of Shallum, the
keeper of the door.
1206

JEREMIAH

And I put before the sons of the house of the
Rĕḵaḇites bowls filled with wine, and cups, and I said
to them, “Drink wine.”
6 But they said, “We do not drink wine, because
Yonaḏaḇ the son of Rĕḵaḇ, our father, commanded
us, saying, ‘You shall not drink wine, neither you nor
your sons, forever.
7 ‘And do not build a house, neither sow seed, nor
plant a vineyard, nor have any of these, but dwell in
tents all your days, so that you live many days on the
face of the land where you are sojourners.’
8 “So we obeyed the voice of Yonaḏaḇ son of
Rĕḵaḇ, our father, in all that he commanded us, to
drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons,
and our daughters,
9 nor to build ourselves houses to dwell in. And we
have no vineyard, field or seed.
10 “But we dwell in tents, and have obeyed and done
according to all that Yonaḏaḇ our father commanded
us.
11 “And it came to be, when Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel came up into the land, that we
said, ‘Come, let us go to Yerushalayim for fear of the
army of the Kasdites and for fear of the army of the
Arameans.’ So we dwell at Yerushalayim.”
12 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu, saying,
13 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘Go, and you shall say to the men of Yahuḏah and to
the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, “Have you not
received instruction, to obey My Words?” declares
HWHY.
14 “The words of Yonaḏaḇ son of Rĕḵaḇ, which he
commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are
established, and they have not drunk unto this day,
for they have obeyed their father’s command. And as
5

1207

YIRMEYAHU

for Me, I have spoken to you, rising early and
speaking, but you have not obeyed Me.
15 “And I sent to you all My servants the neḇi’im,
rising up early and sending them, saying, ‘Turn, each
one from his evil way, and make good your deeds,
and do not go after other mighty ones to serve them,
and you shall dwell in the land which I have given you
and your fathers.’ But you have not inclined your ear,
nor obeyed Me.
16 “The sons of Yonaḏaḇ son of Rĕḵaḇ have indeed
carried out the command of their father which he
commanded them, but this people has not obeyed
Me.’ ”
17 “Therefore thus said HWHY Elohim of hosts, the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘See, I am bringing on Yahuḏah
and on all the inhabitants of Yerushalayim all the evil
I have pronounced against them, because I have
spoken to them but they did not listen, and I have
called to them but they did not answer.’ ”
18 And Yirmeyahu said to the house of the Rĕḵaḇites,
“Thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘Because you have obeyed the command of Yonaḏaḇ
your father, and guarded all his commands and done
according to all that he commanded you,
19 therefore thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “Of Yonaḏaḇ son of Rĕḵaḇ there shall never
cease to be a man to stand before Me.” ’ ”

36 And it came to be in the fourth year of Yahoyaqim
son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, that this
word came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY, saying,
2 “Take a scroll and write on it all the words that I
have spoken to you against Yisra’ĕl, and against
Yahuḏah, and against all the nations, from the day I
1208

JEREMIAH

spoke to you, from the days of Yoshiyahu even to this
day.
3 “It could be that the house of Yahuḏah hears of all
the evil which I plan to bring upon them, so that each
one turns back from his evil way, and I shall pardon
their wickedness and their sin.”
4 And Yirmeyahu called Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah. And
Baruḵ wrote on a scroll from the mouth of Yirmeyahu,
all the words of HWHY which He had spoken to him.
5 And Yirmeyahu commanded Baruḵ, saying, “I am
shut up, I am unable to enter the House of HWHY.
6 “But you shall enter, and shall read from the scroll
which you have written from my mouth, the words of
HWHY, in the hearing of the people in the House of
HWHY on the day of fasting. And also read them in the
hearing of all Yahuḏah who come from their cities.
7 “It could be that they present their supplication
before HWHY, and they turn back, each one from his
evil way. For great is the displeasure and the wrath
that HWHY has spoken against this people.”
8 And Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah did according to all that
Yirmeyahu the naḇi commanded him, reading from
the book the words of HWHY in the House of HWHY.
9 And it came to be in the fifth year of Yahoyaqim
son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign of Yahuḏah, in the ninth
month, that they called a fast before HWHY to all the
people in Yerushalayim, and to all the people who
came from the cities of Yahuḏah to Yerushalayim.
10 And Baruḵ read from the book the words of
Yirmeyahu in the House of HWHY, in the room of
Gemaryahu son of Shaphan the scribe, in the upper
courtyard at the entry of the New Gate of the House
of HWHY, in the hearing of all the people.
11 And Miḵayahu son of Gemaryahu, son of
Shaphan, heard all the words of HWHY from the book.
1209

YIRMEYAHU

And then he went down to the sovereign’s house,
into the scribe’s room. And there all the heads were
sitting: Elishama the scribe, Delayahu son of
Shemayahu, Elnathan son of Aḵbor, Gemaryahu son
of Shaphan, Tsiḏqiyahu son of Ḥananyahu, and all
the heads.
13 And Miḵayahu told them all the words which he
heard when Baruḵ read the book in the hearing of the
people.
14 Then all the heads sent Yahuḏi son of
Nethanyahu, son of Shelemyahu, son of Kushi, to
Baruḵ, saying, “Take in your hand the scroll from
which you have read in the hearing of the people, and
come.” So Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah took the scroll in his
hand and came to them.
15 And they said to him, “Sit down, please, and read
it in our hearing.” Then Baruḵ read it in their hearing.
16 And it came to be, when they had heard all the
words, that they looked at each other in fear, and said
to Baruḵ, “We are certainly going to report all these
words to the sovereign.”
17 And they asked Baruḵ, saying, “Please explain to
us, how did you write all these words? From his
mouth?”
18 And Baruḵ answered them, “From his mouth he
spoke all these words to me, and I wrote them with
ink in the book.”
19 Then the heads said to Baruḵ, “Go, hide, you and
Yirmeyahu, and let no one know where you are.”
20 And they went to the sovereign, into the court. But
they put the scroll in the room of Elishama the scribe,
and told all the words in the hearing of the sovereign.
21 The sovereign therefore sent Yahuḏi to bring the
scroll, and he took it from the room of Elishama the
scribe. And Yahuḏi read it in the hearing of the
12

1210

JEREMIAH

sovereign and in the hearing of all the heads standing
beside the sovereign.
22 And the sovereign was sitting in the winter house
in the ninth month, with a fire burning on the hearth
before him.
23 Then it came to be, when Yahuḏi had read three
or four columns, that the sovereign cut it with the
scribe’s knife and threw it into the fire that was on the
hearth, until the entire scroll was burned in the fire
that was on the hearth.
24 Yet the sovereign and all his servants who heard
all these words were not afraid, nor did they tear their
garments.
25 Moreover,
Elnathan, and Delayahu, and
Gemaryahu pleaded with the sovereign not to burn
the scroll, but he did not listen to them.
26 And the sovereign commanded Yeraḥme’ĕl son of
the sovereign, and Serayahu son of Azri’ĕl, and
Shelemyahu son of Aḇde’ĕl, to seize Baruḵ the scribe
and Yirmeyahu the naḇi, but HWHY had hid them.
27 And after the sovereign had burned the scroll with
the words which Baruḵ had written from the mouth of
Yirmeyahu, the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu,
saying,
28 “Take another scroll, and write on it all the former
words that were in the first scroll which Yahoyaqim
the sovereign of Yahuḏah has burned,
29 and say to Yahoyaqim sovereign of Yahuḏah,
‘Thus said HWHY, “You have burned this scroll, saying,
‘Why have you written in it that the sovereign of Baḇel
is certainly coming to destroy this land, and cause
man and beast to cease from here?’ ”
30 ‘Therefore thus said HWHY concerning Yahoyaqim
sovereign of Yahuḏah, “He shall have no one to sit on
the throne of Dawiḏ, and his dead body is to be
1211

YIRMEYAHU

thrown out, to the heat of the day and the frost of the
night.
31 “And I shall punish him, and his seed, and his
servants for their wickedness. And I shall bring on
them, and on the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, and on
the men of Yahuḏah all the evil I have spoken against
them. But they did not listen.” ’ ”
32 So Yirmeyahu took another scroll and gave it to
Baruḵ the scribe, son of Nĕriyah, who wrote on it from
the mouth of Yirmeyahu all the words of the book
which Yahoyaqim sovereign of Yahuḏah had burned
in the fire. And many similar words were added to
them.

37 And Sovereign Tsiḏqiyahu son of Yoshiyahu
reigned instead of Konyahu son of Yahoyaqim, whom
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel appointed to
reign in the land of Yahuḏah.
2 But neither he nor his servants nor the people of
the land had listened to the words of HWHY which He
spoke by the naḇi Yirmeyahu.
3 And Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign sent Yahuḵal son of
Shelemyah, and the kohĕn, Tsephanyahu son of
Ma’asĕyah, to the naḇi Yirmeyahu, saying, “Please
pray to HWHY our Elohim for us.”
4 Now Yirmeyahu was still coming and going among
the people, for they had not yet put him in prison.
5 Meanwhile, Pharaoh’s army had departed from
Mitsrayim. And when the Kasdites who were
besieging Yerushalayim heard news of them, they
withdrew from Yerushalayim.
6 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi, saying,
7 “Thus said HWHY the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Say this
to the sovereign of Yahuḏah, who sent you to Me to
1212

JEREMIAH

inquire of Me, “See, Pharaoh’s army which has come
up to help you, shall turn back to Mitsrayim, to their
own land.
8 “And the Kasdites shall return and fight against
this city, and take it and burn it with fire.” ’
9 “Thus said HWHY, ‘Do not deceive yourselves,
saying, “The Kasdites shall go away from us,” for they
do not go.
10 ‘For though you had smitten the entire army of the
Kasdites who are fighting against you, and there
remained only wounded men among them, they
would get up, each man in his tent, and burn the city
with fire.’ ”
11 And it came to be, when the army of the Kasdites
left the siege of Yerushalayim for fear of Pharaoh’s
army,
12 that Yirmeyahu went out of Yerushalayim to go
into the land of Binyamin to receive his portion there
in the midst of the people.
13 And it came to be, as he was in the gate of
Binyamin, a master of the guard was there whose
name was Yiriyah son of Shelemyah, son of
Ḥananyah. And he seized Yirmeyahu the naḇi,
saying, “You are deserting to the Kasdites!”
14 But Yirmeyahu said, “It is a lie! I am not deserting
to the Kasdites.” But he did not listen to him, and
Yiriyah seized Yirmeyahu and brought him to the
heads.
15 And the heads were wroth with Yirmeyahu, and
smote him and put him in prison in the house of
Yahonathan the scribe. For they had made that for a
prison.
16 When Yirmeyahu had entered into the dungeon
and into the cells, then Yirmeyahu remained there
many days.
1213

YIRMEYAHU

And Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign sent and took him
out. And the sovereign asked him secretly in his
house, and said, “Is there any word from HWHY?” And
Yirmeyahu said, “There is.” And he said, “You are
given into the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel!”
18 And Yirmeyahu said to Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign,
“What have I sinned against you, and against your
servants, and against this people, that you have put
me into prison?
19 “Where are your neḇi’im who naḇu to you, saying,
‘The sovereign of Baḇel is not coming against you or
against this land?’
20 “But now, please hear, O my master the
sovereign. Please, let my petition be accepted before
you, and do not make me return to the house of
Yahonathan the scribe, lest I die there.”
21 Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign then gave orders for
Yirmeyahu to be placed in the court of the guard, and
that they should give him daily a piece of bread from
the bakers’ street, until all the bread in the city was
gone. So Yirmeyahu remained in the court of the
guard.
17

38 And Shephatyah son of Mattan, and Geḏalyahu
son of Pashḥur, and Yuḵal son of Shelemyahu, and
Pashḥur son of Malkiyah heard the words which
Yirmeyahu had spoken to all the people, saying,
2 “Thus said HWHY, ‘He who remains in this city shall
die by the sword, by scarcity of food, and by
pestilence, but whoever goes over to the Kasdites
shall live. And his life shall be as a prize to him, and
he shall live.’
3 “Thus said HWHY, ‘This city is certainly given into
the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel’s army, and he
shall take it.’ ”
1214

JEREMIAH

Then the heads said to the sovereign, “Please, let
this man be put to death, because he is weakening
the hands of the men of battle who are left in this city,
and the hands of all the people, by speaking such
words to them. For this man does not seek the peace
of this people, but the evil.”
5 And Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign said, “Look, he is in
your hand. For the sovereign is unable to do any
matter against you.”
6 And they took Yirmeyahu and threw him into the
dungeon of Malkiyahu the sovereign’s son, which was
in the court of the guard, and they let Yirmeyahu down
with ropes. And in the dungeon there was no water,
but mud. So Yirmeyahu sank in the mud.
7 And Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ the Kushite, one of the eunuchs,
who was in the sovereign’s house, heard that they
had put Yirmeyahu in the dungeon. And the sovereign
was sitting at the Gate of Binyamin,
8 And Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ came from the sovereign’s
house and spoke to the sovereign, saying,
9 “My master the sovereign, these men have done
evil in all that they have done to Yirmeyahu the naḇi,
whom they have thrown into the dungeon, and he is
likely to die from hunger in the place where he is, for
there is no more bread in the city.”
10 And the sovereign commanded Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ the
Kushite, saying, “Take thirty men from here with you,
and lift Yirmeyahu the naḇi out of the dungeon before
he dies.”
11 So Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ took the men with him and went
into the house of the sovereign under the treasury,
and took old clothes and old rags from there, and let
them down by ropes into the dungeon to Yirmeyahu.
12 And Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ the Kushite said to Yirmeyahu,
“Please put these old clothes and rags under your
armpits, under the ropes.” And Yirmeyahu did so,
4

1215

YIRMEYAHU

and they pulled Yirmeyahu up with ropes and lifted
him out of the dungeon. And Yirmeyahu remained in
the court of the guard.
14 Then Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign sent and had
Yirmeyahu the naḇi brought to him at the third
entrance of the House of HWHY. And the sovereign
said to Yirmeyahu, “I am asking you a matter. Do not
hide a matter from me.”
15 And Yirmeyahu said to Tsiḏqiyahu, “If I declare it
to you, shall you not put me to death? And if I give
you advice, you shall not listen to me.”
16 But Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign swore secretly to
Yirmeyahu, saying, “As HWHY lives, who made us this
life, I do not put you to death, nor do I give you into
the hand of these men who seek your life.”
17 And Yirmeyahu said to Tsiḏqiyahu, “Thus said
HWHY, the Elohim of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘If
you do indeed surrender to the heads of the
sovereign of Baḇel, then your being shall live, and this
city not be burned with fire. And you and your house
shall live.
18 ‘But if you do not surrender to the heads of the
sovereign of Baḇel, then this city shall be given into
the hand of the Kasdites, and they shall burn it with
fire, and you shall not escape from their hand.’ ”
19 Then Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign said to Yirmeyahu,
“I am afraid of the Yahuḏim who have gone over to
the Kasdites, lest they give me into their hand, and
they maltreat me.”
20 But Yirmeyahu said, “They shall not hand you
over. Please, obey the voice of HWHY which I speak
to you, and let it be well with you, and your life be
spared.
21 “But if you refuse to surrender, this is the word that
HWHY has shown me:
13

1216

JEREMIAH

‘Then see, all the women who are left in the
sovereign of Yahuḏah’s house shall be surrendered
to the heads of the sovereign of Baḇel, and see, they
are saying, “Your close friends have provoked you
and prevailed against you; your feet have sunk in the
mire; they have turned away again.”
23 ‘And they are going to surrender all your wives and
children to the Kasdites, and you yourself shall not
escape from their hand, but be taken by the hand of
the sovereign of Baḇel, and this city shall be burned
with fire.’ ”
24 Then Tsiḏqiyahu said to Yirmeyahu, “Let no one
know of these words, and you shall not die.
25 “But if the heads hear that I have spoken with you,
and they come to you and say to you, ‘Declare to us
now what you have said to the sovereign, and also
what the sovereign said to you. Do not hide it from us,
and we do not put you to death,’
26 then you shall say to them, ‘I presented my petition
before the sovereign, not to send me back to the
house of Yahonathan to die there.’ ”
27 And all the heads came to Yirmeyahu and asked
him. And he informed them according to all these
words that the sovereign had commanded. And they
said no more to him, for the matter was not heard.
28 So Yirmeyahu remained in the court of the guard
until the day that Yerushalayim was taken, and he
was when Yerushalayim was taken.
22

39 In the ninth year of Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of
Yahuḏah, in the tenth month, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel and all his army came against
Yerushalayim, and besieged it.
2 In the eleventh year of Tsiḏqiyahu, in the fourth
month, on the ninth day of the month, the city was
broken into.
1217

YIRMEYAHU

And all the heads of the sovereign of Baḇel came
in and sat in the Middle Gate: Nĕrḡal Sar-Etser,
Samgar-Neḇo, Sarseḵim, Raḇ-Saris, Nĕrḡal SarEtser, Raḇ-Maḡ, and all the rest of the heads of the
sovereign of Baḇel.
4 And it came to be, when Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign
of Yahuḏah and all the men of battle saw them, they
fled and left the city by night, by way of the
sovereign’s garden, by the gate between the two
walls. And he went out toward the desert plain.
5 But the army of the Kasdites pursued them and
overtook Tsiḏqiyahu in the desert plains of Yeriḥo.
And they captured him, and brought him up to
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, to Riḇlah in the
land of Ḥamath, where he spoke judgment on him.
6 And the sovereign of Baḇel slew the sons of
Tsiḏqiyahu before his eyes in Riḇlah. The sovereign
of Baḇel also slew all the nobles of Yahuḏah.
7 And he put out the eyes of Tsiḏqiyahu, and bound
him with bronze shackles to bring him to Baḇel.
8 And the Kasdites burned the house of the
sovereign and the houses of the people with fire, and
they broke down the walls of Yerushalayim.
9 And Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, exiled to
Baḇel the remnant of the people who remained in the
city and those who defected to him, with the rest of
the people who were left.
10 But Neḇuzaradan, chief of the guard, left in the
land of Yahuḏah the poor people, who had naught
whatever, and gave them vineyards and fields on the
same day.
11 And Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel gave
an order concerning Yirmeyahu to Neḇuzaraḏan,
chief of the guard, saying,
3

1218

JEREMIAH

“Take him and look after him, and do no harm
whatsoever to him, but do to him even as he shall
speak to you.”
13 And Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, and
Neḇushazban the Raḇsaris, Nĕrḡal-Sar-Etser the
Raḇmaḡ, and all the sovereign of Baḇel’s chief
officers sent,
14 and had Yirmeyahu taken from the court of the
guard, and gave him to Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam,
son of Shaphan, to take him home. And he dwelt
among the people.
15 And the word of HWHY had come to Yirmeyahu
while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying,
16 “Go, and you shall speak to Eḇeḏ-Meleḵ the
Kushite, saying, ‘Thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am bringing My words upon this
city for evil and not for good, and they shall be before
you in that day.
17 “And I shall deliver you in that day,” declares
HWHY, “so that you are not given into the hand of the
men of whom you are afraid.
18 “For I shall rescue you, and you shall not fall by
the sword. But your life shall be as a prize to you, for
you have put your trust in Me,” declares HWHY.’ ”
12

40 The word that came to Yirmeyahu from HWHY
after Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, had let him go
from Ramah, when he had taken him bound in chains
among all the exiles from Yerushalayim and Yahuḏah,
who were being exiled to Baḇel.
2 And the chief of the guard took Yirmeyahu and
said to him, “HWHY your Elohim has spoken this evil
on this place.
3 “And HWHY has brought it on, and has done, as He
has said. Because you have sinned against HWHY,
1219

YIRMEYAHU

and did not obey His voice, therefore this matter has
come upon you.
4 “And now, see, I loosen you today from the chains
that were on your hand. If it seems good to you to
come with me to Baḇel, come, and I shall look after
you. But if it seems wrong for you to come with me to
Baḇel, remain here. See, all the land is before you, go
wherever it seems good and right for you to go.”
5 And before he replied, “Or go back to Geḏalyahu
son of Aḥiqam, son of Shaphan, whom the sovereign
of Baḇel has made governor over the cities of
Yahuḏah, and dwell with him among the people, or go
wherever it seems right for you to go.” And the chief
of the guard gave him provisions and a gift and let him
go.
6 So Yirmeyahu went to Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam,
to Mitspah, and dwelt with him among the people who
were left in the land.
7 And all the commanders of the armies who were
in the fields, they and their men, heard that the
sovereign of Baḇel had made Geḏalyahu son of
Aḥiqam governor in the land, and had put him in
charge of the men, and women, and children, and the
poor of the land who had not been exiled to Baḇel.
8 So they came to Geḏalyahu at Mitspah - Yishma’ĕl
the son of Nethanyahu, and Yoḥanan and
Yahonathan the sons of Qarĕaḥ, and Serayah the
son of Tanḥumeth, and the sons of Ophai the
Netophathite and Yezanyahu the son of a
Ma’aḵathite, they and their men.
9 And Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, son of Shaphan,
swore to them and their men, saying, “Do not be
afraid of serving the Kasdites. Dwell in the land and
serve the sovereign of Baḇel, and it shall be well with
you.
1220

JEREMIAH

“And I, see, I am dwelling at Mitspah, to serve the
Kasdites who come to us. But you, gather wine and
summer fruit and oil, and put them in your vessels,
and dwell in your cities which you have taken.”
11 Also, when all the Yahuḏim who were in Mo’aḇ,
and among the Ammonites, and in Eḏom, and who
were in all the lands, heard that the sovereign of
Baḇel had left a remnant of Yahuḏah, and that he had
appointed over them Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, son
of Shaphan,
12 then all the Yahuḏim returned from all the places
where they had been driven, and came to the land of
Yahuḏah, to Geḏalyahu at Mitspah, and gathered
wine and summer fruit in large quantities.
13 And Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ and all the
commanders of the army that were in the fields came
to Geḏalyahu at Mitspah,
14 and they said to him, “Do you know that Ba’alis
sovereign of the Ammonites has sent Yishma’ĕl son
of Nethanyah to take your life?” But Geḏalyahu son
of Aḥiqam would not believe them.
15 Then Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ spoke secretly to
Geḏalyahu in Mitspah, saying, “Please let me go and
smite Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah, without anyone
knowing it. Why should he murder you, and so let all
the Yahudim who are gathered to you be scattered,
and the remnant in Yahuḏah perish?”
16 But Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam said to Yohanan
son of Qarĕaḥ, “Do not do this matter, for what you
are saying about Yishma’ĕl is not true.”
10

41 And in the seventh month it came to be that
Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah, son of Elishama, of the
royal seed, and of the officers of the sovereign, came
with ten men to Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, at Mitspah.
And while they ate bread together there in Mitspah,
1221

YIRMEYAHU

Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah, and the ten men who
were with him, arose and smote Geḏalyahu son of
Aḥiqam, son of Shaphan, with the sword, and killed
him whom the sovereign of Baḇel had made governor
over the land.
3 And Yishma’ĕl smote all the Yahuḏim who were
with him, with Geḏalyahu at Mitspah, and the
Kasdites who were found there, the men of battle.
4 And it came to be, on the second day after he had
killed Geḏalyahu, when no one yet knew it,
5 that men came from Sheḵem, from Shiloh, and
from Shomeron, eighty men with their beards shaved
and their garments torn, having cut themselves, with
offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to
the House of HWHY.
6 And Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah went out from
Mitspah to meet them, weeping as he walked along.
And it came to be, as he met them, that he said to
them, “Come to Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam!”
7 And it came to be, when they came inside the city,
that Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah slew them into a pit,
he and the men who were with him.
8 But ten men were found among them who said to
Yishma’ĕl, “Do not kill us, for we have wheat, and
barley, and oil, and honey hidden in the field.” So he
held back and did not kill them among their brothers.
9 And the pit into which Yishma’ĕl had thrown all the
corpses of the men whom he had slain, because of
Geḏalyahu, was the same one Asa the sovereign had
made for fear of Ba’asha sovereign of Yisra’ĕl Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyahu had filled it with the
slain.
10 Then Yishma’ĕl took captive all the rest of the
people who were in Mitspah, the sovereign’s
daughters and all the people who were left in Mitspah,
2

1222

JEREMIAH

whom Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, had
entrusted to Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam. And
Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyahu took them captive and
went to go over to the Ammonites.
11 But Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ and all the
commanders of the army that were with him heard of
all the evil that Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah had done,
12 so they took all the men and went to fight with
Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah. And they found him by
the great pool that is in Giḇ’on.
13 And it came to be, when all the people who were
with Yishma’ĕl saw Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and all
the commanders of the army who were with him, that
they were glad.
14 And all the people whom Yishma’ĕl had taken
captive from Mitspah turned around, and came back,
and went to Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ.
15 But Yishma’ĕl the son of Nethanyah escaped from
Yoḥanan with eight men and went to the Ammonites.
16 Then Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and all the
commanders of the army that were with him, took
from Mitspah all the rest of the people whom he had
recovered from Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah after he
had murdered Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam - the mighty
men of battle and the women and the children and the
eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Giḇ’on.
17 And they departed and dwelt in the lodging place
of Kimham, which is near Bĕyth Leḥem, to go to enter
Mitsrayim,
18 because of the Kasdites. For they were afraid of
them, because Yishma’ĕl son of Nethanyah had
smitten Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, whom the
sovereign of Baḇel had made governor in the land.

42 Then all the commanders of the army, and
Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and Yezanyah son of
1223

YIRMEYAHU

Hoshayah, and all the people, from the least to the
greatest, came near
2 and said to Yirmeyahu the naḇi, “We beg you, let
our petition be acceptable to you, and pray for us to
HWHY your Elohim, for all this remnant, for we are few
left of many, as your eyes see us.
3 “And let HWHY your Elohim show us the way in
which we should walk and the word we should do.”
4 And Yirmeyahu the naḇi said to them, “I have
heard. See, I am praying to HWHY your Elohim
according to your words, and it shall be that I declare
to you all the word HWHY answers you. I withhold not
a word from you.”
5 And they said to Yirmeyahu, “Let HWHY be a true
and steadfast witness between us, if we do not do
according to all the word which HWHY your Elohim
sends us by you.
6 “Whether good or evil, let us obey the voice of
HWHY our Elohim to whom we send you, in order that
it might be well with us when we obey the voice of
HWHY our Elohim.”
7 And after ten days it came to be that the word of
HWHY came to Yirmeyahu.
8 So he called Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and all the
commanders of the army which were with him, and all
the people from the least even to the greatest,
9 and said to them, “Thus said HWHY, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, to whom you sent me to present your petition
before Him,
10 ‘If you would indeed stay in this land, then I shall
build you and not pull you down, and I shall plant you
and not pluck you up. For I have relented of the evil I
have done to you.
11 ‘Do not be afraid of the sovereign of Baḇel, of
whom you are afraid. Do not be afraid of him,’
1224

JEREMIAH

declares HWHY, ‘for I am with you, to save you and
deliver you from his hand.
12 ‘And I shall show you compassion, so that he has
compassion on you and let you return to your own
land.’
13 “But if you say, ‘We are not staying in this land,’
and so disobey the voice of HWHY your Elohim,
14 saying, ‘No, but we are going to the land of
Mitsrayim so that we see no fighting, nor hear the
sound of the ram’s horn, nor hunger for bread, and
there we shall stay,’
15 then hear the word of HWHY, O remnant of
Yahuḏah! Thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘If you indeed turn your faces to enter
Mitsrayim, and shall go to sojourn there,
16 then it shall be that the sword which you feared
overtakes you there in the land of Mitsrayim, and the
scarcity of food of which you were afraid clings to you
there in Mitsrayim, and you die there.
17 ‘And so it shall be with all the men who turned their
faces to go to Mitsrayim to sojourn there: they shall
die by the sword, by scarcity of food, and by
pestilence, and not one of them shall survive or
escape from the evil I am bringing upon them.’
18 “For thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘As My displeasure and My wrath have been
poured out on the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, so
shall My wrath be poured out on you when you enter
Mitsrayim. And you shall be an oath, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach, and you
shall see this place no more.’
19 “HWHY has spoken about you, O remnant of
Yahuḏah, ‘Do not go to Mitsrayim!’ Know for certain
that I have warned you this day.
20 “For you deceived yourselves when you sent me
to HWHY your Elohim, saying, ‘Pray for us to HWHY our
1225

YIRMEYAHU

Elohim, and according to all that HWHY your Elohim
says, so declare to us and we shall do it.’
21 “So I have declared it to you today, but you have
not obeyed the voice of HWHY your Elohim in all which
He has sent me to you.
22 “And now, know for certain that you shall die by
the sword, by scarcity of food, and by pestilence in
the place where you have desired to go to sojourn.”

43 And it came to be, when Yirmeyahu had ended
speaking all these words to all the people - all the
words of HWHY their Elohim, for which HWHY their
Elohim had sent him to them 2 that Azaryahu son of Hoshayah, and Yoḥanan son
of Qarĕaḥ, and all the proud men spoke, saying to
Yirmeyahu, “You are speaking a lie! HWHY our Elohim
has not sent you to say, ‘Do not go to Mitsrayim to
sojourn there.’
3 “For Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah is moving you against
us, to give us into the hand of the Kasdites, to put us
to death or exile us to Baḇel.”
4 So Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ, and all the
commanders of the army, and all the people
disobeyed the voice of HWHY, to stay in the land of
Yahuḏah.
5 And Yoḥanan son of Qarĕaḥ and all the
commanders of the army took all the remnant of
Yahuḏah who had returned to dwell in the land of
Yahuḏah, from all nations where they had been
driven 6 the men, and the women, and the children, and
the sovereign’s daughters, and every being whom
Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, had left with
Geḏalyahu son of Aḥiqam, son of Shaphan, and
Yirmeyahu the naḇi, and Baruḵ son of Nĕriyah.
1226

JEREMIAH

So they went to the land of Mitsrayim, for they
disobeyed the voice of HWHY. And they went as far as
Taḥpanḥes.
8 And the word of HWHY came to Yirmeyahu in
Taḥpanḥes, saying,
9 “Take large stones in your hand, and you shall
hide them before the eyes of the men of Yahuḏah, in
the clay in the brick courtyard which is at the entrance
to Pharaoh’s house in Taḥpanḥes.
10 “Then you shall say to them, ‘Thus said HWHY of
hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am sending, and
I shall bring Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel,
My servant. And I shall place his throne above these
stones that I have hidden. And he shall spread his
canopy over them.
11 “And he shall come and smite the land of
Mitsrayim. Death to those for death, and captivity to
those for captivity, and the sword to those for the
sword.
12 “And he shall light fire to the houses of the mighty
ones of Mitsrayim. And he shall burn them and take
them captive. And he shall cover himself with the land
of Mitsrayim, as a shepherd puts on his garment, and
he shall go out from there in peace.
13 “And he shall break the stone pillars of Bĕyth
Shemesh which are in the land of Mitsrayim, and he
shall burn the houses of the mighty ones of the
Mitsrites with fire.” ’ ”
7

44 The word that came to Yirmeyahu concerning all
the Yahuḏim who were dwelling in the land of
Mitsrayim - who were dwelling at Miḡdol, and at
Taḥpanḥes, and at Noph, and in the land of Pathros,
saying,
2 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
‘You yourselves have seen all the evil that I have
1227

YIRMEYAHU

brought on Yerushalayim and on all the cities of
Yahuḏah. And see, this day they are a ruin, and no
one dwells in them,
3 because of their evil which they have done to
provoke Me, by going to burn incense by serving
other mighty ones whom they did not know, they nor
you nor your fathers.
4 ‘And I sent to you all My servants the neḇi’im,
rising early and sending them, saying, “Please do not
do this abominable matter that I hate!”
5 ‘But they did not listen or incline their ear, to turn
from their evil, not to burn incense to other mighty
ones.
6 ‘So My wrath and My displeasure were poured out
and burned in the cities of Yahuḏah and in the streets
of Yerushalayim, and they became a ruin and a
wasteland, as it is this day.’
7 “And now, thus said HWHY, the Elohim of hosts, the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Why are you doing this great evil
against your lives, to cut off from you man and
woman, child and infant, from the midst of Yahuḏah,
leaving none to remain,
8 by provoking Me with the works of your hands, by
burning incense to other mighty ones in the land of
Mitsrayim where you have gone to dwell, to cut
yourselves off and be a curse and a reproach among
all the nations of the earth?
9 ‘Have you forgotten the evils of your fathers, and
the evils of the sovereigns of Yahuḏah, and the evils
of their wives, and your own evils, and the evils of
your wives, which they have done in the land of
Yahuḏah and in the streets of Yerushalayim?
10 ‘To this day they have not been humbled, nor have
they revered, nor have they walked in My Torah and
in My Laws that I put before you and your fathers.’
1228

JEREMIAH

“Therefore thus said HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘See, I am turning My face against you for
evil and for cutting off all Yahuḏah.
12 ‘And I shall take the remnant of Yahuḏah who
have turned their faces to go into the land of
Mitsrayim to sojourn there. And they shall all be
consumed in the land of Mitsrayim - fall by the sword,
consumed by scarcity of food. From the least to the
greatest they shall die, by the sword and by scarcity
of food. And they shall be a cursing and an
astonishment and a curse and a reproach!
13 ‘And I shall punish those dwelling in the land of
Mitsrayim, as I have punished Yerushalayim, by the
sword, by scarcity of food, and by pestilence.
14 ‘And none of the remnant of Yahuḏah who have
gone into the land of Mitsrayim to sojourn there shall
escape or survive, lest they return to the land of
Yahuḏah, to which they are longing to return to dwell
there. For they shall not return, except those who
escape.’ ”
15 Then all the men who knew that their wives had
burned incense to other mighty ones, and all the
women who stood by, a great assembly, and all the
people who dwelt in the land of Mitsrayim, in Pathros,
answered Yirmeyahu, saying,
16 “We are not going to listen to you in the matter
about which you spoke to us in the Name of HWHY!
17 “But we shall do whatever has gone out of our own
mouth, to burn incense to the sovereigness of the
heavens and pour out drink offerings to her, as we
have done, we and our fathers, our sovereigns and
our heads, in the cities of Yahuḏah and in the streets
of Yerushalayim. And we had plenty of food, and were
well-off, and saw no evil.
18 “But since we ceased burning incense to the
sovereigness of the heavens and pouring out drink
11

1229

YIRMEYAHU

offerings to her, we have lacked all and have been
consumed by the sword and by scarcity of food.
19 “And when we burned incense to the sovereigness
of the heavens and poured out drink offerings to her,
did we make cakes for her, to idolize her, and pour
out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?”
20 Then Yirmeyahu spoke to all the people - to the
men and to the women, and to all the people who had
given him that answer, saying,
21 “As for the incense that you burned in the cities of
Yahuḏah and in the streets of Yerushalayim, you and
your fathers, your sovereigns and your heads, and
the people of the land, did not HWHY remember them?
And it came into His heart!
22 “And HWHY could no longer bear it, because of the
evil of your deeds and because of the abominations
which you did. Therefore your land is a ruin, an object
of astonishment, a curse, and without an inhabitant,
as it is this day.
23 “Because you have burned incense and because
you have sinned against HWHY, and did not obey the
voice of HWHY or walk in His Torah, in His Laws or in
His Witnesses, therefore this evil has befallen you, as
at this day.”
24 And Yirmeyahu said to all the people and to all the
women, “Hear the word of HWHY, all Yahuḏah who are
in the land of Mitsrayim!
25 “Thus spoke HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
saying, ‘You and your wives have spoken with your
mouths, and have filled with your hands, saying, “We
shall perform our vows that we have made, to burn
incense to the sovereigness of the heavens and pour
out drink offerings to her.” Then confirm your vows
and perform your vows!’
1230

JEREMIAH

“Therefore hear the word of HWHY, all Yahuḏah
who are dwelling in the land of Mitsrayim, ‘See, I have
sworn by My great Name,’ declares HWHY, ‘My Name
shall no longer be called upon by the mouth of any
man of Yahuḏah in all the land of Mitsrayim, saying,
“As the Aḏon HWHY lives…”
27 ‘See, I am watching over them for evil and not for
good. And all the men of Yahuḏah who are in the land
of Mitsrayim shall be consumed by the sword and by
scarcity of food, until they come to an end.
28 ‘And those who escape the sword, few in number,
shall return from the land of Mitsrayim to the land of
Yahuḏah. And all the remnant of Yahuḏah, who came
into the land of Mitsrayim to sojourn there, shall know
whose word is established, Mine or theirs.
29 ‘And this is the sign to you,’ declares HWHY, ‘that I
am punishing you in this place, so that you know that
My words are certainly established against you for
evil.’
30 “Thus said HWHY, ‘See, I am giving Pharaoh
Ḥophra sovereign of Mitsrayim into the hand of his
enemies and into the hand of those who seek his life,
as I gave Tsiḏqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah into the
hand of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, his
enemy who sought his life.’ ”
26

45 The word that Yirmeyahu the naḇi spoke to Baruḵ
son of Nĕriyah, when he had written these words in a
book from the mouth of Yirmeyahu, in the fourth year
of Yahoyaqim son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, saying,
2 “Thus said HWHY, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
concerning you, Baruḵ:
3 ‘You have said, “Woe to me now! For HWHY has
added grief to my pain. I have been wearied with my
sighing, and I have found no rest.” ’
1231

YIRMEYAHU

“Say this to him, ‘Thus said HWHY, “See, what I
have built I am breaking down, and what I have
planted I am plucking up, that is, the entire land.
5 “And do you seek great matters for yourself? Do
not seek them, for look, I am bringing evil on all flesh,”
declares HWHY. “But I shall give your life to you as a
prize in all places, wherever you go.” ’ ”
4

46 The word of HWHY which came to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi concerning the gentiles:
2 For Mitsrayim, concerning the army of Pharaoh
Neḵo, sovereign of Mitsrayim, which was by the River
Perath in Karkemish, and which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the
sovereign of Baḇel had smitten in the fourth year of
Yahoyaqim, son of Yoshiyahu, sovereign of
Yahuḏah:
3 “Prepare the large and the small shield, and draw
near to battle!
4 “Harness the horses, and mount up, you
horsemen! Stand with helmets, polish the spears, put
on the armour!
5 “Why do I see them afraid, turned back? And their
fighters are beaten down. And they have fled in haste,
and did not look back, for fear was all around,”
declares HWHY.
6 Do not let the swift flee away, nor the mighty man
escape. They shall stumble and fall toward the north,
by the River Perath.
7 Who is this rising like a flood, whose waters surge
about like the rivers?
8 Mitsrayim rises like a flood, and its waters surge
about like the rivers. And he says, ‘Let me rise and
cover the earth; let me destroy the city and its
inhabitants.’
1232

JEREMIAH

Go up, O horses, and rage, O chariots! And let the
mighty men go forth - Kush and Put who handle the
shield, and Luḏ who handle and bend the bow.
10 For this is the day of the Aḏon HWHY of hosts, a
day of vengeance, to revenge Himself on His
adversaries. And the sword shall devour, and be
satisfied and made drunk with their blood. For the
Aḏon HWHY of hosts has a slaughtering in the land of
the north by the River Perath.
11 Go up to Gil’aḏ and take balm, O maiden, the
daughter of Mitsrayim. In vain you have used many
remedies, there is no healing for you.
12 Nations have heard of your shame, and your cry
has filled the land. For the mighty has stumbled
against the mighty, they have both fallen together.
13 The word which HWHY spoke to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi, about the coming of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign
of Baḇel, to smite the land of Mitsrayim:
14 “Declare in Mitsrayim, and let it be heard in Miḡdol.
And let it be heard in Noph and in Taḥpanḥes. Say,
‘Stand fast and be prepared, for a sword shall devour
all around you.’
15 “Why were your strong ones swept away? They
did not stand because HWHY drove them away.
16 “He made many stumble; indeed, they fell over
each other, and said, ‘Arise! Let us go back to our
own people, and to the land of our birth, away from
the oppressing sword.’
17 “There they cried, ‘Pharaoh, sovereign of
Mitsrayim, is but a noise. He has let the appointed
time pass by!’
18 “As I live,” declares the Sovereign, whose Name
is HWHY of hosts, “For as Taḇor is among the
mountains, and as Karmel by the sea, he shall come.
9

1233

YIRMEYAHU

“O you daughter dwelling in Mitsrayim, prepare
yourself to go into exile! For Noph shall become a
waste and a ruin, and be burned, without inhabitant.
20 “Mitsrayim is like a very pretty heifer, but
destruction comes, it comes from the north.
21 “Her hired ones too, in her midst, are like fattened
calves, for they too shall turn, they shall flee away
together. They shall not stand, for the day of their
calamity has come upon them, the time of their
punishment.
22 “Its sound moves along like a serpent, for they
move on like an army and come against her with
axes, like woodcutters.
23 “They shall cut down her forest,” declares HWHY,
“for it is not searched, because they are more
numerous than locusts, and without number.
24 “The daughter of Mitsrayim shall be put to shame.
She shall be given into the hand of the people of the
north.”
25 HWHY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, has said,
“See, I am bringing punishment on Amon of No, and
on Pharaoh, and on Mitsrayim, and on their mighty
ones, and on their sovereigns, and on Pharaoh and
on those trusting in him.
26 “And I shall give them into the hand of those who
seek their lives, into the hand of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel and into the hand of his servants.
And afterward it shall be inhabited as in the days of
old,” declares HWHY.
27 “But as for you, do not fear, O My servant Ya’aqoḇ,
and do not be discouraged, O Yisra’ĕl! For look, I am
saving you from afar, and your descendants from the
land of their captivity. And Ya’aqoḇ shall return, and
shall have rest and be at ease, with no one disturbing.
19

1234

JEREMIAH

“Do not fear, O Ya’aqoḇ My servant,” declares
HWHY, “for I am with you. Though I make a complete
end of all the gentiles to which I have driven you, yet
I do not make a complete end of you. But I shall
reprove you in right-ruling, and by no means leave
you unpunished.”

28

47 The word of HWHY that came to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi concerning the Pelishtites, before Pharaoh smote
Azzah:
2 Thus said HWHY, “See, waters are rising out of the
north, and shall be an overflowing flood. And they
shall overflow the land and all that is in it, the city and
those who dwell within. And men shall cry, and all the
inhabitants of the land shall wail.
3 “At the noise of the stamping hooves of his strong
horses, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling
of his wheels, the fathers shall not look to their
children, because of weakness of hands,
4 because of the day that shall come to ravage all
the Pelishtites, to cut off from Tsor and Tsiḏon every
helper that survives. For HWHY is ravaging the
Pelishtites, the remnant of the isle of Kaphtor.
5 “Baldness shall come upon Azzah, Ashqelon shall
be cut off with the remnant of their valley. Till when
would you cut yourself?
6 “O you sword of hWhY, how long till you rest? Put
yourself up into your sheath, rest and be still!
7 “How shall it rest, when hWhY has given it a
command? Against Ashqelon and against the
seashore - there He has appointed it.”

48 Concerning Mo’aḇ. This is what HWHY of hosts,
the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl said, “Woe to Neḇo! For it is
ravaged, Qiryathayim is put to shame, captured. The
high stronghold is put to shame and broken down.
1235

YIRMEYAHU

“There is praise for Mo’aḇ no longer. In Ḥeshbon
they have devised evil against her, ‘Come and let us
cut it off as a nation.’ O Maḏmĕn, you are also cut off,
a sword goes after you.
3 “Listen! An outcry from Ḥoronayim, ravaging and
great destruction!
4 “Mo’aḇ shall be destroyed, her little ones shall cry
out.
5 “For on the ascent to Luḥith they go up weeping
bitterly. For in the descent of Ḥoronayim the enemies
shall hear a cry of destruction.
6 “Flee, deliver your own lives! And be like a bush in
the wilderness.
7 “For because you have trusted in your works and
your treasures, you shall be captured. And Kemosh
shall go forth into exile, his priests and his heads
together.
8 “And a ravager shall come into every city, no one
escapes. And the valley shall perish, and the plain be
destroyed, as hWhY has spoken.
9 “Give wings to Mo’aḇ, for she has to flee away,
and her cities become a ruin, with no one to dwell in
them.
10 “Cursed is he who is slack in doing the work of
hWhY, and cursed is he who withholds his sword from
blood.
11 “Mo’aḇ has been at ease from his youth, and he
has settled on his dregs, and has not been emptied
from vessel to vessel, nor has he gone into exile.
Therefore his flavour has stayed in him, and his
fragrance is unchanged.
12 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “when I shall send him tilters, who shall tilt him
over and empty his vessels and break the pitchers.
2

1236

JEREMIAH

“And Mo’aḇ shall be ashamed because of
Kemosh, as the house of Yisra’ĕl was ashamed of
Bĕyth Ĕl, their refuge.
14 “How do you say, ‘We are mighty and strong men
for battle’?
15 “Mo’aḇ is ravaged and her cities have been
entered. And her chosen young men have gone down
to the slaughter,” declares the Sovereign, whose
Name is hWhY of hosts.
16 “The calamity of Mo’aḇ is near to come and his
affliction hurries fast.
17 “Lament for him, all you who are around him. And
all you who know his name, say, ‘How the strong
sceptre has been broken, the staff of splendour!’
18 “Come down from your esteem, and sit in thirst, O
inhabitant, daughter of Diḇon. For the ravager of
Mo’aḇ shall come against you, he shall destroy your
strongholds.
19 “Stand by the way and watch, O inhabitant of
Aro’ĕr. Ask him who flees and her who escapes; say,
‘What has been done?’
20 “Mo’aḇ has been put to shame, for it has been
broken down. Howl and cry! Let it be heard in Arnon
that Mo’aḇ is ravaged.
21 “And judgment has come on the plain country, on
Ḥolon and on Yahatsah and on Mopha’ath,
22 and on Diḇon and Neḇo and on Bĕyth
Diḇlathayim,
23 and on Qiryathayim and on Bĕyth Gamul and on
Bĕyth Me’on,
24 and on Qeriyoth and on Botsrah and on all the
cities of the land of Mo’aḇ, far and near.
25 “The horn of Mo’aḇ has been cut off, and his arm
has been broken,” declares hWhY.
13

1237

YIRMEYAHU

“Make him drunk, because he has made himself
great against hWhY. Mo’aḇ shall splash in his vomit,
and he shall also be in mockery.
27 “And was not Yisra’ĕl a mockery to you? Was he
found among thieves? For whenever you speak of
him, you shake your head.
28 “O inhabitants of Mo’aḇ, leave the cities and dwell
in the rock, and be like the dove making a nest in the
sides of the cave’s mouth.
29 “We have heard of the pride of Mo’aḇ. He is very
proud of his loftiness and arrogance and pride, and of
the haughtiness of his heart.”
30 “I know his wrath,” declares hWhY, “and his
boastings are untrue. His deeds are false.
31 “Therefore I wail for Mo’aḇ, and I cry out for all
Mo’aḇ. I mourn for the men of Qir Ḥeres.
32 “O vine of Siḇmah! I weep for you with the weeping
of Ya’zĕr. Your branches have passed over the sea,
they have come to the sea of Ya’zĕr. The ravager has
fallen on your summer fruit and your grape harvest.
33 “Joy and gladness have been taken away from the
orchard and from the land of Mo’aḇ. And I have made
wine to cease from the winepresses. No one treads
with shouting - the shouting is no shouting!
34 “From the outcry of Ḥeshbon unto El’alĕh, unto
Yahats, they shall raise their voice, from Tso’ar to
Ḥoronayim, like a three-year-old heifer, for even the
waters of Nimrim are dried up.
35 “And I shall make an end in Mo’aḇ to him who
offers in the high places and burns incense to his
mighty ones,” declares hWhY.
36 “So My heart sounds for Mo’aḇ like flutes, and My
heart sounds for the men of Qir Ḥeres like flutes.
Therefore the wealth they made shall be gone.
26

1238

JEREMIAH

“For every head is bald, and every beard clipped cuts on all the hands, and sackcloth on the loins.
38 “On all the house-tops of Mo’aḇ and in its streets
it is all lamentation, for I have broken Mo’aḇ like a
vessel in which no one delights,” declares hWhY.
39 “How she has been broken down! They shall wail!
How Mo’aḇ has turned her back with shame! So
Mo’aḇ shall be a mockery and a horror to all those
about her.”
40 For thus said hWhY, “See, he soars like an eagle,
and shall spread his wings over Mo’aḇ.
41 “Qeriyoth shall be captured, and the strongholds
seized. And the heart of the mighty men in Mo’aḇ on
that day shall be like the heart of a woman in labour.
42 “And Mo’aḇ shall be destroyed as a people,
because he has made himself great against hWhY.
43 “Fear and the pit and the snare are upon you, O
inhabitant of Mo’aḇ,” declares hWhY.
44 “He who flees from the fear falls into the pit, and
he who gets out of the pit is caught in the snare. For
I am bringing upon Mo’aḇ the year of their
punishment,” declares hWhY.
45 “Those who fled stood powerless under the
shadow of Ḥeshbon. But a fire shall come out of
Ḥeshbon, and a flame from the midst of Siḥon, and
consume the brow of Mo’aḇ and the crown of the
head of the sons of Sha’on.
46 “Woe to you, O Mo’aḇ! The people of Kemosh
have perished, for your sons have been taken into
exile, and your daughters into exile.
47 “But I shall turn back the captivity of Mo’aḇ in the
latter days,” declares hWhY. Thus far is the judgment
of Mo’aḇ.
37

49 Concerning the Ammonites: Thus said hWhY,
“Has Yisra’ĕl no sons? Has he no heir? Why has
1239

YIRMEYAHU

Malkam taken possession of Gaḏ, and his people
dwell in its cities?
2 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “when I shall sound a battle cry in Rabbah of
the Ammonites. And it shall be a heap, a wasteland,
and her villages shall be burned with fire. Then
Yisra’ĕl shall dispossess those who dispossessed
him,” declares HWHY.
3 “Howl, O Ḥeshbon, for Ai is ravaged! Cry,
daughters of Rabbah, gird on sackcloth! Lament and
diligently search by the walls, for Malkam shall go into
exile, with his priests and his heads.
4 “Why do you boast in the valleys, your flowing
valley, O backsliding daughter who is trusting in her
treasures, saying, ‘Who would come against me?’
5 “See, I am bringing fear upon you, from all those
around you,” declares the Aḏon hWhY of hosts. “And
you shall be driven out, each one straight ahead, with
no one to bring home the wanderer.
6 “And after this I turn back the captivity of the
children of Ammon,” declares hWhY.
7 Concerning Eḏom: Thus said hWhY of hosts, “Is
there no more wisdom in Tĕman? Has counsel been
lost to those with understanding? Has their wisdom
vanished?
8 “Flee, turn back, dwell in the depths, O inhabitants
of Deḏan! For I shall bring the calamity of Ĕsaw upon
him, the time that I shall punish him.
9 “If grape-gatherers came to you, would they not
leave some gleaning grapes? Even thieves by night
would destroy until they had enough!
10 “But as for Me, I shall make Ĕsaw bare. I shall
uncover his hiding places, so that he is unable to
conceal himself. His seed is ravaged, his brothers
and his neighbours, and he is no more.
1240

JEREMIAH

“Leave your fatherless children, let Me keep them
alive. And let your widows trust in Me.”
12 For thus said hWhY, “See, those whose judgment
was not to drink of the cup have certainly drunk. And
are you the one to go unpunished? You shall not go
unpunished, but certainly drink of it.
13 “For I have sworn by Myself,” declares hWhY, “that
Botsrah is to become a ruin, a reproach, a waste, and
a curse, and all its cities become everlasting wastes.”
14 I have heard a report from hWhY, and an envoy
has been sent to the nations, “Gather together, come
against her, and rise up to battle!
15 “For look, I shall make you small among nations,
despised among men.
16 “The dread for you, the pride of your heart, has
deceived you, O you who dwell in the clefts of the
rock, holding the height of the hill! Though you make
your nest as high as the eagle, from there I bring you
down,” declares the Aḏon.
17 “And Eḏom shall be a ruin, everyone who passes
by it is astonished and whistles at all its plagues.
18 “As in the overthrow of Seḏom and Amorah and
their neighbouring cities,” declares hWhY, “No one
shall dwell there, nor would a son of man sojourn in
it.
19 “See, he comes up like a lion from the pride of the
Yardĕn against the home of the strong. But in an
instant I shall make him run away from her. And who
is the Chosen One to appoint over her? For who is
like Me? And who summons Me? And who is that
Shepherd who stands before Me?”
20 Therefore hear the counsel of hWhY which He has
counselled concerning Eḏom, and the purposes He
has purposed concerning the inhabitants of Tĕman:
the least of the flock shall drag them away! He shall
make their pasture a waste before them!
11

1241

YIRMEYAHU

The earth shall be shaken at the noise of their fall.
There is an outcry! Its noise is heard at the Sea of
Reeds.
22 See, like an eagle he flies up, and spreads his
wings over Botsrah. And the heart of the mighty men
of Eḏom in that day shall be like the heart of a woman
in her pain.
23 Concerning Dammeseq: “Ḥamath and Arpaḏ have
been put to shame, for they have heard an evil report.
They have been melted in anxiety, like the sea,
unable to rest.
24 “Dammeseq has become feeble, she has turned
to flee, and trembling has seized her. Distress and
pain have taken hold of her like a woman in labour.
25 “How is the city of praise deserted, the city of My
joy!
26 “Therefore her young men fall in her streets, and
all the men of battle are cut off in that day,” declares
hWhY of hosts.
27 “And I shall kindle a fire in the wall of Dammeseq,
and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-Haḏaḏ.”
28 To Qĕḏar and to the reigns of Ḥatsor, which
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel smote: Thus
said hWhY, “Arise, go up to Qĕḏar, and ravage the
men of the East!
29 “Their tents and their flocks, their curtains and all
their vessels shall be taken. And they shall take away
their camels for themselves. And they shall cry out to
them, ‘Fear is on every side!’
30 “Flee, go away! Dwell in the depths, O inhabitants
of Ḥatsor!” declares hWhY. “For Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel has taken counsel against you,
and has devised a plan against you.
21

1242

JEREMIAH

“Arise, go up to the nation at ease that dwells
safely,” declares hWhY. “It has no gates or bars, they
dwell alone.
32 “And their camels shall become plunder, and their
large herds booty. And I shall scatter them to all
winds, those who cut off the corner, and bring their
calamity from all its sides,” declares hWhY.
33 “Ḥatsor shall be a habitation for jackals, a desert
forever. No one dwells there, nor does son of man
sojourn in it.”
34 The word of hWhY that came to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi concerning Ĕylam, in the beginning of the reign
of Tsiḏqiyahu, the sovereign of Yahuḏah, saying,
35 “Thus said hWhY of hosts, ‘See, I am breaking the
bow of Ĕylam, the chief of their might.
36 ‘And I shall bring upon Ĕylam the four winds from
the four quarters of the shamayim, and scatter them
toward all those winds. And there shall be no nation
where the outcasts of Ĕylam do not go.
37 ‘And I shall break Ĕylam before their enemies and
before those who seek their life. And I shall bring evil
upon them, my burning displeasure,’ declares hWhY.
‘And I shall send the sword after them until I have
consumed them.
38 ‘And I shall place My throne in Ĕylam, and destroy
from there the sovereign and the heads,’ declares
hWhY.
39 ‘And it shall be in the latter days that turn back the
captivity of Ĕylam,’ declares HWHY.”
31

50 The word that hWhY spoke concerning Baḇel,
concerning the land of the Kasdites by Yirmeyahu the
naḇi.
2 “Declare among the nations, and let it be heard.
And lift up a banner, let it be heard, and do not
conceal it. Say, ‘Baḇel shall be taken, Bĕl shall be put
1243

YIRMEYAHU

to shame, Meroḏaḵ shall be broken, her images shall
be put to shame, her idols shall be broken.’
3 For a nation shall come up against her from the
north, which shall make her land waste, and none
shall dwell in it. They shall flee, they shall go, both
man and beast.
4 “In those days and at that time,” declares hWhY,
“the children of Yisra’ĕl shall come, they and the
children of Yahuḏah together, weeping as they come,
and seek hWhY their Elohim.
5 “They shall ask the way to Tsiyon, their faces
toward it, ‘Come and let us join ourselves to hWhY, in
an everlasting Covenant, never to be forgotten.’
6 “My people have been wandering sheep. Their
shepherds have led them astray, turning them away
on the mountains. They have gone from mountain to
hill, they have forgotten their resting place.
7 “All who found them have devoured them. And
their adversaries have said, ‘We are not guilty,
because they have sinned against hWhY, the Home
of righteousness, and the Expectation of their fathers:
hWhY.’
8 “Flee from the midst of Baḇel, come out of the land
of the Kasdites. And be as rams before a flock.
9 “For look, I am stirring up and bringing up against
Baḇel an assembly of great nations from a land of the
north, and they shall array themselves against her.
From there she shall be captured - their arrows are
like those of a mighty skilled man, not returning
empty-handed.
10 “And Kasdim shall become plunder, all who
plunder her shall satisfy themselves,” declares hWhY.
11 “Because you were glad, because you rejoiced,
you who plunder My inheritance, because you have
1244

JEREMIAH

grown fat like a heifer threshing grain, and you neigh
like stallions,
12 your mother shall be greatly ashamed. She who
bore you shall be humiliated. Look, the last of the
nations, a wilderness, a dry land and a desert.
13 “Because of the wrath of hWhY she shall not be
inhabited, but she shall be deserted - all of it.
Everyone passing by Baḇel shall be astonished and
whistle at all her plagues.
14 “Arrange yourselves against Baḇel all around, all
you who bend the bow. Shoot at her, spare no arrows,
for she has sinned against HWHY.
15 “Shout against her all around. She has given her
hand, her foundations have fallen, her walls are
thrown down, for it is the vengeance of hWhY. Take
vengeance on her. As she has done, so do to her.
16 “Cut off the sower from Baḇel, and him who
handles the sickle at harvest time. From before the
sword of the oppressor each one turns to his own
people, and each one flees to his own land.
17 “Yisra’ĕl is a scattered sheep, the lions have
driven him away. First the sovereign of Ashshur
devoured him, and now, at last, this Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel has broken his bones.”
18 Therefore thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, “See, I am punishing the sovereign of Baḇel
and his land, as I have punished the sovereign of
Ashshur.
19 “And I shall bring back Yisra’ĕl to his pasture, and
he shall feed on Karmel and Bashan. And his being
shall be satisfied on Mount Ephrayim and Gil’aḏ.
20 “In those days and at that time,” declares hWhY,
“the wickedness of Yisra’ĕl shall be searched for, but
there shall be none; and the sin of Yahuḏah, but none
shall be found. For I shall pardon those whom I leave
as a remnant.
1245

YIRMEYAHU

“Go up against the land of Merathayim, against it,
and against the inhabitants of Peqoḏ. Slay and put
them under the ban,” declares hWhY, “and do
according to all that I have commanded you.
22 “There is a sound of battle in the land, and of great
destruction.
23 “How the hammer of all the earth has been cut off
and broken! How Baḇel has become a ruin among the
nations!
24 “I have laid a snare for you, and you were
captured, O Baḇel, and you yourself did not know!
You have been found and also caught, because you
strove against hWhY.”
25 hWhY has opened His armoury, and has brought
out the weapons of His displeasure, for the Aḏon
Elohim of hosts has a work to do in the land of the
Kasdites.
26 Come against her from every quarter, open her
storehouses, pile her up as heaps of ruins, and put
her under the ban. Let her have no remnant.
27 Slay all her bulls, let them go down to the
slaughter. Woe to them! For their day has come, the
time of their punishment.
28 Listen! They flee and escape from the land of
Baḇel, to declare in Tsiyon the vengeance of hWhY
our Elohim, the vengeance of His Hĕyḵal.
29 “Summon archers against Baḇel. All you who
bend the bow, encamp against it all around, let no one
escape. Repay her according to her work, do to her
according to all she has done. For she has been
proud against hWhY, against the Qadosh One of
Yisra’ĕl.
30 “Therefore her young men shall fall in the streets,
and all her men of battle shall perish in that day,”
declares hWhY.
21

1246

JEREMIAH

“See, I am against you, O proud one!” declares the
Aḏon hWhY of hosts, “for your day has come, the time
for your punishment.
32 “And the proud one shall stumble, and he shall fall,
with no one to raise him up. And I shall kindle a fire in
his cities, and it shall devour all around him.”
33 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “The children of Yisra’ĕl
were oppressed, along with the children of Yahuḏah.
And all who took them captive have held them fast,
they refused to let them go.
34 “Their Redeemer is strong, hWhY of hosts is His
Name. He shall strongly plead their case, so as to
give rest to the land, but unrest to the inhabitants of
Baḇel.
35 “A sword is upon the Kasdites,” declares hWhY,
“and it is upon the inhabitants of Baḇel, and upon her
heads and upon her wise men.
36 “A sword is upon the liars, and they shall be fools.
A sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be
broken down.
37 “A sword is upon their horses, and upon their
chariots, and upon all the mixed peoples who are in
her midst, and they shall become like women. A
sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be
plundered.
38 “A sword is upon her waters, and they shall be
dried up. For it is a land of carved images, and they
boast about their idols.
39 “Therefore the wild desert beasts shall dwell with
the jackals, and the ostriches dwell in it. And it shall
never again be inhabited, nor dwelt in, unto all
generations.
40 “As Elohim overthrew Seḏom and Amorah and
their neighbouring cities,” declares hWhY, “so no one
would dwell there, nor would son of man sojourn in it.
31

1247

YIRMEYAHU

“See, a people shall come from the north, and a
great nation and many sovereigns stirred up from the
ends of the earth.
42 “They lay hold of bow and spear, they are cruel
and they show no compassion. They sound like the
roaring sea, and ride on horses, put in array, like a
man for the battle, against you, O daughter of Baḇel.
43 “The sovereign of Baḇel has heard the report
about them, and his hands became weak. Distress
has seized him, pain like that of a woman in labour.
44 “See, he comes up like a lion from the pride of the
Yardĕn, against the enduring pasture. But in an
instant I shall make them run away from her. And who
is the Chosen One whom I appoint against her? For
who is like Me? Who summons Me? And who is that
Shepherd who stands before Me?”
45 Therefore hear the counsel of hWhY which He has
counselled concerning Baḇel, and His purposes He
has purposed concerning the land of the Kasdites: the
least of the flock shall drag them away! He shall make
their pasture a waste before them!
46 At the sound of Baḇel’s capture the earth shall be
shaken, and the outcry shall be heard among the
nations.
41

51 Thus said hWhY, “See, I am stirring up the spirit
of a destroyer against Baḇel, against those who dwell
in Leḇ - My opponents.
2 And I shall send winnowers to Baḇel, who shall
winnow her and empty her land. For they shall be
against her all around, in the day of evil.
3 “Let the archer draw his bow, and let him stand
ready in his armour. Do not spare her young men, put
all her army under the ban.
1248

JEREMIAH

“And the slain shall fall in the land of the Kasdites,
and the pierced-through in her streets.
5 “For neither Yisra’ĕl nor Yahuḏah is widowed by
his Elohim, hWhY of hosts, though their land has been
filled with sin against the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.”
6 Flee from the midst of Baḇel and let each one save
his life! Do not be cut off in her wickedness, for this is
the time of the vengeance of hWhY, the recompense
He is repaying her.
7 Baḇel was a golden cup in the hand of hWhY,
making drunk all the earth. The nations drank her
wine, that is why the nations went mad!
8 Baḇel shall suddenly fall and be broken. Howl for
her! Take balm for her pain - if so be, she might be
healed.
9 We would have healed Baḇel, but she is not
healed. Let us leave her and each go to his own land,
for her judgment reaches to the shamayim and is
lifted up to the clouds.
10 hWhY has brought forth our righteousness. Come
and let us declare in Tsiyon the work of hWhY our
Elohim.
11 Polish the arrows! Put on the shields! hWhY has
stirred up the spirit of the sovereigns of the Maḏites.
For His plan is against Baḇel to destroy it, because it
is the vengeance of HWHY, the vengeance for His
Hĕyḵal.
12 Lift up a banner on the walls of Baḇel, strengthen
the watch, station the watchmen, prepare the
ambush. For hWhY has both planned and done what
He spoke concerning the inhabitants of Baḇel.
13 You who dwell upon many waters, great in
treasures, your end has come, the measure of your
greedy gain.
4

1249

YIRMEYAHU

hWhY of hosts has sworn by Himself, “I shall
certainly fill you with men, as with locusts, and they
shall lift up a shout against you.”
15 He made the earth by His power, He established
the world by His wisdom, and stretched out the
shamayim by His understanding.
16 When He gives forth His voice the waters in the
shamayim roar, and He makes vapours to ascend
from the ends of the earth; He makes lightnings for
the rain, and He brings the wind out of His treasuries.
17 All mankind has become too brutish to know,
every smith has been put to shame by the carved
image, for his moulded image is falsehood, and there
is no breath in them.
18 They are worthless, a work of mockery. In the time
of their punishment they perish.
19 The Portion of Ya’aqoḇ is not like them, for He is
the Maker of all, and Yisra’ĕl is the tribe of His
inheritance. hWhY of hosts is His Name.
20 “You are My battle-axe, weapons of battle, and
with you I shall break nations in pieces, and with you
I shall destroy reigns.
21 “And with you I shall break in pieces the horse and
its rider, and with you I shall break in pieces the
chariot and its rider.
22 “And with you I shall break in pieces man and
woman, and with you I shall break in pieces old and
young, and with you I shall break in pieces the young
man and the maiden.
23 “And with you I shall break in pieces the shepherd
and his flock, and with you I shall break in pieces the
farmer and his yoke of oxen. And with you I shall
break in pieces governors and rulers.
14

1250

JEREMIAH

“And I shall repay Baḇel and all the inhabitants of
Kasdim for all the evil they have done in Tsiyon before
your eyes,” declares hWhY.
25 “See, I am against you, O destroying mountain,
who destroys all the earth,” declares hWhY. “And I
shall stretch out My hand against you. And I shall roll
you down from the rocks, and make you a burnt
mountain.
26 “And they shall not take from you a stone for a
corner nor a stone for a foundation, but you shall be
a waste forever,” declares hWhY.
27 Lift up a banner in the land, blow the ram’s horn
among the nations! Prepare the nations against her,
call the reigns together against her: Ararat, Minni, and
Ashkenaz. Appoint a commander against her, bring
up horses like hairy locusts.
28 Separate the nations against her, with the
sovereigns of the Maḏites, its governors and all its
rulers, all the land of his rule,
29 so that the land shakes and writhes in pain. For
every plan of hWhY shall be established against
Baḇel, to make the land of Baḇel a ruin, without
inhabitant.
30 The mighty men of Baḇel have ceased to fight,
they remained in their strongholds. Their might has
failed, they became like women, they have burned
her dwelling places. The bars of her gate have been
broken.
31 One runner runs to meet another, and one
reporter to meet another, to report to the sovereign of
Baḇel that his city is taken on all sides,
32 and the fords have been captured, and they have
burned the reeds with fire, and the soldiers are
startled.
33 For thus said hWhY of hosts, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
“The daughter of Baḇel is like a threshing-floor at the
24

1251

YIRMEYAHU

time it is trodden. Yet a little while and the time of her
harvest shall come.”
34 “Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel has
devoured us, he has crushed us, he has made us an
empty vessel, he has swallowed us up like a dragon.
He has filled his stomach with my delicacies, he has
driven us away.
35 “Let the violence done to me and my flesh be upon
Baḇel,” says the inhabitant of Tsiyon. And, “Let my
blood be upon the inhabitants of Kasdim,” says
Yerushalayim.
36 Therefore thus said hWhY, “See, I am pleading
your case. And I shall take vengeance for you and dry
up her sea and make her fountain dry.
37 “And Baḇel shall become a heap, a habitation of
jackals, an astonishment and a hissing, without
inhabitant.
38 “Together they roar like lions, they shall growl like
lions’ cubs.
39 “In their heat I prepare their feasts. And I shall
make them drunk, so that they rejoice, and sleep a
never-ending sleep and not awake,” declares hWhY.
40 “I shall bring them down like lambs to the
slaughter, like rams with male goats.
41 “Oh, how Shĕshaḵ has been captured, the praise
of all the earth been seized! How Baḇel has become
a ruin among the nations!
42 “The sea has risen over Baḇel, she has been
covered with the roaring of its waves.
43 “Her cities have become a ruin, a dry land and a
desert, a land where no one dwells, neither does a
son of man pass by it.
44 “And I shall punish Bĕl in Baḇel. And I shall make
him spew out what he has swallowed, and nations
1252

JEREMIAH

shall no longer stream to him. Even the wall of Baḇel
shall fall.
45 “Come out of her midst, My people! And let
everyone deliver his being from the burning
displeasure of hWhY.
46 “And lest your heart grow faint, and you fear the
report heard in the land - for a report shall come one
year, and after that, in another year a report shall
come, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler 47 therefore see, the days are coming that I shall
bring punishment on the carved images of Baḇel, and
all her land shall be put to shame, and all her slain fall
in her midst.
48 “And the shamayim and the earth and all that is in
them shall shout for joy over Baḇel, for the ravagers
shall come to her from the north,” declares hWhY.
49 As Baḇel is to fall for the slain of Yisra’ĕl, so for
Baḇel the slain of all the earth shall fall.
50 You who have escaped the sword, go away! Do
not stand still! Remember hWhY from afar, and let
Yerushalayim come to your heart.
51 We are ashamed because we have heard
reproach. Shame has covered our faces, for
strangers have come into the miqdashim of the
House of hWhY.
52 “Therefore see, the days are coming,” declares
hWhY, “that I shall bring punishment on her carved
images, while the wounded groan throughout all her
land.
53 “Though Baḇel should mount up to the shamayim,
and though she should make the height of her
strength inaccessible, ravagers shall come to her
from Me,” declares hWhY.
54 Listen! A cry from Baḇel, and great destruction
from the land of the Kasdites,
1253

YIRMEYAHU

because hWhY is ravaging Baḇel, and shall silence
her loud voice. And her waves shall roar like great
waters, the noise of their voice shall resound,
56 because the ravager shall come against her,
against Baḇel, and her mighty men shall be captured.
Every one of their bows shall be broken, for hWhY is
the Ĕl of recompense, He shall certainly repay.
57 “And I shall make her rulers drunk, and her wise
men, her governors, and her deputies, and her mighty
men. And they shall sleep a lasting sleep, and not
awake,” declares the Sovereign, whose Name is
hWhY of hosts.
58 Thus said hWhY of hosts, “The broad walls of
Baḇel are completely demolished, and her high gates
are burned with fire, and peoples labour in vain, and
the nations weary themselves for fire.”
59 The word that Yirmeyahu the naḇi commanded
Serayah son of Nĕriyah, son of Maḥsĕyah, when he
went with Tsiḏqiyahu the sovereign of Yahuḏah to
Baḇel in the fourth year of his reign. And Serayah was
a quartermaster.
60 So Yirmeyahu wrote in a book all the evil that
would come upon Baḇel, all these words which have
been written concerning Baḇel.
61 And Yirmeyahu said to Serayah, “When you come
to Baḇel and see it, and read all these words,
62 then you shall say, ‘O hWhY, You have spoken
concerning this place to cut it off, so that none shall
dwell in it, neither man nor beast, for it is a ruin
forever.’
63 “And it shall be, when you have ended reading this
book, that you shall tie a stone to it and throw it into
the middle of Perath,
64 and shall say, ‘So does Baḇel sink and not rise
from the evil that I am bringing upon her, and they
55

1254

JEREMIAH

shall weary themselves.’ ” Thus far are the words of
Yirmeyahu.

52 Tsiḏqiyahu was twenty-one years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Ḥamutal
the daughter of Yirmeyahu of Liḇnah.
2 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
all that Yahoyaqim had done.
3 For through the displeasure of hWhY this came to
be against Yerushalayim and Yahuḏah, until He had
cast them out from His presence. And Tsiḏqiyahu
rebelled against the sovereign of Baḇel.
4 And it came to be in the ninth year of his reign, in
the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, that
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel and all his army
came against Yerushalayim and encamped against it.
And they built a siege wall against it all around.
5 And the city was under siege until the eleventh
year of Sovereign Tsiḏqiyahu.
6 On the ninth of the fourth month the scarcity of
food was so severe in the city that there was no food
for the people of the land.
7 Then the city wall was breached, and all the men
of battle fled and went out of the city at night by way
of the gate between the two walls, which was by the
sovereign’s garden, while the Kasdites were near the
city all around. And they went by way of the desert
plain.
8 But the army of the Kasdites pursued the
sovereign, and they overtook Tsiḏqiyahu in the desert
plains of Yeriḥo, and his entire army was scattered
from him.
9 Then they captured the sovereign and brought him
up to the sovereign of Baḇel at Riḇlah in the land of
Ḥamath, and he pronounced judgments on him.
1255

YIRMEYAHU

And the sovereign of Baḇel slew the sons of
Tsiḏqiyahu before his eyes, and he also slew all the
heads of Yahuḏah in Riḇlah.
11 And he put out the eyes of Tsiḏqiyahu. And the
sovereign of Baḇel bound him in bronze shackles,
and took him to Baḇel, and put him in prison till the
day of his death.
12 And on the tenth of the fifth month, which was the
nineteenth year of sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel, Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard,
who served the sovereign of Baḇel, came to
Yerushalayim,
13 and he burned the House of hWhY, and the
sovereign’s house, and all the houses of
Yerushalayim, and all the houses of the great men,
he burned with fire.
14 And all the army of the Kasdites who were with the
chief of the guard broke down all the walls of
Yerushalayim all around.
15 And Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, exiled some
of the poor people, and the rest of the people who
were left in the city, and the defectors who had gone
over to the sovereign of Baḇel, and the rest of the
craftsmen.
16 But Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, left some of
the poor of the land as vinedressers and farmers.
17 And the Kasdites broke the bronze columns that
were in the House of hWhY, and the stands and the
bronze sea that were in the House of hWhY, and
brought all their bronze to Baḇel.
18 They also took away the pots, and the shovels,
and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the ladles, and
all the bronze utensils with which they served,
19 and the basins, and the fire holders, and the
bowls, and the pots, and the lampstands, and the
10

1256

JEREMIAH

ladles, and the cups, whatever was of solid gold and
whatever was of solid silver, the chief of the guard
took.
20 The two columns, one sea, the twelve bronze bulls
which were under it, and the stands, which Sovereign
Shelomoh had made for the House of hWhY - the
bronze of all these vessels was beyond weighing.
21 As for the columns, the height of one column was
eighteen ammah, and its circumference was twelve
ammah, and its thickness was four etsba’oth, hollow.
22 And a capital of bronze was on it. And the height
of one capital was five ammah, with a network and
pomegranates all around the capital, all of bronze.
And the second column, with pomegranates was the
same.
23 And there were ninety-six pomegranates on the
sides. All the pomegranates on the network were one
hundred, all around.
24 And the chief of the guard took Serayah the chief
kohĕn, and Tsephanyah the second kohĕn, and the
three doorkeepers.
25 And from the city he took one eunuch who was in
charge of the men of battle, and seven men who saw
the sovereign’s face, who were found in the city, and
the scribe of the commander of the army who
mustered the people of the land, and sixty men of the
people of the land who were found in the city.
26 And Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, took these
and brought them to the sovereign of Baḇel at Riḇlah,
27 and the sovereign of Baḇel smote them and put
them to death at Riḇlah in the land of Ḥamath. Thus
Yahuḏah was exiled from its own land.
28 These are the people whom Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
exiled: in the seventh year, three thousand and
twenty-three Yahuḏim;
1257

YIRMEYAHU

in the eighteenth year of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar he
exiled from Yerushalayim eight hundred and thirtytwo beings;
30 in the twenty-third year of Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar,
Neḇuzaraḏan, chief of the guard, exiled of the
Yahudim seven hundred and forty-five beings. All the
beings were four thousand six hundred.
31 And it came to be in the thirty-seventh year of the
exile of Yahoyaḵin sovereign of Yahuḏah, in the
twelfth month, on the twenty-fifth of the month, that
Ewil-Meroḏaḵ sovereign of Baḇel, in the first year of
his reign, lifted up the head of Yahoyaḵin sovereign
of Yahuḏah and brought him out of prison,
32 and spoke kindly to him and placed his throne
above those of the sovereigns who were with him in
Baḇel.
33 So he changed his prison garments, and he ate
bread continually before the sovereign all the days of
his life.
34 And as for his allowance, there was a continual
allowance given him by the sovereign of Baḇel, a
portion for each day until the day of his death, all the
days of his life.
29

1258

EZEKIEL

YEḤEZQĔL
‫ יחזקאל‬LAqzXY

1 And it came to be in the thirtieth year, in the fourth
month, on the fifth of the month, as I was among the
exiles by the River Keḇar, the shamayim were opened
and I saw visions of Elohim.
2 On the fifth of the month, in the fifth year of
Sovereign Yahoyaḵin’s exile,
3 the word of HWHY came expressly to Yeḥezqĕl the
kohĕn, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Kasdites by
the River Keḇar. And the hand of HWHY came upon
him there.
4 And I looked and saw a whirlwind coming out of
the north, a great cloud with fire flashing itself. And
brightness was all around it, and out of its midst like
glowing metal, out of the midst of the fire,
5 and out of the midst of it came what looked like
four living creatures. And this was their appearance:
they had the likeness of a man.
6 And each one had four faces, and each one had
four wings.
7 And their feet were straight feet, and the soles of
their feet were like the sole of a calves’ foot. And they
sparkled like the appearance of polished bronze,
8 and under their wings on their four sides were the
hands of a man. And each of the four had faces and
wings 9 their wings touched one another. They did not turn
when they went, but each one went straight forward.
10 And the likeness of their faces: the face of a man,
and each of the four had the face of a lion on the right
side, and each of the four had the face of an ox on
1259

YEḤEZQĔL

the left side, and each of the four had the face of an
eagle.
11 Such were their faces. Their wings were spread
upward, two of each touched one another, and two
covered their bodies.
12 And each one went straight forward, going
wherever the spirit was to go, and they did not turn
when they went.
13 And the likeness of the living creatures: their
appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the
appearance of torches, moving back and forth among
the living creatures. And the fire was bright, and out
of the fire went lightning.
14 And the living creatures ran back and forth, like the
appearance of a flash of lightning.
15 And I looked at the living creatures, and saw a
wheel on the earth beside each living creature with its
four faces.
16 The appearance of the wheels and their works
was like the appearance of beryl, and all four had the
same form. The appearance of their works was, as it
were, a wheel in the middle of a wheel.
17 When they went, they went in any one of four
directions, they did not turn aside when they went.
18 And their rims were high and awesome, and their
rims were covered with eyes, all around the four of
them.
19 And when the living creatures went, the wheels
went beside them. And when the living creatures
were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted
up.
20 Wherever the spirit was to go, they went, because
there the spirit went. And the wheels were lifted
together with them, for the spirit of the living creatures
was in the wheels.
1260

EZEKIEL

When those went, these went; when those stood,
these stood. And when those were lifted up from the
earth, the wheels were lifted up together with them,
for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
22 And a likeness was over the heads of the living
creatures, an expanse like the appearance of an
awesome crystal, stretched out over their heads.
23 And under the expanse their wings were straight,
one toward another. Each one had two which covered
one side, and each one had two which covered the
other side of the body.
24 And when they went, I heard the noise of their
wings, like the noise of many waters, like the voice of
Ĕl Shaddai, a tumult like the noise of an army. And
when they stood still, they let down their wings.
25 And a voice came from above the expanse that
was over their heads. When they stood, they dropped
their wings.
26 And above the expanse over their heads was the
likeness of a throne, in appearance like a sapphire
stone. And on the likeness of the throne was a
likeness as the appearance of a man high above it.
27 And from the appearance of His waist and upward
I saw what looked like glowing metal with the
appearance of fire all around within it. And from the
appearance of His waist and downward I saw what
looked like fire, and brightness all around.
28 As the appearance of a rainbow in a cloud on a
rainy day, so was the appearance of the brightness
all around it. This was the appearance of the likeness
of the esteem of HWHY. And when I saw it, I fell on my
face, and I heard a voice of One speaking.
21

2 And He said to me, “Son of man, stand on your feet,
so that I speak to you.”
1261

YEḤEZQĔL

And the Ruaḥ entered into me when He spoke to
me, and stood me on my feet. And I heard Him who
was speaking to me.
3 And He said to me, “Son of man, I am sending you
to the children of Yisra’ĕl, to a nation of rebels who
have rebelled against Me. They and their fathers have
transgressed against Me, until this day.
4 “And the children are stiff of face and hard of heart
to whom I am sending you, and you shall say to them,
‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY.’
5 “And they - whether they hear or whether they
refuse, for they are a rebellious house - shall know
that a naḇi has been in their midst.
6 “And you, son of man, do not be afraid of them,
nor be afraid of their words, though thistles and thorns
are with you and you dwell among scorpions. Do not
be afraid of their words or discouraged by their looks,
for they are a rebellious house.
7 “And you shall speak My Words to them, whether
they hear or whether they refuse, for they are
rebellious.
8 “And you, son of man, hear what I am speaking to
you. Do not be rebellious like that rebellious house,
open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.”
9 And I looked and saw a hand stretched out to me.
And see, a scroll of a book was in it,
10 and He spread it before me, and it was written on
the inside and on the outside. And written on it were
lamentations and mourning and woe.
2

3 And He said to me, “Son of man, eat what you find,
eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Yisra’ĕl.”
2 And I opened my mouth, and He fed me the scroll.
3 And He said to me, “Son of man, feed your
stomach, and fill your stomach with this scroll that I
1262

EZEKIEL

am giving you.” And I ate it, and it was as sweet as
honey in my mouth.
4 And He said to me, “Son of man, go to the house
of Yisra’ĕl, and you shall speak to them with My
Words.
5 “For you are not sent to a people of foreign speech
and of difficult language, but to the house of Yisra’ĕl,
6 not to many people of foreign speech and of
difficult language, whose words you do not
understand. If I had rather sent you to them, they
would have listened to you.
7 “But the house of Yisra’ĕl is going to refuse to
listen to you, for they refuse to listen to Me. For all the
house of Yisra’ĕl are hard of head, and hard of heart.
8 “See, I shall make your face as hard as their faces
and your forehead as hard as their foreheads.
9 “Like adamant stone, harder than flint, I shall make
your forehead. Do not be afraid of them, nor be
discouraged at their looks, for they are a rebellious
house.”
10 And He said to me, “Son of man, receive into your
heart all My Words that I speak to you, and hear with
your ears.
11 “And go! Come to the exiles, to the children of your
people, and speak to them and say to them, ‘Thus
said the Aḏon HWHY,’ whether they hear, or whether
they refuse.”
12 And the Ruaḥ lifted me up, and behind me I heard
a voice of great rumbling, “Baruḵ be the esteem of
HWHY from His place,”
13 and the sound of the wings of the living creatures
touching one another, and the sound of the wheels
beside them, and the sound of a great rushing.

1263

YEḤEZQĔL

And the Ruaḥ lifted me and took me away, and I
went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, while the
hand of HWHY was strong upon me.
15 And I came to the exiles at Tĕl Aḇiḇ, who were
dwelling by the River Keḇar. And I sat where they
were sitting, and sat there, stunned among them,
seven days.
16 And it came to be at the end of seven days that
the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
17 “Son of man, I have made you a watchman for the
house of Yisra’ĕl. And you shall hear a word from My
mouth, and shall warn them from Me.
18 “When I say to the wicked, ‘You shall certainly die,’
and you have not warned him, nor spoken to warn the
wicked from his wicked way, to save his ḥai, that
same wicked man shall die in his wickedness, and his
blood I require at your hand.
19 “But if you have warned the wicked and he does
not turn from his wickedness, nor from his wicked
way, he shall die in his wickedness, and you have
delivered your being.
20 “And when a righteous one turns from his
righteousness and shall do unrighteousness, when I
have put a stumbling-block before him, he shall die.
Because you did not warn him, he shall die in his sin,
and his righteousness which he has done is not
remembered, and his blood I require at your hand.
21 “But if you have warned the righteous one that the
righteous should not sin, and he did not sin, he shall
certainly live because he has been warned, and you
have delivered your being.”
22 And the hand of HWHY came upon me there, and
He said to me, “Arise, go out into the plain, so that I
might speak to you there.”
14

1264

EZEKIEL

So I got up and went out into the plain, and see,
the esteem of HWHY stood there, like the esteem
which I saw by the River Keḇar, and I fell on my face.
24 And the Ruaḥ entered me and stood me on my
feet, and spoke with me and said to me, “Go, shut
yourself inside your house.
25 “And you, O son of man, see, they shall put cords
on you and bind you with them, so that you do not go
out in their midst.
26 “And I make your tongue stick to the roof of your
mouth, so that you shall be dumb and not be a
reprover to them, for they are a rebellious house.
27 “But when I speak with you, I open your mouth,
and you shall say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY.’
He who hears, let him hear. And he who refuses, let
him refuse, for they are a rebellious house.
23

4 “And you, son of man, take a clay tablet, and you
shall lay it before you, and shall inscribe on it a city,
Yerushalayim,
2 and shall lay siege against it, and build a siege wall
against it, and heap up a mound against it, and make
camps against it, and place battering rams against it
all around.
3 “Then take an iron plate, and put it as an iron wall
between you and the city. And you shall turn your face
against it, and it shall be besieged, and you shall lay
siege against it. It is a sign to the house of Yisra’ĕl.
4 “And lie on your left side, and you shall put the
wickedness of the house of Yisra’ĕl on it. As many
days as you lie on it, you shall bear their wickedness.
5 “For I Myself have laid on you the years of their
wickedness, according to the number of the days,
three hundred and ninety days. And you shall bear
the wickedness of the house of Yisra’ĕl.
1265

YEḤEZQĔL

“And when you have completed them, you shall lie
again on your right side and shall bear the
wickedness of the house of Yahuḏah forty days, a day
for a year. I have laid on you a day for a year.
7 “Then you shall turn your face toward the siege of
Yerushalayim, with your arm bared, and you shall
naḇa against it.
8 “And see, I shall put cords on you so that you do
not turn from one side to another until you have
completed the days of your siege.
9 “And take wheat, and barley, and beans, and
lentils, and millet, and spelt. And you shall put them
into one vessel, and make bread of them. You shall
eat it, as many days as you lie on your side, three
hundred and ninety days.
10 “And your food which you eat is by weight, twenty
sheqels a day, to be eaten from time to time.
11 “And drink water by measure, one-sixth of a hin, to
be drunk from time to time.
12 “And eat it as a barley cake. And bake it, before
their eyes, on human dung.”
13 And HWHY said, “Even so the children of Yisra’ĕl
shall eat their defiled bread among the gentiles, to
whom I drive them.”
14 Then I said, “Ah, Aḏonai HWHY! See, I have never
defiled myself from my youth till now. I have never
eaten what died of itself or was torn by beasts, nor
has unclean meat ever come into my mouth.”
15 And He said to me, “See, I am giving you the dung
of cattle instead of human dung, and you shall
prepare your bread over it.”
16 And He said to me, “Son of man, see, I am going
to cut off the supply of bread in Yerushalayim, and
they shall eat bread by weight and with fear, and drink
water by measure and with dread,
6

1266

EZEKIEL

so that they lack bread and water, and shall be
appalled with one another, and be consumed in their
wickedness.

17

5 “And you, son of man, take a sharp sword, take it
as a barber’s razor, and you shall pass it over your
head and your beard. And you shall take scales to
weigh and divide the hair.
2 “Burn with fire one-third in the midst of the city
when the days of the siege are completed. And you
shall take one-third and strike around it with the
sword, and scatter one-third in the wind. And I shall
draw out a sword after them.
3 “And you shall take a few from there and bind them
in the edge of your garment.
4 “And take again some of them, and throw them
into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire.
From it a fire shall spread unto all the house of
Yisra’ĕl.
5 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘This is Yerushalayim
which I have placed in the midst of the gentiles, with
the lands all around her.
6 ‘But she rebelled against My Right-Rulings, doing
wickedness, more than the gentiles, and My Laws
more than the lands all around her. For they have
rejected My Right-Rulings, and they have not walked
in My Laws.’
7 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Because you
have rebelled more than the gentiles all around you,
and have not walked in My Laws, nor done My RightRulings, nor even done according to the right-rulings
of the gentiles all around you,’
8 therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Look I Myself
am against you and shall execute judgments in your
midst before the eyes of the gentiles.
1267

YEḤEZQĔL

‘And I shall do among you what I have never done,
and the like of which I never do again, because of all
your abominations.
10 ‘Therefore fathers are going to eat their sons in
your midst, and sons eat their fathers. And I shall
execute judgments among you and scatter all your
remnant to all the winds.
11 ‘Therefore, as I live,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY,
‘because you have defiled My Miqdash with all your
filthiness and with all your abominations, therefore I
also withdraw. And My eye shall not pardon, nor shall
I spare.
12 ‘One-third of you shall die of pestilence, and be
consumed with scarcity of food in your midst. And
one-third shall fall by the sword all around you. And I
shall scatter another third to all the winds, and draw
out a sword after them.
13 ‘And My displeasure shall be completed. And I
shall bring My wrath to rest upon them, and I shall be
eased. And they shall know that I, HWHY, have spoken
it in My ardour, when I have completed My wrath upon
them.
14 ‘And I shall make you a waste and a reproach
among the gentiles that are all around you, before the
eyes of all who pass by.
15 ‘And it shall be a reproach, an object of scorn, a
warning, and an astonishment to the gentiles that are
all around you, when I execute judgments among you
in displeasure and in wrath and in heated
chastisements. I, HWHY, have spoken.
16 ‘When I send against them the evil arrows of
scarcity of food which shall be for their destruction,
which I send to destroy you, I shall increase the
scarcity of food upon you and cut off your supply of
bread.
9

1268

EZEKIEL

‘And I shall send against you scarcity of food and
evil beasts, and they shall bereave you. And
pestilence and blood shall pass through you, while I
bring the sword against you. I, HWHY, have spoken.’ ”

17

6 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, turn your face toward the mountains
of Yisra’ĕl, and naḇa against them.
3 “And you shall say, ‘O mountains of Yisra’ĕl, hear
the word of the Aḏon HWHY!’ Thus said the Aḏon HWHY
to the mountains, to the hills, to the ravines, and to
the valleys, “Look, I Myself am bringing a sword
against you, and I shall destroy your high places.
4 “And your altars shall be ruined, your sun-pillars
shall be broken in pieces. And I shall make your slain
fall in front of your idols,
5 and lay the corpses of the children of Yisra’ĕl in
front of their idols, and scatter your bones all around
your altars.
6 “In all your dwelling places the cities shall be
destroyed and the high places deserted, so that your
altars are broken and bear their punishment. And
your idols shall be destroyed and made to cease, and
your sun-pillars cut down, and your works blotted out.
7 “And the slain shall fall in your midst, and you shall
know that I am HWHY.
8 “But I shall leave a remnant, in that some of you
shall escape the sword among the gentiles, when you
are scattered throughout the lands.
9 “And those of you who escape shall remember Me
among the gentiles where they have been taken
captive, because I have been broken by their
adulterous heart which has turned away from Me, and
by their eyes which whored after their idols. And they
2

1269

YEḤEZQĔL

shall loathe themselves for the evils which they have
done in all their abominations.
10 “And they shall know that I am HWHY, and not for
naught have I spoken to do this evil to them.”
11 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Strike with your hand
and stamp your feet, and say, ‘Alas, because of all
the evil abominations of the house of Yisra’ĕl who
shall fall by sword, by scarcity of food, and by
pestilence!
12 ‘He who is far off shall die by pestilence, he who is
near fall by the sword, and he who is left over and is
besieged, die by scarcity of food. And I shall complete
My wrath upon them.
13 ‘And you shall know that I am HWHY, when their
slain are among their idols all around their altars, on
every high hill, on all the mountaintops, under every
green tree, and under every thick oak, wherever they
offered sweet incense to all their idols.
14 ‘And I shall stretch out My hand against them and
make the land a wasteland, even more waste than the
wilderness toward Diḇlah, in all their dwelling places.
And they shall know that I am HWHY.’ ” ’ ”

7 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“And you, son of man, this is what the Aḏon HWHY
said to the land of Yisra’ĕl, ‘An end! The end has
come upon the four corners of the land.
3 ‘Now the end is upon you, and I shall send My
displeasure against you, and judge you according to
your ways, and repay you for all your abominations.
4 ‘And My eye shall not pardon you, nor would I
spare, for I repay your ways while your abominations
are in your midst. And you shall know that I am HWHY!’
5 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘A calamity, an only
calamity, look, it has come!
2

1270

EZEKIEL

‘An end has come, the end has come! It has
awakened against you, look, it has come!
7 ‘The turn has come to you, O inhabitants of the
land. The time has come, a day of uproar is near, and
not of rejoicing in the mountains.
8 ‘Soon I shall pour out My wrath, and shall
complete My displeasure upon you, and judge you
according to your ways, and repay you for all your
abominations.
9 ‘And My eye shall not pardon, nor would I spare. I
give you according to your ways while your
abominations are in your midst. And you shall know
that I am HWHY who smites.
10 ‘See, the day! See, it has come! The turn has
come, the rod has blossomed, pride has budded.
11 ‘The violence has grown into a rod of wickedness.
There is none of them, and none of its crowd, and
none of their riches, and none eminent among them.
12 ‘The time has come, the day has arrived. ‘Let not
the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is on
all its crowd.
13 ‘For the seller shall not return to what has been
sold, though they are still alive. For the vision is for all
its crowd - it shall not turn back. And because of his
wickedness no one holds fast to his life.
14 ‘They have blown the trumpet and all is prepared,
but no one goes to battle, for My wrath is on all its
crowd.
15 ‘The sword is outside, and the pestilence and the
scarcity of food inside. He who is in the field dies by
the sword, and he who is in a city, scarcity of food and
pestilence devour him,
16 while they who escape of them shall escape and
be on the mountains like doves of the valleys. All of
them mourning, each for his wickedness.
6

1271

YEḤEZQĔL

‘All hands go limp, and all knees become as water.
18 ‘And they shall gird on sackcloth, and be covered
with trembling. And shame shall be on every face,
and baldness on all their heads.
19 ‘They throw their silver into the streets, and their
gold becomes as filth. Their silver and their gold is
unable to deliver them in the day of the wrath of HWHY.
They do not satisfy their appetite, nor fill their
stomachs, because it has been their stumbling-block
of wickedness.
20 ‘And the splendour of His ornaments, He made it
in excellency. But they made from it the images of
their abominations and their filthiness. Therefore I
shall make it like filth to them.
21 ‘And I shall give it for a prey into the hands of
strangers, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil,
and they shall profane it.
22 ‘And I shall turn My face from them. And they shall
profane My secret place, for destroyers shall enter it
and profane it.
23 ‘Make a chain, for the land has been filled with
crimes of blood, and the city has been filled with
violence.
24 ‘And I shall bring the evil ones of the gentiles, and
they shall possess their houses. And I shall cause the
pride of the strong to cease, and their miqdashim
shall be profaned.
25 ‘Destruction shall come. And they shall seek
peace, but there is none.
26 ‘Calamity upon calamity shall come, and report
shall be upon report. And they shall seek a vision from
a naḇi. But the Torah has perished from the kohĕn,
and counsel from the elders!
27 ‘Let the sovereign mourn, and let the prince put on
despair, and let the hands of the common people
17

1272

EZEKIEL

tremble. And I shall deal with them according to their
way, and judge them with their own right-rulings. And
they shall know that I am HWHY!’ ”

8 And it came to be in the sixth year, in the sixth
month, on the fifth of the month, as I sat in my house
with the elders of Yahuḏah sitting before me, that the
hand of the Aḏon HWHY fell upon me there.
2 And I looked and saw a likeness, like the
appearance of fire. From His waist and downward the
appearance was like fire, and from His waist and
upward the appearance of brightness, like glowing
metal.
3 And He stretched out the form of a hand, and took
me by a lock of my hair. And the Ruaḥ lifted me up
between the earth and the shamayim, and brought
me in visions of Elohim to Yerushalayim, to the door
of the north gate of the inner court, where the seat of
the image of jealousy was, which causes jealousy.
4 And see, the esteem of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl was
there, like the vision that I saw in the plain.
5 And He said to me, “Son of man, please lift your
eyes toward the north.” And I lifted my eyes
northward, and north of the altar gate I saw this image
of jealousy in the entrance.
6 And He said to me, “Son of man, do you see what
they are doing, the great abominations which the
house of Yisra’ĕl are doing here, driving Me away
from My Miqdash? And you are to see still greater
abominations.”
7 Then He brought me to the door of the court. And
I looked and saw a hole in the wall.
8 And He said to me, “Son of man, please dig into
the wall.” And when I dug into the wall I saw a door.
1273

YEḤEZQĔL

And He said to me, “Go in, and see the evil
abominations which they are doing there.”
10 And I went in and looked and saw all kinds of
creeping creatures, abominable beasts, and all the
idols of the house of Yisra’ĕl, carved all around on the
walls.
11 And facing them stood seventy men of the elders
of the house of Yisra’ĕl, and in their midst stood
Ya’azanyahu son of Shaphan. Each one had a censer
in his hand, and a thick cloud of incense went up.
12 And He said to me, “Son of man, have you seen
what the elders of the house of Yisra’ĕl are doing in
the dark, each one in the room of his idols? For they
say, ‘HWHY does not see us, HWHY has forsaken the
land.’ ”
13 And He said to me, “You are to see still greater
abominations which they are doing.”
14 And He brought me to the door of the north gate
of the House of HWHY, and I saw women sitting there,
weeping for Tammuz.
15 Then He said to me, “Have you seen this, O son
of man? You are to see still greater abominations
than these.”
16 And He brought me into the inner court of the
House of HWHY. And there, at the door of the Hĕyḵal
of HWHY, between the porch and the altar, were about
twenty-five men with their backs toward the Hĕyḵal of
HWHY and their faces toward the east, and they were
bowing themselves eastward to the sun.
17 And He said to me, “Have you seen, O son of
man? Is it a small matter to the house of Yahuḏah to
do the abominations which they have done here? For
they have filled the land with violence, and turn back
to provoke Me. And see, they are putting the branch
to My nose.
9

1274

EZEKIEL

“Therefore I shall indeed deal in wrath. My eye
shall not pardon nor would I spare. And they shall cry
in My ears with a loud voice, but I shall not hear them.”

18

9 And He called out in my hearing with a loud voice,
saying, “Let the punishers of the city draw near, each
with his weapon of destruction in his hand.”
2 And look, six men came from the direction of the
upper gate, which faces north, each with his battleaxe in his hand. And one man in their midst was
clothed with linen and had a writer’s ink-horn at his
side. And they came in and stood beside the bronze
altar.
3 And the esteem of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl went up
from the keruḇ, where it had been, to the threshold of
the House. And He called to the man clothed with
linen, who had the writer’s ink-horn at his side,
4 and HWHY said to him, “Pass on into the midst of
the city, into the midst of Yerushalayim, and you shall
put a mark on the foreheads of the men who sigh and
cry over all the abominations that are done within it.”
5 And to the others He said in my hearing, “Pass on
into the city after him and smite, do not let your eye
pardon nor spare.
6 “Slay to destruction old, young men, maidens and
children and women, but do not come near anyone
upon whom is the mark, and begin at My Miqdash.”
So they began with the elders who were in front of the
House.
7 And He said to them, “Defile the House, and fill the
courts with the slain. Go out!” And they went out and
smote in the city.
8 And as they were smiting them it came to be that
I alone was left. And I fell on my face and cried out,
and said, “Ah, Aḏonai HWHY! Are You destroying all
1275

YEḤEZQĔL

the remnant of Yisra’ĕl in pouring out Your wrath on
Yerushalayim?”
9 And He said to me, “The wickedness of the house
of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah is exceedingly great, and the
land is filled with bloodshed, and the city filled with
that which is warped. For they say, ‘HWHY has
forsaken the land, and HWHY is not seeing!’
10 “But as for Me, My eye shall not pardon, nor would
I spare, I shall recompense their deeds on their own
head.”
11 And see, the man clothed with linen, who had the
ink-horn at his side, reported back and said, “I have
done as You commanded me.”

10 And I looked and saw in the expanse that was
above the head of the keruḇim, like a sapphire stone,
having the appearance of the likeness of a throne.
2 And He spoke to the man clothed with linen, and
said, “Go in among the wheels, under the keruḇ, and
fill your hands with coals of fire from among the
keruḇim, and scatter over the city.” And he went in
before my eyes.
3 And the keruḇim were standing on the south side
of the House when the man went in, and the cloud
filled the inner court.
4 And the esteem of HWHY went up from the keruḇ,
over the threshold of the House. And the House was
filled with the cloud, and the court was filled with the
brightness of the esteem of HWHY.
5 And the sound of the wings of the keruḇim was
heard in the outer court, like the voice of Ĕl Shaddai
when He speaks.
6 And it came to be, when He commanded the man
clothed in linen, saying, “Take fire from among the
1276

EZEKIEL

wheels, from among the keruḇim,” that he went in and
stood beside the wheel.
7 And the keruḇ stretched out his hand from among
the keruḇim to the fire that was among the keruḇim,
and took some, and put it into the hands of the man
clothed with linen, who took it and went out.
8 And the form of a man’s hand was seen under the
wings of the keruḇim.
9 And I looked and saw four wheels beside the
keruḇim, one wheel beside each keruḇ, and the
wheels’ appearance was like the colour of beryl
stone.
10 As for their appearance, all four looked alike; as if
a wheel in the middle of a wheel.
11 When they went, they went on their four sides;
they did not turn aside when they went, but went in
the direction the head was facing. They did not turn
aside when they went.
12 And their entire bodies, and their backs, and their
hands, and their wings, and the wheels that the four
had, were covered with eyes all around.
13 The wheels were called in my hearing, “Wheel.”
14 And each one had four faces: the first face was the
face of a keruḇ, and the second face the face of a
man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth
the face of an eagle.
15 And the keruḇim were lifted up - it was the living
creature I saw by the River Keḇar.
16 And when the keruḇim went, the wheels went
beside them. And when the keruḇim lifted their wings
to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also did
not turn from beside them.
17 When they stood still, the wheels stood still, and
when one was lifted up, the other lifted itself up, for
the spirit of the living creature was in them.
1277

YEḤEZQĔL

And the esteem of HWHY went from the threshold
of the House and stood over the keruḇim.
19 And the keruḇim lifted their wings and rose from
the earth before my eyes. When they went out, the
wheels were beside them. And it stood at the door of
the east gate of the House of HWHY, and the esteem
of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl was above them.
20 It was the living creature I saw under the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl by the River Keḇar, and I knew they were
keruḇim.
21 Each one had four faces and each one four wings,
and the likeness of the hands of a man was under
their wings.
22 And the likeness of their faces was the same as
the faces which I had seen by the River Keḇar, their
appearances and themselves. Each one went
straight forward.
18

11 And the Ruaḥ lifted me up and brought me to the
east gate of the House of HWHY, which faces east. And
see, at the door of the gate were twenty-five men,
among whom I saw Ya’azanyah son of Azzur, and
Pelatyahu son of Benayahu, heads of the people.
2 And He said to me, “Son of man, these are the
men who plot wickedness and give evil counsel in this
city,
3 who are saying, ‘It is not near, let us build houses.
This is the cooking pot, and we are the meat.’
4 “Therefore naḇa against them, naḇa, O son of
man!”
5 And the Ruaḥ of HWHY fell upon me, and said to
me, “Speak! ‘Thus said HWHY, “Thus you have said, O
house of Yisra’ĕl. For I know what comes up in your
spirit.
1278

EZEKIEL

“You have increased your slain in this city, and
filled its streets with the slain.”
7 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Your slain
whom you have laid in its midst, they are the meat,
and this city is the cooking pot. But I shall bring you
out of the midst of it.
8 “You have feared the sword, and I bring a sword
upon you,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
9 “And I shall bring you out of its midst, and give you
into the hands of strangers, and execute judgments
on you.
10 “By the sword you fall. At the border of Yisra’ĕl I
judge you. And you shall know that I am HWHY.
11 “This is not your cooking pot, nor are you the meat
in its midst. At the border of Yisra’ĕl I judge you.
12 “And you shall know that I am HWHY, for you have
not walked in My Laws nor executed My RightRulings, but have done according to the rulings of the
gentiles which are all around you.” ’ ”
13 And it came to be, while I was neḇuah, that
Pelatyahu son of Benayah died. And I fell on my face
and cried out with a loud voice, and said, “Ah, Aḏonai
HWHY! Are You making an end of the remnant of
Yisra’ĕl?”
14 Then the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
15 “Son of man, your brothers, your relatives, your
kinsmen, and all the house of Yisra’ĕl, all of it, are
those about whom the inhabitants of Yerushalayim
said, ‘Keep far from HWHY, this land has been given to
us as a possession.’
16 “Therefore say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“Although I have sent them far off among the gentiles,
and although I have scattered them among the lands,
yet I was for them a Miqdash for a little while in the
lands to which they came.” ’
6

1279

YEḤEZQĔL

“Therefore say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “And I
shall gather you from the peoples, and I shall
assemble you from the lands where you have been
scattered, and I shall give you the land of Yisra’ĕl.” ’
18 “And they shall go there, and shall take away all
its filthiness and all its abominations from there.
19 “And I shall give them one heart, and put a new
spirit within you. And I shall take the stony heart out
of their flesh, and give them a heart of flesh,
20 so that they walk in My Laws, and guard My RightRulings, and shall do them. And they shall be My
people and I shall be their Elohim.
21 “But to those whose hearts walk after the heart of
their filthiness and their abominations, I shall
recompense their deeds on their own heads,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY.
22 And the keruḇim lifted up their wings, with the
wheels beside them, and the esteem of the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl was high above them.
23 And the esteem of HWHY went up from the midst of
the city and stood upon the mountain, which is on the
east side of the city.
24 And the Ruaḥ lifted me up and brought me in a
vision by the Ruaḥ of Elohim into Kasdim, to those in
exile. And the vision that I had seen went up from me.
25 And I spoke to those in exile of all the words of
HWHY which He had shown me.
17

12 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, you are dwelling in the midst of a
rebellious house. They have eyes to see but they
have not seen, they have ears to hear but they have
not heard, for they are a rebellious house.
3 “Therefore, son of man, prepare your baggage for
exile, and go into exile by day before their eyes. And
2

1280

EZEKIEL

you shall go from your place into exile to another
place before their eyes. It could be that they see,
though they are a rebellious house.
4 “And you shall bring out your baggage for exile
before their eyes by day, and at evening go before
their eyes, like those who go into exile.
5 “Dig through the wall before their eyes, and you
shall carry out through it 6 take them on your shoulders and bring them out at
dark before their eyes. Cover your face, so that you
do not see the land, for I have made you a sign to the
house of Yisra’ĕl.”
7 And so I did, as I was commanded. I brought out
my baggage for exile by day, and at evening I dug
through the wall with my hand. I brought them out at
dark, and I took them on my shoulder before their
eyes.
8 And in the morning the word of HWHY came to me,
saying,
9 “Son of man, did not the house of Yisra’ĕl, the
rebellious house, say to you, ‘What are you doing?’
10 “Say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “This
message is to the prince in Yerushalayim and all the
house of Yisra’ĕl who are in their midst.” ’
11 “Say, ‘I am a sign to you. As I have done, so it is
done to them - they are to go into exile, into captivity.’
12 “And the prince who is in their midst is to bear his
baggage on his shoulder at dark and go out. They are
to dig through the wall to bring them out through it. He
is to cover his face, so that he does not see the land
with his eyes.
13 “And I shall spread My net over him, and he shall
be caught in My snare. And I shall bring him to Baḇel,
the land of the Kasdites, but he shall not see it, and
yet die there.
1281

YEḤEZQĔL

“And I shall scatter to every wind all who are
around him to help him, and all his bands, and I shall
draw out the sword after them.
15 “And they shall know that I am HWHY, when I
scatter them among the gentiles. And I shall disperse
them throughout the lands.
16 “But I shall let a few of their men escape from the
sword, from scarcity of food, and from pestilence, so
that they recount all their abominations among the
gentiles wherever they go. And they shall know that I
am HWHY.”
17 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, eat your bread with trembling, and
drink your water with fear and with anxiety.
19 “And you shall say to the people of the land, ‘Thus
said the Aḏon HWHY to the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim and to the land of Yisra’ĕl, “Let them
eat their bread with anxiety, and drink their water with
astonishment, for her land is emptied of all who are in
it, because of the violence of all those who dwell in it.
20 “And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid
waste, and the land shall become a wasteland. And
you shall know that I am HWHY.” ’ ”
21 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
22 “Son of man, what is this proverb that you people
have about the land of Yisra’ĕl, which says, ‘The days
go by, and every vision shall come to naught’?
23 “Therefore say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“I shall make this proverb to cease, so that they no
longer use it as a proverb in Yisra’ĕl.” But say to them,
“The days have drawn near, as well as the matter of
every vision.
24 “For no longer is there to be any false vision or
flattering divination within the house of Yisra’ĕl.
14

1282

EZEKIEL

“For I am HWHY, I speak. And the word which I
speak is done. It is no longer deferred. For in your
days, O rebellious house, when I speak the word I
shall do it,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
26 Again the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
27 “Son of man, see, the house of Yisra’ĕl is saying,
‘The vision that he is seeing is for many days from
now, and he is neḇuah of times far off.’
28 “Therefore say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“None of My words are deferred any longer. When I
speak a word it is done,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
25

13 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, naḇa against the neḇi’im of Yisra’ĕl
who naḇa, and say to those who naḇa out of their own
heart, ‘Hear the word of HWHY!’ ”
3 Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Woe to the foolish
neḇi’im, who are following their own spirit, without
having had a vision!
4 “O Yisra’ĕl, your neḇi’im have been like foxes
among ruins.
5 “You have not gone up into the breaches, nor do
you build a wall for the house of Yisra’ĕl to stand in
battle on the day of HWHY.
6 “Their visions are false and their divinations a lie,
saying, ‘Thus declares HWHY,’ when HWHY has not
sent them, yet they expected the word to be
confirmed!
7 “Have you not seen a false vision, and have you
not spoken a divination of lies? You say, ‘HWHY
declares,’ when I have not spoken.”
8 Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because you
have spoken falsehood and seen lies, therefore see,
I am against you,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
2

1283

YEḤEZQĔL

“My hand shall be against the neḇi’im who see
falsehood and who divine lies. They shall not be in the
council of My people, nor be written in the record of
the house of Yisra’ĕl, and they shall not enter into the
land of Yisra’ĕl. And you shall know that I am the
Aḏon HWHY.
10 “Because, even because they have led My people
astray, saying, ‘Peace!’ when there is no peace. And
when one is building a wall, see, they are coating it
with whitewash!
11 “Say to those who coat it with whitewash: it shall
fall! There shall be flooding rain, and you, O great
hailstones: fall! - and a stormy wind breaks it down,
12 and see, the wall shall fall! Shall you not be asked,
‘Where is the coating with which you coated it?’ ”
13 Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “I shall break
down with a stormy wind in My wrath, and a flooding
rain in My displeasure, and great hailstones in wrath,
to consume.
14 “And I shall throw down the wall you have coated
with whitewash, and bring it down to the ground, and
its foundation shall be uncovered. And it shall fall, and
you shall be consumed in the midst of it. And you shall
know that I am HWHY.
15 “So I shall complete My wrath on the wall and on
those coating it with whitewash, and say to you, ‘The
wall is no more, nor those whitewashing it 16 the neḇi’im of Yisra’ĕl who naḇa concerning
Yerushalayim, and who are seeing visions of peace
for her when there is no peace,’ ” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
17 “And you, son of man, turn your face against the
daughters of your people, who naḇa out of their own
heart, and naḇa against them.
9

1284

EZEKIEL

“And you shall say, ‘This is what the Aḏon HWHY
said, “Woe to those sewing pads for all joints of the
hand, and to those making nettings for the heads of
every height, to trap beings! You trap the beings of
My people, while you preserve your own beings!
19 “And you have profaned Me among My people for
handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to put to
death beings that should not die, and to keep alive
beings who should not live, by your lying to My people
who listen to lies!”
20 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am
against your pads by which you trap the beings there
like birds. And I shall tear them from your arms, and
shall let the beings go, the beings you trap like birds.
21 “And I shall tear off your nettings, and shall deliver
My people out of your hand, and they shall no longer
be as prey in your hand. And you shall know that I am
HWHY.” ’ ”
22 “Because with falsehood you have made the heart
of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad. And
you have strengthened the hands of the wicked, so
that he does not turn from his evil way, to keep him
alive.
23 “Therefore you shall no longer see false visions,
nor practise divination. And I shall deliver My people
out of your hand, and you shall know that I am HWHY.”
’”
18

14 And some of the elders of Yisra’ĕl came to me
and sat before me.
2 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
3 “Son of man, these men have put up their idols in
their hearts, and have put the stumbling-block of their
wickedness before their face. Should I let them
inquire of Me at all?
1285

YEḤEZQĔL

“Therefore speak to them, and you shall say to
them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Everyone of the
house of Yisra’ĕl who puts up his idols in his heart,
and puts the stumbling-block of his wickedness
before his face, and shall come to the naḇi - I HWHY
shall answer him who comes, according to his many
idols,
5 in order to lay hold of the house of Yisra’ĕl by their
heart, for they have become estranged from Me by
their idols, all of them.” ’
6 “Therefore say to the house of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Thus said
the Aḏon HWHY, “Repent, and turn back from your
idols, and turn back your faces from all your
abominations.
7 “For anyone of the house of Yisra’ĕl, or of the
strangers who sojourn in Yisra’ĕl, who separates
himself from Me and puts up his idols in his heart and
puts the stumbling-block of his wickedness before his
face, and shall come to a naḇi to inquire of him
concerning Me, I HWHY shall answer him Myself.
8 “And I shall turn My face against that man and
make him a sign and a proverb, and I shall cut him off
from the midst of My people. And you shall know that
I am HWHY.
9 “And if the naḇi is deceived, and shall speak a
word, I HWHY have deceived that naḇi, and shall
stretch out My hand against him and destroy him from
the midst of My people Yisra’ĕl.
10 “And they shall bear their wickedness, the
wickedness of the naḇi is the same as the wickedness
of the inquirer,
11 so that the house of Yisra’ĕl no longer strays from
Me, nor be made unclean any more with all their
transgressions. And they shall be My people and I be
their Elohim,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
4

1286

EZEKIEL

And the word of HWHY came again to me, saying,
13 “Son of man, when a land sins against Me to
commit a trespass, and I shall stretch out My hand
against it, and cut off its supply of bread and send
scarcity of food on it, and cut off man and beast from
it,
14 even though these three men, Noaḥ, Dani’ĕl, and
lyoḇ, were in it, they would deliver only themselves by
their righteousness,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
15 “If I cause an evil beast to pass through the land,
and it shall bereave it, and it shall be a wasteland, so
that no man passes through because of the beasts,
16 even though these three men were in it, as I live,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY, “they would deliver neither
sons nor daughters. They alone would be delivered,
but the land be a wasteland.
17 “Or if I bring a sword on that land, and I shall say,
‘Sword, go through the land,’ and I shall cut off man
and beast from it,
18 even though these three men were in its midst, as
I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “they would deliver
neither sons nor daughters, for they alone would be
delivered.
19 “Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and I shall
pour out My wrath on it in blood, to cut off from it man
and beast,
20 even though Noaḥ, Dani’ĕl, and lyoḇ were in it, as
I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “they would deliver
neither son nor daughter. They would deliver their
own lives by their righteousness.”
21 For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “How much more it
shall be when I send My four evil judgments on
Yerushalayim: the sword and scarcity of food and evil
beasts and pestilence, to cut off man and beast from
it?
12

1287

YEḤEZQĔL

“But see, there shall be left in it a remnant who are
brought out, both sons and daughters. See, they are
coming out to you, and you shall see their ways and
their deeds, and shall be comforted concerning the
evil which I have brought upon Yerushalayim - all that
I have brought upon it.
23 “And they shall comfort you, when you see their
ways and their deeds. And you shall know that it was
not for naught that I have done whatever I did in it,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY.
22

15 Then the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, how is the vine tree better than any
tree, the vine branch that has been among the trees
of the forest?
3 “Is wood taken from it to be made into any work?
Do they take a peg from it to hang any vessel on?
4 “See, into the fire it shall be given for fuel. Both
ends of it the fire shall burn, and its middle shall be
scorched. Is it fit for any work?
5 “See, when it was intact, it was not made for work,
how much less when the fire has burned it and it is
scorched shall it still be used for work?
6 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘As the vine
tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given
to the fire for fuel, so I shall give up the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim.
7 ‘And I shall turn My face against them. They shall
go out from one fire, but another fire consumes them.
And you shall know that I am HWHY, when I turn My
face against them.
8 ‘And I shall make the land a wasteland, because
they committed trespass,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.”
2

16 Again the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
1288

EZEKIEL

“Son of man, make known to Yerushalayim her
abominations,
3 and say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY to
Yerushalayim, “Your origin and your birth are from the
land of Kena’an. Your father was an Amorite and your
mother a Ḥittite.
4 “As for your birth, on the day you were born your
navel cord was not cut, nor were you washed in water
for cleansing, and you were not rubbed with salt at all,
nor wrapped in cloth at all.
5 “No eye felt sorry for you, to do any of these for
you, to have compassion on you. But you were
thrown out into the open field, to the loathing of your
life on the day you were born.
6 “Then I passed by you and saw you trampled
down in your own blood, and I said to you in your
blood, ‘Live!’ And I said to you in your blood, ‘Live!’
7 “I have let you grow like a plant in the field. And
you are grown and are great, and you come in the
finest ornaments. Breasts were formed, your hair
grew, and you were naked and bare.
8 “Again I passed by you and looked upon you and
saw that your time was the time of love. And I spread
My skirt over you and covered your nakedness. And I
swore an oath to you and entered into a Covenant
with you, and you became Mine,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
9 “And I washed you in water, and I washed off your
blood, and I anointed you with oil.
10 “And I dressed you in embroidered work and gave
you sandals of leather. And I wrapped you in fine linen
and covered you with silk.
11 “And I adorned you with ornaments, and I put
bracelets on your wrists, and a chain on your neck.
2

1289

YEḤEZQĔL

“And I put a ring on your nose, and earrings in your
ears, and a crown of adorning on your head.
13 “Thus you were adorned with gold and silver, and
your dress was of fine linen, and silk, and
embroidered cloth. You ate fine flour, and honey, and
oil. And you were exceedingly pretty, and became fit
for royalty.
14 “And your name went out among the nations
because of your loveliness, for it was perfect, by My
splendour which I had put on you,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
15 “But you trusted in your own loveliness, and
whored because of your name, and poured out your
whorings on everyone passing by who would have it.
16 “And you took some of your garments and made
multi-coloured high places for yourself, and whored
on them - which should not have come about, nor
shall it be.
17 “And you took your splendid adornments, of My
gold and My silver that I gave you, and made for
yourself images of a male and whored with them.
18 “And you took your embroidered garments and
covered them, and you put My oil and My incense
before them.
19 “And My food which I gave you, fine flour and oil
and honey which I fed you, you put it before them as
sweet incense - and so it was,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
20 “And you took your sons and your daughters,
whom you bore to Me, and these you slaughtered as
food to them. Were your whorings a small matter,
21 that you have slain My children and gave them up
to them by causing them to pass through the fire?
12

1290

EZEKIEL

“And in all your abominations and whorings you
did not remember the days of your youth, when you
were naked and bare, trampled down in your blood.
23 “Then it came to be after all your evil - ‘Woe, woe
to you!’ declares the Aḏon HWHY 24 that you also built an arched place for yourself,
and made a high place in every street for yourself.
25 “You built your high places at the head of every
way, and made your loveliness to be loathed. And you
parted your legs to everyone who passed by, and
increased your whorings.
26 “And you whored with the sons of Mitsrayim, your
neighbours, great of flesh. And you increased your
whorings to provoke Me.
27 “And see, I have stretched out My hand against
you, and withdrew your portion, and gave you up to
the desire of those who hate you, the daughters of the
Pelishtites, who are ashamed of your wicked way.
28 “And you whored with the sons of Ashshur, without
being satisfied. And you whored with them and still
were not satisfied.
29 “And you increased your whorings as far as the
land of traders, Kasdim, and even then you were not
satisfied.
30 “How weak is your heart!” declares the Aḏon
HWHY, “seeing you do all this, the deeds of a
shameless whore.
31 “You built your arched place at the head of every
way, and built your high place in every street. Yet you
were unlike a whore, you scorned hire!
32 “The wife who commits adultery who takes
strangers instead of her husband!
33 “To all whores they give gifts, but you gave gifts to
all your lovers, and bribed them to come to you from
all around in your whorings.
22

1291

YEḤEZQĔL

“Thus you are different from other women in your
whorings, because no one whores after you, and in
you giving a hire, while a hire was not given to you.
Thus you are different.”
35 ‘Therefore, O whore, hear the word of HWHY!
36 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because your copper
was poured out and your nakedness uncovered in
your whorings with your lovers, and with the idols of
your abominations, and because of the blood of your
children which you gave to them,
37 therefore, see, I am gathering all your lovers with
whom you took pleasure, all those you loved, with all
those you hated. And I shall gather them from all
around against you and shall uncover your
nakedness to them, and they shall see all your
nakedness.
38 “And I shall judge you with judgments of
adulteresses and shedders of blood. And I shall bring
on you the blood of wrath and jealousy.
39 “And I shall give you into their hand, and they shall
throw your arched place down, and they shall break
down your high places. And they shall strip you of
your garments, and they shall take your splendid
adornments, and leave you naked and bare.
40 “And they shall bring up an assembly against you,
and they shall stone you with stones and thrust you
through with their swords,
41 and burn your houses with fire, and execute
judgments on you before the eyes of many women.
And I shall make you stop whoring, and no longer give
hire.
42 “So I shall bring My wrath to rest upon you, and
My jealousy shall turn away from you. And I shall be
calm, and no longer be wroth.
34

1292

EZEKIEL

“Because you did not remember the days of your
youth, but troubled Me with all this, so see, I shall also
bring your way on your own head,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY. “And shall I not do this thought for all your
abominations?
44 “See, all who use proverbs shall use this proverb
against you, ‘Like mother, like daughter!’
45 “You are your mother’s daughter, who despises
her husband and her children. And you are the sister
of your sisters, who despised their husbands and their
children. Your mother was a Ḥittite and your father an
Amorite.
46 “And your elder sister is Sḥomeron, she and her
daughters, who is dwelling to the north of you. And
your younger sister, who is dwelling to the south of
you, is Seḏom and her daughters.
47 “And have you not walked in their ways and did
according to their abominations? But in all your ways
you soon became more corrupt than they.
48 “As I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “neither your
sister Seḏom nor her daughters have done as you
and your daughters have done.
49 “See, this was the wickedness of your sister
Seḏom: She and her daughter had pride, sufficiency
of bread, and unconcerned ease. And she did not
help the poor and needy.
50 “And they were haughty and did abomination
before Me, and I took them away when I saw it.
51 “And Sḥomeron did not commit half of your sins,
but you have increased your abominations more than
they, and by all the abominations which you have
done you made your sisters seem righteous!
52 “You also, who pleaded for your sisters, bear your
own shame, because the sins which you committed
were more abominable than theirs. They are more
43

1293

YEḤEZQĔL

righteous than you. So be ashamed too, and bear
your own shame, because you have made your
sisters seem righteous.
53 “And I shall turn back their captivity, the captivity
of Seḏom and her daughters, and the captivity of
Sḥomeron and her daughters, and the captivity of
your captives with them,
54 so that you bear your shame, and shall blush for
all that you did when you comforted them,
55 “and your sisters, Seḏom and her daughters,
return to their former state, and Sḥomeron and her
daughters return to their former state, and you and
your daughters return to your former state.
56 “Was not your sister Seḏom a byword in your
mouth in the days of your pride,
57 before your evil was exposed, as the time of the
reproach of the daughters of Aram and all who were
around her, and of the daughters of the Pelishtites,
who are despising you everywhere?
58 “You shall bear your wickedness and your
abominations,” declares HWHY.
59 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “I shall deal with you
as you have done, in that you have despised the oath
by breaking the Covenant.
60 “But I shall remember My Covenant with you in the
days of your youth, and I shall establish an
everlasting Covenant with you.
61 “And you shall remember your ways and be
ashamed, when you receive your older and your
younger sisters. And I shall give them to you for
daughters, though not by your own covenant.
62 “And I Myself shall establish My Covenant with
you. And you shall know that I am HWHY,
63 so that you remember. And you shall be ashamed,
and never open your mouth any more because of
1294

EZEKIEL

your shame, when I pardon you for all you have
done,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”

17 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a
parable to the house of Yisra’ĕl.
3 “And you shall say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“The great eagle with large wings of long pinions,
covered with feathers of various colours, came to
Leḇanon and took the top of the cedar.
4 “He plucked off the topmost of its young twigs and
brought it to a land of traders. In a city of merchants
he placed it.
5 “He also took some of the seed of the land and
planted it in a field for seed. He took it by many
waters, placed it like a willow tree.
6 “So it grew and became a low, spreading vine. Its
branches turned toward him, and its roots were under
it. And it became a vine, and brought forth branches,
and sent out shoots.
7 “And there was another great eagle with large
wings and many feathers. And see, this vine bent its
roots toward him, and stretched its branches toward
him, to water it, away from the beds where it was
planted.
8 “It was planted in a good field by many waters, to
bring forth branches, and to bear fruit, to be a
splendid vine.” ’
9 “Say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Is it going to
thrive? Is he not going to pull up its roots, and cut off
its fruit, and let it wither? All of its sprouting leaves
wither, without great power or many people, to pluck
it up by its roots.
2

1295

YEḤEZQĔL

“See, it is planted, is it going to thrive? Would it not
utterly wither when the east wind touches it - wither in
the beds where it grows?” ’ ”
11 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
12 “Please say to the rebellious house, ‘Do you not
know what these mean?’ Say, ‘See, the sovereign of
Baḇel went to Yerushalayim and took its sovereign
and heads, and brought them with him to Baḇel.
13 ‘And he took one of the royal seed, and made a
covenant with him, and put him under oath. And he
took away the mighty of the land,
14 so that the reign would be brought low and not lift
itself up, but guard his covenant, that it might stand.
15 ‘But he rebelled against him by sending his
messengers to Mitsrayim, to give him horses and
many people. Shall he thrive? Shall he escape who is
doing these? And shall he break a covenant and still
escape?
16 ‘As I live,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY, ‘in the place
where the sovereign dwells who appointed him to
reign, whose oath he despised and whose covenant
he broke, with him in the midst of Baḇel he shall die!
17 ‘And Pharaoh with his great army and great
company is not going to help him in battle, when they
heap up a siege mound and build a wall to cut off
many beings.
18 ‘And he despised the oath by breaking the
covenant. And see, he has given his hand and he has
done all this, he is not going to escape.’ ”
19 Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “As I live, My
oath which he has despised, and My Covenant which
he has broken, shall I not put it on his own head?
20 “And I shall spread My net over him, and he shall
be taken in My snare. And I shall bring him to Baḇel
10

1296

EZEKIEL

and enter into judgment with him there for the
trespass which he committed against Me,
21 and all his fugitives with all his bands fall by the
sword, and those who are left be scattered to every
wind. And you shall know that I, HWHY, have spoken.”
22 Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “And I shall take from
the top of the highest cedar and appoint it. And I
Myself shall pluck off a tender one from the topmost
of its young twigs, and plant it on a high and lofty
mountain.
23 “On the mountain height of Yisra’ĕl I plant it. And
it shall bring forth branches, and bear fruit, and
become a big cedar. And under it shall dwell birds of
every sort, in the shadow of its branches they shall
dwell.
24 “And all the trees of the field shall know that I,
HWHY, have brought down the high tree and exalted
the low tree, dried up the green tree and made the dry
tree flourish. I, HWHY, have spoken and shall do it.”

18 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“What do you mean when you use this proverb
concerning the land of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are
blunted’?
3 “As I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “you shall no
longer use this proverb in Yisra’ĕl.
4 “See, all beings are Mine, the being of the father
as well as the being of the son is Mine. The being that
is sinning shall die.
5 “But if a man is righteous and shall do right-ruling
and righteousness,
6 if he has not eaten on the mountains, nor lifted up
his eyes to the idols of the house of Yisra’ĕl, nor
2

1297

YEḤEZQĔL

defiled his neighbour’s wife, nor comes near a woman
during her uncleanness,
7 if he does not oppress anyone, returns to the
debtor his pledge, does not commit robbery, gives his
bread to the hungry and covers the naked with a
garment,
8 if he does not lend on interest or take increase,
turns back his hand from unrighteousness, executes
right-ruling in truth between man and man,
9 if he walks in My Laws, and he has guarded My
Right-Rulings in truth - he is righteous, he shall
certainly live!” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
10 “But if he has brought forth a son who is a robber
or a shedder of blood, who does any of these 11 whereas he himself did not do any of these - that
also he has eaten on the mountains or defiled his
neighbour’s wife,
12 if he has oppressed the poor and needy, has
committed robbery, he does not return a pledge, has
lifted his eyes to the idols, or done abomination,
13 if he has lent on interest or taken increase - shall
he live? He shall not live! If he has done any of these
abominations, he shall certainly die, his blood is upon
him.
14 “But see, if he has brought forth a son who sees
all the sins which his father has done, but he fears
and does not do likewise,
15 has not eaten on the mountains, and has not lifted
his eyes to the idols of the house of Yisra’ĕl, has not
defiled his neighbour’s wife,
16 has not oppressed anyone, nor withheld a pledge,
nor committed robbery, has given his bread to the
hungry and covered the naked with a garment,
17 turns back his hand from the poor, and he has not
taken interest or increase, has executed My Right1298

EZEKIEL

Rulings and walked in My Laws - he shall not die for
the wickedness of his father, he shall certainly live!
18 “His father, because he used oppression, robbed
his brother, and did what is not good among his
people, see, he shall die for his wickedness.
19 “And you said, ‘Why should the son not bear the
wickedness of the father?’ But the son has done rightruling and righteousness, he has guarded all My Laws
and he does them, he shall certainly live.
20 “The being who sins shall die. The son shall not
bear the wickedness of the father, nor the father bear
the wickedness of the son. The righteousness of the
righteous is upon himself, and the wickedness of the
wicked is upon himself.
21 “But the wicked, if he turns from all his sins which
he has done, and he shall guard all My Laws, and
shall do right-ruling and righteousness, he shall
certainly live, he shall not die.
22 “All the transgressions which he has done shall not
be remembered against him - in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live.
23 “Have I any pleasure in the death of the wicked?”
declares the Aḏon HWHY. “Is it not that he should turn
from his ways, and live?
24 “But when a righteous one turns away from his
righteousness and does unrighteousness, according
to all the abominations that the wicked one has done,
shall he live? All his righteousness which he has done
shall not be remembered. For his trespass which he
has committed, and for his sin which he has
committed, for them he shall die.
25 “And you said, ‘The Way of HWHY is not right.’ Hear
now, O house of Yisra’ĕl, is My Way not right? Is it not
your ways that are not right?
1299

YEḤEZQĔL

“When a righteous one turns away from his
righteousness, and does unrighteousness, and he
dies in it, it is because of his unrighteousness which
he has done that he dies.
27 “And when the wicked turns away from the
wickedness which he has done, and he does rightruling and righteousness, he keeps himself alive.
28 “Because he sees and turns away from all the
transgressions which he has done, he shall certainly
live, he shall not die.
29 “And the house of Yisra’ĕl have said, ‘The Way of
HWHY is not right.’ Are My Ways not right, O house of
Yisra’ĕl? Is it not your ways that are not right?
30 “Therefore I judge you, O house of Yisra’ĕl, every
one according to his ways,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
“Repent, and turn back from all your transgressions,
and let not wickedness be a stumbling-block to you.
31 “Cast away from you all the transgressions, by
which you have transgressed, and make for
yourselves a new heart and a new spirit. For why
should you die, O house of Yisra’ĕl?
32 “For I have no pleasure in the death of one who
dies,” declares the Aḏon HWHY. “So turn back and
live!”
26

19 “And take up a lamentation for the leaders of
Yisra’ĕl,
2 and you shall say, ‘What a lioness was your
mother among the lions! She lay down among the
lions, in the midst of the young lions she reared her
cubs.
3 ‘And she brought up one of her cubs, and he
became a young lion. And he learned to tear the prey,
he devoured men.
1300

EZEKIEL

‘Then nations heard of him. He was caught in their
pit, and they brought him with chains to the land of
Mitsrayim.
5 ‘When she saw, as she waited, that her
expectancy was lost, she took another of her cubs
and made him a young lion.
6 ‘And he went about among the lions, and became
a young lion. And he learned to tear the prey, he
devoured men.
7 ‘And he knew their widows, and laid waste their
cities. And the land and all who filled it was stunned
by the noise of his roaring.
8 ‘Then nations came against him from the
provinces on every side, and spread their net over
him, he was caught in their pit.
9 ‘And they put him in a cage in chains, and brought
him to the sovereign of Baḇel. They brought him in
nets, so his roar was no longer heard on the
mountains of Yisra’ĕl.
10 ‘Your mother was like a vine in your vineyard,
planted by the waters, a bearer of fruit and branching,
because of many waters.
11 ‘And she had strong rods for sceptres of rulers.
And her stature was exalted among the thick
branches, and was seen in her height with the mass
of its branches.
12 ‘But she was uprooted in wrath, she was cast
down to the ground, and the east wind dried her fruit.
Her strong rods were broken and withered, fire
consumed them.
13 ‘And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry
and thirsty land.
14 ‘And fire went out from a rod of her branches. It
devoured her fruit, so that she has no strong rod, a
4

1301

YEḤEZQĔL

sceptre to rule.’ ” This is a lament, and it shall be a
lament.

20 And it came to be in the seventh year, in the fifth
month, on the tenth of the month, that certain of the
elders of Yisra’ĕl came to inquire of HWHY, and sat
before me.
2 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
3 “Son of man, speak to the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and
say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Have you
come to inquire of Me? As I live, I am not being
inquired of by you,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’
4 “Judge them, son of man, judge them! Make
known to them the abominations of their fathers.
5 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon
HWHY, “On the day when I chose Yisra’ĕl and lifted My
hand in an oath to the seed of the house of Ya’aqoḇ,
and made Myself known to them in the land of
Mitsrayim, I lifted My hand in an oath to them, saying,
‘I am HWHY your Elohim.’
6 “On that day I lifted My hand in an oath to them, to
bring them out of the land of Mitsrayim into a land that
I had searched out for them, flowing with milk and
honey, the splendour of all lands.
7 “And I said to them, ‘Each one of you, throw away
the abominations which are before his eyes, and do
not defile yourselves with the idols of Mitsrayim! I am
HWHY your Elohim.’
8 “But they rebelled against Me, and would not obey
Me. All of them did not throw away the abominations
which were before their eyes, nor did they forsake the
idols of Mitsrayim. So I resolved to pour out My wrath
on them to complete My displeasure against them in
the midst of the land of Mitsrayim.
1302

EZEKIEL

“But I acted for My Name’s sake, that it should not
be profaned before the eyes of the gentiles among
whom they were - before whose eyes I had made
Myself known to them, to bring them out of the land
of Mitsrayim.
10 “So I took them out of the land of Mitsrayim, and I
brought them into the wilderness.
11 “And I gave them My Laws and showed them My
Right-Rulings, ‘which, if a man does, he shall live by
them.’
12 “And I also gave them My Shabbathoth, to be a
sign between them and Me, to know that I am HWHY
who makes them qadosh.
13 “But the house of Yisra’ĕl rebelled against Me in
the wilderness. They did not walk in My Laws, and
they rejected My Right-Rulings, which, if a man does,
he shall live by them. And they greatly profaned My
Shabbathoth. Then I said I would pour out My wrath
on them in the wilderness, to consume them.
14 “But I acted for My Name’s sake, not to profane it
before the gentiles, before whose eyes I had brought
them out.
15 “And I Myself also lifted My hand in an oath to
them in the wilderness, not to bring them into the land
which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey,
the splendour of all lands,
16 because they rejected My Right-Rulings and did
not walk in My Laws, and they profaned My
Shabbathoth. For their heart went after their idols.
17 “And My eye pardoned them, from destroying
them. And I did not make an end of them in the
wilderness.
18 “And I said to their children in the wilderness, ‘Do
not walk in the laws of your fathers, nor observe their
rulings, nor defile yourselves with their idols.
9

1303

YEḤEZQĔL

‘I am HWHY your Elohim. Walk in My Laws, and
guard My Right-Rulings, and do them.
20 ‘And qadosh My Shabbathoth, and they shall be a
sign between Me and you, to know that I am HWHY
your Elohim.’
21 “But the children rebelled against Me. They did not
walk in My Laws, and My Right-Rulings they did not
guard to do them, which, if a man does, he shall live
by them. They profaned My Shabbathoth, so I
resolved to pour out My wrath on them to complete
My displeasure against them in the wilderness.
22 “But I held back My hand and acted for My Name’s
sake, not to profane it before the eyes of the gentiles,
before whose eyes I had brought them out.
23 “Also, I Myself lifted My hand in an oath to those
in the wilderness, to scatter them among the gentiles
and disperse them throughout the lands,
24 because they had not done My Right-Rulings, and
they rejected My Laws, and they profaned My
Shabbathoth, and their eyes were on their fathers’
idols.
25 “And I also gave them up to laws that were not
good, and right-rulings by which they would not live.
26 “And I defiled them by their own gifts, as they
passed all their first-born through the fire, so that I
might stun them, so that they know that I am HWHY.” ’
27 “Therefore, son of man, speak to the house of
Yisra’ĕl, and you shall say to them, ‘Thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, “In this your fathers have further reviled
Me, by committing trespass against Me.
28 “When I brought them into the land for which I had
lifted My hand in an oath to give them, and they saw
all the high hills and all the thick trees, they offered
their slaughterings there and provoked Me with their
offerings there. And they sent up their sweet
19

1304

EZEKIEL

fragrance there and poured out their drink offerings
there.
29 “And I said to them, ‘What is this high place to
which you go?’ So its name is called Bamah to this
day.” ’
30 “Therefore say to the house of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Thus said
the Aḏon HWHY, “Are you defiling yourselves in the
way of your fathers? And do you whore after their
abominations?
31 “For when you lift up your gifts and make your
sons pass through the fire, you defile yourselves with
all your idols, even to this day. And shall I be inquired
of by you, O house of Yisra’ĕl? As I live,” declares the
Aḏon HWHY, “I am not being inquired of by you.
32 “And what comes up in your spirit shall never be,
when you say, ‘Let us be like the gentiles, like the
tribes in other lands, serving wood and stone.’
33 “As I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “do not I, with
a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with
wrath poured out, reign over you?
34 “And I shall bring you out from the peoples and
gather you out of the lands where you are scattered,
with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm,
and with wrath poured out.
35 “And I shall bring you into the wilderness of the
peoples, and shall enter into judgment with you face
to face there.
36 “As I entered into judgment with your fathers in the
wilderness of the land of Mitsrayim, so I shall enter
into judgment with you,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
37 “And I shall make you pass under the rod, and
shall bring you into the bond of the Covenant,
38 and purge the rebels from among you, and those
who transgress against Me. From the land where they
sojourn I bring them out, but they shall not come into
1305

YEḤEZQĔL

the land of Yisra’ĕl. And you shall know that I am
HWHY.
39 “As for you, O house of Yisra’ĕl,” thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, “Go, serve each of you his idols, and
afterwards, if you are not listening to Me. But do not
profane My qodesh Name any more with your gifts
and your idols.
40 “For on My qodesh mountain, on the mountain
height of Yisra’ĕl,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “there all
the house of Yisra’ĕl, all of them in the land, shall
serve Me. There I shall accept them, and there I shall
require your offerings and the first-fruits of your
offerings, together with all your qodesh gifts.
41 “As a sweet fragrance I shall accept you when I
bring you out from the peoples. And I shall gather you
out of the lands where you have been scattered. And
I shall be qadosh in you before the gentiles.
42 “And you shall know that I am HWHY, when I bring
you into the land of Yisra’ĕl, into the land for which I
lifted My hand in an oath to give to your fathers.
43 “And there you shall remember your ways and all
your deeds with which you were defiled. And you shall
loathe yourselves in your own sight because of all the
evils that you did.
44 “And you shall know that I am HWHY, when I have
dealt with you for My Name’s sake, not according to
your evil ways nor according to your corrupt deeds, O
house of Yisra’ĕl,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
45 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
46 “Son of man, turn your face toward the south, and
preach against the south and naḇa against the forest
land, the Negeḇ.
47 “And you shall say to the forest of the Negeḇ,
‘Hear the word of HWHY! Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“See, I am kindling a fire in you, and it shall devour
1306

EZEKIEL

every green tree and every dry tree in you - the
blazing flame is not quenched. And it shall burn all
faces from the south to the north.
48 “And all flesh shall see that I, HWHY, have kindled
it, it is not quenched.” ’ ”
49 And I said, “Ah, Aḏonai HWHY! They are saying of
me, ‘Is he not speaking parables?’ ”

21 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, turn your face toward Yerushalayim,
and preach against the miqdashim, and naḇa against
the land of Yisra’ĕl.
3 “And you shall say to the land of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Thus
said HWHY, “See, I am against you, and I shall draw
My sword out of its sheath and cut off from you the
righteous and the wicked.
4 “Because I shall cut off from you the righteous and
the wicked, therefore My sword shall go out of its
sheath against all flesh from south to north.
5 “And all flesh shall know that I, HWHY, have drawn
My sword out of its sheath, not to turn back again.” ’
6 “And you, son of man, sigh with a breaking of loins,
and sigh with bitterness before their eyes.
7 “And it shall be when they say to you, ‘Why are
you sighing?’ that you shall say, ‘Because of the
report that is coming. And every heart shall melt, and
all hands shall go limp, and every spirit become faint,
and all knees be weak as water. See, it is coming,
and it shall be,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.”
8 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
9 “Son of man, naḇa, and you shall say, ‘Thus said
HWHY! “Say, ‘A sword, a sword is sharpened and also
polished!
2

1307

YEḤEZQĔL

‘It is sharpened to make a slaughter, it is polished
to flash like lightning!’ Or shall we rejoice? My son,
you have despised the rod, every stick!
11 “And He has given it to be polished, to be taken by
the hand. This sword is sharpened and polished, to
be given into the hand of the slayer.
12 “Cry and wail, son of man, for it shall be on My
people, on all the leaders of Yisra’ĕl. They shall be
delivered to the sword together with My people,
therefore strike your thigh.
13 “For it is a trier, and what if it even despises the
rod? Shall it not be?” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
14 “And you, son of man, naḇa, and strike your hands
together. And let the sword come down twice, thrice,
the sword for the slain. It is the sword of the slain, the
great one, which surrounds them.
15 “I have turned the point of the sword against all
their gates, to melt the heart and that the overthrown
be many. Ah! It is made like lightning, keen for
slaughter.
16 “Sharpen yourself on the right, mark yourself on
the left, wherever your edge is appointed!
17 And I too, I shall strike My hands together and
cause My wrath to rest. I, HWHY, have spoken.”
18 And the word of HWHY came to me again, saying,
19 “And you, son of man, appoint for yourself two
ways for the sword of the sovereign of Baḇel to go,
both of them coming from one land. And place a
signpost, put it at the head of the way to the city.
20 “Appoint a way for the sword to go to Rabbah of
the Ammonites, and to Yahuḏah, into the walled
Yerushalayim.
21 “For the sovereign of Baḇel shall stand at the
parting of the way, at the fork of the two ways, to
practise divination. He shall shake the arrows, he
10

1308

EZEKIEL

shall ask the household idols, he shall look at the
liver.
22 “In his right hand shall be the divination for
Yerushalayim: to put up battering rams, to call for a
slaughter, to lift the voice with shouting, to put
battering rams against the gates, to heap up a siege
mound, to build a wall.
23 “And it shall be to them as a false divination in the
eyes of those who have sworn oaths to them. But he
is bringing their wickedness to remembrance, so that
they are taken.
24 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Because you
have made your wickedness to be remembered, in
that your transgressions are uncovered, so that your
sins are seen in all your deeds. Because you have
been remembered, you are taken by hand.
25 ‘And to you, O profane, wicked one, leader of
Yisra’ĕl, whose day has come, in the time of the
wickedness of the end,
26 thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Remove the turban, and
take off the crown! This shall not remain! Exalt the
humble, and humble the exalted.
27 ‘Overthrown, overthrown, I make it overthrown! It
shall be no longer, until He comes to whom it rightly
belongs - and I shall give it!’
28 “And you, son of man, naḇa and say, ‘Thus said
the Aḏon HWHY concerning the Ammonites and
concerning their reproach.’ And you shall say, ‘A
sword, a sword, drawn for slaughter, polished to the
utmost like lightning 29 while they see false visions for you, while they
divine a lie to you - to put you on the necks of the
profaned ones, the wicked ones whose day has
come, in the time of the wickedness of the end.
1309

YEḤEZQĔL

‘Return it to its sheath. In the place where you
were created, in the land of your origin, I shall judge
you.
31 ‘And I shall pour out My displeasure on you, blow
against you with the fire of My wrath, and shall give
you into the hands of beastly men, skilled to destroy.
32 ‘You are to be fuel for the fire, your blood to be in
the midst of the land. You are not to be remembered,
for I HWHY have spoken.’ ”
30

22 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“And now, son of man, judge, judge the city of
blood! And you shall show her all her abominations!
3 “And you shall say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“The city sheds blood in her midst, that her time might
come. And she has made idols within herself to
become defiled.
4 “You have become guilty by the blood which you
have shed, and have defiled yourself with the idols
which you have made. Thus you have brought your
days near, and have come to the end of your years.
Therefore I shall make you a reproach to the gentiles,
and a mockery to all lands.
5 “Those near and those far from you mock you defiled is your name and great the confusion!
6 “See the leaders of Yisra’ĕl: each one has used
his arm to shed blood in you.
7 “They have despised father and mother within
you. They have oppressed the stranger in your midst.
They have oppressed the fatherless and the widow
within you.
8 “You have despised that which is qodesh to Me,
and you have profaned My Shabbathoth.
2

1310

EZEKIEL

“Slanderous men have been in you to shed blood.
And in you are those who eat on the mountains. They
have done wickedness in your midst.
10 “In you they have uncovered the nakedness of a
father. In you they have humbled women who are
defiled during their uncleanness.
11 “And the one has done abomination with his
neighbour’s wife. And another has wickedly defiled
his daughter-in-law. And another within you has
humbled his sister, his father’s daughter.
12 “In you they have taken a bribe to shed blood. You
have taken interest and increase. You have cut off
your neighbour by extortion. And you have forgotten
Me,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
13 “And see, I shall smite My hand because of your
greedy gain which you have made, and at the
bloodshed which has been in your midst.
14 “Would your heart stand, your hands remain
strong, in the days when I deal with you? I, HWHY,
have spoken, and shall do it.
15 “And I shall scatter you among the gentiles, and
shall disperse you throughout the lands, and shall
consume your filthiness out of you.
16 “And you shall profane yourself before the eyes of
the gentiles. And you shall know that I am HWHY.” ’
”
17 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, the house of Yisra’ĕl has become
dross to Me. All of them are bronze, and tin, and iron,
and lead, in the midst of a furnace - they have become
the dross of silver.
19 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Because all
of you have become dross, therefore see, I am
gathering you into the midst of Yerushalayim.
9

1311

YEḤEZQĔL

‘As they gather silver, and bronze, and iron, and
lead, and tin into the midst of a furnace, to blow fire
on it, to melt it, so I gather you in My displeasure and
in My wrath. And I shall blow and melt you.
21 ‘And I shall gather you and blow on you with the
fire of My wrath, and you shall be melted in its midst.
22 ‘As silver is melted in the midst of a furnace, so are
you melted in its midst. And you shall know that I,
HWHY, have poured out My wrath on you.’ ”
23 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
24 “Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that is not
cleansed or rained upon in the day of displeasure.’
25 “There is a conspiracy of her neḇi’im in her midst,
like a roaring lion tearing the prey. They have
devoured life, they have taken treasure and wealth,
they have made many widows in her midst.
26 “Her kohenim have done violence to My Torah and
they profane My qodesh matters. They have not
distinguished between the qodesh and profane, nor
have they made known between the unclean and the
clean. And they have hidden their eyes from My
Shabbathoth, and I am profaned in their midst.
27 “Her leaders in her midst are like wolves tearing
the prey, to shed blood, to destroy lives, and to get
greedy gain.
28 “And her neḇi’im have coated them with
whitewash, seeing a false vision, and divining a lie for
them, saying, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,’ when HWHY
had not spoken.
29 “The
people of the land have practised
oppression, and committed robbery, and have
oppressed the poor and needy. And they oppressed
the stranger without right-ruling.
30 “And I sought for a man among them who would
make a wall, and stand in the breach before Me on
20

1312

EZEKIEL

behalf of the land, that I should not destroy it - but I
did not find one!
31 “Therefore I have poured out My displeasure on
them, I have consumed them with the fire of My wrath.
And I have put their way on their own head,” declares
the Aḏon HWHY.

23 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, there were two women, daughters of
one mother.
3 “And they whored in Mitsrayim, they whored in
their youth. There their breasts were handled, and
there their maiden nipples were squeezed.
4 “And their names were: Oholah the elder and
Oholiḇah her sister. And they were Mine, and they
bore sons and daughters. And their names:
Sḥomeron is Oholah, and Yerushalayim is Oholiḇah.
5 “And Oholah whored while she was Mine. And she
lusted for her lovers, the neighbouring Ashshurians,
6 dressed in purple, officers and rulers, all of them
desirable young men, horsemen riding on horses.
7 “So she gave her whorings on them, all of them
choice sons of Ashshur. And with all for whom she
lusted, with all their idols, she defiled herself.
8 “And she did not forsake her whorings from
Mitsrayim, for in her youth they had lain with her, and
they squeezed her maiden nipples, and poured out
their whorings on her.
9 “Therefore I have given her into the hand of her
lovers, into the hand of the Ashshurians, for whom
she lusted.
10 “They uncovered her nakedness, they took away
her sons and daughters, and slew her with the sword.
And she became a byword among women, and they
executed judgments on her.
2

1313

YEḤEZQĔL

“And her sister Oholiḇah saw this, yet she became
more corrupt in her lust than she, and in her whorings
more corrupt than her sister’s whorings.
12 “She lusted for the sons of Ashshur, officers and
rulers, the ones near, perfectly dressed, horsemen
riding on horses, all of them desirable young men.
13 “And I saw that she was defiled, they both took the
same way.
14 “But she increased her whorings, and she looked
at men carved on the wall, images of Kasdites
portrayed in red,
15 girded with belts around their loins, flowing
turbans on their heads, all of them looking like
officers, like the Baḇelians of Kasdim, the land of their
birth.
16 “As soon as her eyes saw them, she lusted for
them and sent messengers to them in Kasdim.
17 “And the Baḇelians came to her, into the bed of
love, and they defiled her with their whorings. And she
was defiled by them, and her being turned from them
in disgust.
18 “And she uncovered her whorings and uncovered
her nakedness. Then I turned My being from her in
disgust, as My being had turned from her sister in
disgust.
19 “And she increased her whorings, remembering
the days of her youth, when she whored in the land of
Mitsrayim.
20 “And she lusted after her lovers, whose flesh is like
the flesh of donkeys, and whose emission is like the
emission of horses.
21 “Thus you longed for the wickedness of your
youth, when the Mitsrites squeezed your nipples
because of the breasts of your youth.
11

1314

EZEKIEL

“Therefore, Oholiḇah, thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
‘See, I am stirring up your lovers against you, from
whom your being turned in disgust, and shall bring
them against you from every side:
23 the Baḇelians, and all the Kasdites, Peqoḏ, and
Showa, and Qowa, all the sons of Ashshur with them,
all of them desirable young men, governors and
rulers, officers and men of name, all of them riding on
horses.
24 ‘And they shall come against you with battle-axe,
chariots, and wheels, and with an assembly of
peoples. They shall put against you armour, and
shield, and helmet all around. And I shall commit the
judgment to them, and they shall judge you according
to their rulings.
25 ‘And I shall turn My jealousy against you and they
shall deal heatedly with you. They shall cut off your
nose and your ears, while the rest of you fall by the
sword. Your sons and your daughters they shall take
away, while the rest of you shall be consumed by fire.
26 ‘And they shall strip you of your garments and
shall take your pretty jewels.
27 ‘And I shall put an end to your wickedness and to
your whorings from the land of Mitsrayim, so that you
do not lift your eyes to them neither remember
Mitsrayim any more.’
28 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am giving
you into the hand of those whom you hate, into the
hand of those from whom your being turned in
disgust.
29 ‘And they shall deal with you in hatred, and they
shall take away all you have worked for, and they
shall leave you naked and bare. And the nakedness
of your whorings shall be uncovered, and the
wickedness of your whorings.
22

1315

YEḤEZQĔL

‘I do this to you because of your whoring after the
gentiles, because you have been defiled by their
idols.
31 ‘You have walked in the way of your sister, and I
shall give her cup into your hand.’
32 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Drink of your sister’s
cup, the deep and wide one - you being laughed at
and mocked at - for it holds much.
33 ‘Be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, the cup of
astonishment and ruin, the cup of your sister
Sḥomeron.
34 ‘And you shall drink it and shall drain it, and gnaw
its shards, and tear at your own breasts. For I have
spoken,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.
35 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Because you
have forgotten Me and cast Me behind your back,
therefore you shall bear your wickedness and your
whorings.’ ”
36 And HWHY said to me, “Son of man, judge Oholah
and Oholiḇah! And declare to them their
abominations.
37 “For they have committed adultery, and blood is
on their hands. And they have committed adultery
with their idols, and even offered their sons whom
they bore to Me, passing them through the fire, to
devour.
38 “They also did this to Me: They have defiled My
Miqdash on the same day, and they have profaned
My Shabbathoth.
39 “For when they had slain their children for their
idols, on the same day they came into My Miqdash to
profane it. And see, that is what they did in the midst
of My House.
40 “And they even sent for men to come from afar, to
whom a messenger was sent. And see, they came 30

1316

EZEKIEL

for whom you washed yourself, painted your eyes,
and adorned yourself with ornaments.
41 “And you sat on a splendid couch, with a table
prepared before it, on which you had put My incense
and My oil.
42 “And the sound of a crowd at ease was with her,
and drunkards were brought from the wilderness with
men of the commonest sort. And they put bracelets
on their wrists and pretty crowns on their heads.
43 “Then I said concerning the one worn out in
adulteries, ‘Now let them commit her whorings, even
hers!’
44 “And they went in to her, as men go in to a woman
who is a whore. Thus they went in to Oholah and
Oholiḇah, the wicked women.
45 “But let righteous men judge them with the
judgment of adulteresses, and the judgment of
women who shed blood, for they are adulteresses,
and blood is on their hands.
46 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Bring up an
assembly against them, give them up to maltreatment
and plunder.
47 ‘And the assembly shall stone them with stones
and cut them with their swords. They shall slay their
sons and their daughters, and burn their houses with
fire.
48 ‘And I shall put an end to wickedness in the land,
and all the women shall be instructed not to commit
wickedness as you have done.
49 ‘And they shall put your wickedness on you, and
you shall bear the sins of your idols. And you shall
know that I am the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”

1317

YEḤEZQĔL

24 And in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the
tenth of the month, the word of HWHY came to me,
saying,
2 “Son of man, write down the name of the day, for
on this same day the sovereign of Baḇel has thrown
himself against Yerushalayim.
3 “And speak a parable to the rebellious house, and
you shall say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Put
on a pot, put it on, and also pour water into it.
4 “Gather pieces of meat in it, every good piece, the
thigh and the shoulder, fill it with choice bones.
5 “Take the choice of the flock, also pile bones under
it, cook it thoroughly, also let the bones cook in it.”
6 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Woe to the
city of blood, to the pot in which there is rust, and
whose rust has not gone out of it! Bring it out piece by
piece, on which no lot has fallen.
7 “For her blood is in her midst. She has put it on a
shining rock. She did not pour it on the ground, to
cover it with dust.
8 “To stir up wrath and take vengeance, I have put
her blood on a shining rock, so that it would not be
covered.”
9 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Woe to the
city of blood! Let Me also make the pile great.
10 “Heap on the wood, kindle the fire, cook the meat
well, mixing in the spices, and let the bones be burned
up.
11 “And stand it on the coals, empty, so that it gets
hot, and its bronze glows. And its filthiness shall be
melted in it, and its rust be consumed.
12 “She has wearied herself with sorrows, and her
great rust has not gone from her. Into the fire with her
rust!
1318

EZEKIEL

“In your filthiness is wickedness. Because I have
cleansed you, but you are not clean. You shall not be
cleansed of your filthiness any more, till I have caused
My wrath to rest upon you.
14 “I, HWHY, have spoken. It shall come, and I shall
do it. I do not hold back, nor do I pardon, nor do I
relent. According to your ways and according to your
deeds they shall judge you,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’
”
15 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
16 “Son of man, see, I am taking away from you the
desire of your eyes with one stroke. But do not mourn,
nor weep, nor let your tears run down.
17 “Groan silently, make no mourning for the dead.
Bind your turban on your head, and put your sandals
on your feet. Do not cover your upper lip, and do not
eat man’s bread of sorrow.”
18 And I spoke to the people in the morning, and in
the evening my wife died. And the next morning I did
as I was commanded.
19 And the people said to me, “Would you not explain
to us what these matters you are doing mean to us?”
20 And I said to them, “The word of HWHY came to me,
saying,
21 ‘Speak to the house of Yisra’ĕl, “Thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am profaning My Miqdash - the
pride of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and
the delight of your being. And your sons and
daughters whom you left behind shall fall by the
sword.
22 ‘And you shall do as I have done, do not cover
your upper lip nor eat man’s bread of sorrow,
23 and let your turbans remain on your heads and
your sandals on your feet. Do not mourn, nor weep,
13

1319

YEḤEZQĔL

but you shall pine away in your wickednesses and
groan with one another.
24 ‘And Yeḥezqĕl shall be a sign to you. Do according
to all that he has done. When this comes, you shall
know that I am the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
25 ‘And you, son of man, on the day when I take from
them their stronghold, the joy of their adorning, the
desire of their eyes, and the lifting up of their being,
their sons and their daughters,
26 on that day one that has escaped shall come to
you to let you hear it with your ears.
27 ‘On that day your mouth shall be opened to him
who has escaped, and you shall speak and no longer
be silent. And you shall be a sign to them. And they
shall know that I am HWHY.’ ”

25 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, turn your face against the
Ammonites, and naḇa against them.
3 “And you shall say to the Ammonites, ‘Hear the
word of the Aḏon HWHY! Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“Because you said, ‘Aha!’ against My Miqdash when
it was profaned, and against the land of Yisra’ĕl when
it was ruined, and against the house of Yahuḏah
when they went into exile,
4 therefore, see, I am giving you as a possession to
the men of the East, and they shall put their
encampments among you and make their dwellings
among you - they shall eat your fruit, and they shall
drink your milk.
5 “And I shall make Rabbah a pasture for camels
and Ammon a resting place for flocks. And you shall
know that I am HWHY.”
6 ‘For this is what the Aḏon HWHY said, “Because
you clapped your hands, and you stamped your feet,
2

1320

EZEKIEL

and rejoiced with all the scorn of your being against
the land of Yisra’ĕl,
7 therefore see, I Myself shall stretch out My hand
against you, and give you as plunder to the nations.
And I shall cut you off from the peoples, and make
you perish from the lands. I shall destroy you, and you
shall know that I am HWHY.”
8 ‘This is what the Aḏon HWHY said, “Because Mo’aḇ
and Sĕ’ir say, ‘See, the house of Yahuḏah is like all
the gentiles,’
9 therefore, see, I am opening the flank of Mo’aḇ on
the side of the cities, on the side of his cities on its
frontiers, the splendour of the land, Bĕyth Yeshimoth,
Ba’al Me’on, and Qiryathayim,
10 and I shall give it, together with the Ammonites, as
a possession to the men of the East, so that the
Ammonites are no more remembered among the
nations.
11 “Also on Mo’aḇ I execute judgments, and they
shall know that I am HWHY.”
12 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because of what
Eḏom has done against the house of Yahuḏah by
taking vengeance, so that they became very guilty,
and they have taken vengeance on them,”
13 therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “I shall stretch
out My hand against Eḏom, and I shall cut off man
and beast from it and lay it waste - from Tĕman even
to Deḏaneh they shall fall by the sword.
14 “And I shall lay My vengeance on Eḏom by the
hand of My people Yisra’ĕl. And they shall do in Eḏom
according to My displeasure and according to My
wrath. So they shall know My vengeance,” declares
the Aḏon HWHY.
15 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because the
Pelishtites have acted in vengeance, and took
1321

YEḤEZQĔL

vengeance with scorn in being, to destroy with lasting
enmity,”
16 therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am
stretching out My hand against the Pelishtites, and I
shall cut off the Kerĕthites and destroy the remnant of
the seacoast,
17 and execute great vengeance on them with raging
reproofs. And they shall know that I am HWHY, when I
lay My vengeance upon them.” ’ ”

26 And it came to be in the eleventh year, on the first
of the month, the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, because Tsor has spoken against
Yerushalayim, ‘Aha! She, the gateway of the peoples,
has been broken, she has been turned over to me.
Let me be filled, she has been ruined.’
3 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am
against you, O Tsor, and shall cause many nations to
come up against you, as the sea causes its waves to
come up.
4 ‘And they shall destroy the walls of Tsor, and they
shall break down her towers. And I shall scrape her
dust from her, and shall make her like a shining rock.
5 ‘She shall be a place for spreading nets in the
midst of the sea, for I have spoken,’ declares the
Aḏon HWHY. ‘And she shall become plunder for the
nations,
6 while her daughter villages which are in the fields
are slain by the sword. And they shall know that I am
HWHY.’
7 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am bringing
against Tsor from the north Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel, a sovereign of sovereigns, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, even
an assembly, and many people.
1322

EZEKIEL

‘With the sword he shall slay your daughter
villages in the fields. And he shall heap up a siege
mound against you, and shall build a wall against you,
and shall raise a large shield against you,
9 and lay the blow of his battering rams against your
walls, and break down your towers with his weapons.
10 ‘From his many horses, their dust shall cover you.
From the noise of the horsemen, and wheels, and
chariots, your walls shall shake as he enters your
gates, as men enter a city that is breached.
11 ‘With the hooves of his horses he tramples all your
streets, he slays your people by the sword, and the
columns of your strength shall fall to the ground.
12 ‘And they shall plunder your riches, and they shall
loot your merchandise. And they shall break down
your walls and destroy your pleasant houses. And
they shall put your stones, and your timber, and your
dust in the midst of the water.
13 ‘And I shall cause the sound of your songs to
cease, and let the sound of your lyres be heard no
more.
14 ‘And I shall make you like a shining rock, and let
you be a place for spreading nets, never to be rebuilt,
for I HWHY have spoken,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.
15 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY to Tsor, ‘Would the
coastlands not shake at the sound of your fall, when
the wounded cry, when slaughter is made in your
midst?
16 ‘And all the princes of the sea shall come down
from their thrones, and they shall lay aside their
robes, and take off their embroidered garments, and
put on trembling, and sit on the ground. And they shall
tremble continuously, and they shall be astonished at
you.
8

1323

YEḤEZQĔL

‘And they shall take up a lamentation for you, and
say to you, “How you have perished, O one inhabited
by seafaring men, the city well-praised, who was
strong at sea, she and her inhabitants, who put their
fear on all her inhabitants!
18 Now the coastlands tremble on the day of your fall!
And the coastlands by the sea shall shudder at your
going out.” ’
19 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘When I make you
a ruined city, like cities no longer inhabited, when I
bring the deep upon you, and great waters cover you,
20 then I shall bring you down with those who go
down into the pit, to the people of old. And I shall
make you dwell in the lowest part of the earth, in
wastes of old, with those who go to the pit, so that you
do not return. But I shall establish splendour in the
land of the living.
21 ‘I make you a horror, and let you be no more. And
you are sought for, but never found again,’ declares
the Aḏon HWHY.”
17

27 The word of HWHY came again to me, saying,
“Now, son of man, take up a lamentation for Tsor,
3 and you shall say to Tsor, ‘You who dwell at the
entrance to the sea, merchant of the peoples on many
coastlands, thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “O Tsor, you
yourself have said, ‘I am perfect in loveliness.’
4 “Your borders are in the heart of the seas. Your
builders have perfected your loveliness.
5 “They have made all your timbers of fir trees from
Senir. They took a cedar from Leḇanon to make a
mast for you.
6 “From the oaks of Bashan they made your oars.
They made your deck with ivory from the coasts of
Kittim.
2

1324

EZEKIEL

“Of fine embroidered linen from Mitsrayim was
your sail to serve you as banner. Of blue and purple
from the coasts of Elishah was your covering.
8 “The inhabitants of Tsiḏon and Arwaḏ were your
seamen. Your wise men, O Tsor, were in you, they
were your sailors.
9 “The elders of Geḇal and its wise men were in you
repairing your seams. All the ships of the sea and
their seamen were in you to trade your merchandise.
10 “Those from Paras, Luḏ, and Put were in your
army as men of battle. Shield and helmet they hung
up within you, they gave splendour to you.
11 “The sons of Arwaḏ, and your army were on your
walls all around, and the Gammaḏites were in your
towers. They hung their shields on your walls all
around, they perfected your loveliness.
12 “Tarshish was your merchant because of your
great wealth. They gave you silver, iron, tin, and lead
for your merchandise.
13 “Yawan, Tuḇal, and Mesheḵ were your traders.
They exchanged slaves and objects of bronze for
your merchandise.
14 “Those from the house of Toḡarmah exchanged
horses, and horsemen, and mules for your
merchandise.
15 “The men of Deḏan traded with you. Many isles
were your market, they brought you ivory tusks and
ebony as payment.
16 “Aram was your merchant because of the
multitude of your works. They gave you emeralds,
purple, and embroidery, and fine linen, and corals,
and rubies for your wares.
17 “Yahuḏah and the land of Yisra’ĕl were your
traders. For your merchandise they exchanged wheat
7

1325

YEḤEZQĔL

of Minnith, and early figs, and honey, and oil, and
balm.
18 “Dammeseq was your merchant because of the
multitude of your works, because of your great wealth
of goods, with the wine of Ḥelbon and with white wool.
19 “Weḏan and Yawan from Uzal paid for your wares,
they exchanged wrought iron, cassia, and cane for
your merchandise.
20 “Deḏan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding.
21 “Araḇia, and all princes of Qĕḏar, were merchants
for you. In lambs, and rams, and goats they were your
merchants.
22 “The traders of Sheḇa and Ra’mah were your
traders. They paid for your wares with the choicest
spices, and all kinds of precious stones, and gold.
23 “Ḥaran, and Kanneh, and Ĕḏen, traders of Sheḇa,
Ashshur, and Kilmaḏ traded with you.
24 “They traded with you in perfect items, in purple
clothes, in embroidered garments, in chests of multicoloured clothes, in strong twined cords, among your
merchandise.
25 “The ships of Tarshish were the travellers of your
merchandise. And you were filled and richly laden in
the heart of the seas.
26 “Your seamen brought you into many waters, but
the east wind broke you in the heart of the seas.
27 “Your wealth, and your wares, your merchandise,
your mariners and your sailors, your repairers of
seams, and your dealers in merchandise, and all your
fighting men who are in you, and the entire company
which is in your midst, shall go down into the heart of
the seas on the day of your fall,
28 the coasts shaking at the sound of the cry of your
sailors.
1326

EZEKIEL

“And all the oarsmen, the mariners, all the sailors
of the sea shall come down from their ships. They
shall stand on the shore,
30 and they shall raise their voice and cry bitterly over
you, and cast dust on their heads, rolling themselves
in ashes.
31 “And they shall shave themselves bald because of
you, and shall gird themselves with sackcloth. And
they shall weep for you with bitterness of heart and
bitter wailing.
32 “And in their wailing for you they shall take up a
lamentation. And they shall lament for you, ‘Who is
cut off in the midst of the sea like Tsor?
33 ‘When your wares went out by sea, you have filled
many peoples; with your great wealth and your
merchandise you have made the sovereigns of the
earth rich.
34 ‘In the time you are broken by the seas in the
depths of the waters, your merchandise and all your
company shall fall in your midst.
35 ‘All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished
at you, and their sovereigns shall be greatly afraid,
their faces shall be troubled.
36 ‘The merchants among the peoples shall whistle
at you. You shall become a horror, and be no more,
forever.’ ” ’ ”
29

28 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, say to the prince of Tsor, ‘Thus said
the Aḏon HWHY, “Because your heart is lifted up, and
you say, ‘I am Ĕl, I sit in the seat of Elohim, in the
heart of the seas,’ whereas you are a man, and not
Ĕl, though you make your heart as the heart of
Elohim!

2

1327

YEḤEZQĔL

“Look, are you wiser than Dani’ĕl? Has no secret
been hidden from you?
4 “By your wisdom and your understanding you
have made riches for yourself, and gathered gold and
silver into your treasuries.
5 “By your great wisdom, by your trade you have
increased your riches, and your heart is lifted up
because of your riches.”
6 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because you
have made your heart as the heart of Elohim,
7 therefore see, I am bringing against you strangers,
the ruthless ones of the nations. And they shall draw
their swords against the loveliness of your wisdom,
and they shall profane your splendour.
8 “Down into the pit they shall bring you, and you
shall die the death of the slain in the heart of the seas.
9 “Would you still say before him who slays you, ‘I
am Elohim’, whereas you are man, and not Ĕl, in the
hand of him who slays you?
10 “The death of the uncircumcised you shall die, by
the hand of foreigners. For I have spoken,” declares
the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
11 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
12 “Son of man, take up a lamentation for the
sovereign of Tsor, and you shall say to him, ‘Thus
said the Aḏon HWHY, “You were sealing up a pattern,
complete in wisdom and perfect in loveliness.
13 “You were in Ĕḏen, the garden of Elohim. Every
precious stone was your covering: the ruby, topaz,
and diamond, beryl, shoham, and jasper, sapphire,
turquoise, and emerald and gold. The workmanship
of your collets and mountings was prepared for you
on the day you were created.
14 “You were the anointed keruḇ that covered. And I
placed you, you were on the qodesh mountain of
3

1328

EZEKIEL

Elohim. You walked up and down in the midst of
stones of fire.
15 “You were perfect in your ways from the day you
were created, until unrighteousness was found in you.
16 “By the greatness of your trade you became filled
with violence within, and you sinned. So I thrust you
from the mountain of Elohim, and I destroyed you, O
covering keruḇ, from the midst of the stones of fire.
17 “Your heart was lifted up because of your
loveliness, you corrupted your wisdom for the sake of
your splendour. I threw you to the earth, I laid you
before sovereigns, to look at you.
18 “You profaned your miqdashim by your many
wickednesses, by the unrighteousness of your
trading. Therefore I brought forth fire from your midst.
It has devoured you, and I turned you to ashes upon
the earth before the eyes of all who see you.
19 “All who knew you among the peoples were
astonished at you. Waste you shall be, and cease to
be, forever.” ’ ”
20 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
21 “Son of man, turn your face toward Tsiḏon, and
naḇa against her,
22 and you shall say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“See, I am against you, O Tsiḏon, and I shall be
esteemed in your midst. And they shall know that I am
HWHY, when I execute judgments in her. And I shall
be qadosh in her.
23 “And I shall send pestilence upon her, and blood
in her streets. And the slain shall fall in her midst by
the sword against her, from all sides. And they shall
know that I am HWHY.
24 “And there shall no longer be a pricking brier or a
paining thorn for the house of Yisra’ĕl from among all
1329

YEḤEZQĔL

who are around them, who despise them. And they
shall know that I am the Aḏon HWHY.”
25 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “When I have gathered
the house of Yisra’ĕl from the peoples among whom
they are scattered, I shall be qadosh in them before
the eyes of the gentiles. And they shall dwell in their
own land which I gave to My servant Ya’aqoḇ.
26 “And they shall dwell safely, and build houses, and
plant vineyards, and dwell safely, when I execute
judgments on all those around them who despise
them. And they shall know that I am HWHY their
Elohim.” ’ ”

29 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the
twelfth of the month, the word of HWHY came to me,
saying,
2 “Son of man, turn your face against Pharaoh the
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and naḇa against him, and
against Mitsrayim, all of it.
3 “Speak, and you shall say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon
HWHY, “See, I am against you, O Pharaoh sovereign
of Mitsrayim, O great dragon who lies in the midst of
his rivers, who has said, ‘My River is my own, and I, I
have made it for myself.’
4 “And I shall put hooks in your jaws, and I shall
make the fish of your rivers cling to your scales. And
I shall bring you up out of the midst of your rivers, and
all the fish in your rivers cling to your scales.
5 “And I shall leave you in the wilderness, you and
all the fish of your rivers. On the face of the land you
shall fall, and you shall not be picked up or gathered.
I shall give you as food to the beasts of the field and
to the birds of the shamayim.

1330

EZEKIEL

“And all the inhabitants of Mitsrayim shall know
that I am HWHY, because they have been a staff of
reed to the house of Yisra’ĕl.
7 “When they grasped you with the hand, you broke
and tore all their shoulders. When they leaned on you,
you broke and made all their loins shake.”
8 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am
bringing a sword upon you and shall cut off from you
man and beast.
9 “And the land of Mitsrayim shall become a desert
and a waste. And they shall know that I am HWHY,
because he said, ‘The River is mine, and I have made
it.’
10 “Therefore see, I am against you and against your
rivers, and shall make the land of Mitsrayim an utter
waste and a desert, from Miḡdol to Sewĕnĕh, as far
as the border of Kush.
11 “No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of
beast pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited for
forty years.
12 “And I shall make the land of Mitsrayim a desert in
the midst of the lands that are waste. And among the
cities that are ruined, her cities shall be a waste forty
years. And I shall scatter the Mitsrites among the
nations, and I shall disperse them throughout the
lands.”
13 ‘For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “At the end of forty
years I shall gather the Mitsrites from the peoples
among whom they were scattered.
14 “And I shall turn back the captivity of Mitsrayim and
I shall bring them back to the land of Pathros, to the
land of their birth, and there they shall be a lowly
reign,
6

1331

YEḤEZQĔL

being the lowliest of reigns, and never again exalt
itself above the nations. And I shall make them few so
as not to rule over the nations.
16 “And no longer is it to be the refuge of the house
of Yisra’ĕl, bringing to remembrance their wickedness
when they turned to follow them. And they shall know
that I am the Aḏon HWHY.” ’ ”
17 And it came to be in the twenty-seventh year, in
the first month, on the first of the month, that the word
of HWHY came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel
made his army to serve a great service against Tsor,
every head was made bald and every shoulder worn
bare. But he and his army received no reward from
Tsor, for the service he served against it.
19 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am
giving the land of Mitsrayim to Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar
sovereign of Baḇel. And he shall take away her
wealth, take her spoil, and remove her pillage. And it
shall be a reward for his army.
20 ‘I have given him the land of Mitsrayim as a reward
for his labour, because they worked for Me,’ declares
the Aḏon HWHY.
21 ‘In that day I shall make the horn of the house of
Yisra’ĕl to spring forth, while I open your mouth to
speak in their midst. And they shall know that I am
HWHY.’ ”
15

30 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, naḇa and say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon
HWHY, “Howl, ‘Woe to the day!’
3 “For the day the day is near, even the day of HWHY
is near. It is a day of clouds, the time of the nations.
4 “The sword shall come upon Mitsrayim, and great
anguish shall be in Kush, when the slain fall in
2

1332

EZEKIEL

Mitsrayim, and they take away her wealth, and her
foundations are broken down.
5 “Kush, and Put, and Luḏ, all the mixed people, and
Kuḇ, and the sons of the land of the covenant, shall
fall with them by the sword.”
6 ‘Thus said HWHY, “Those who lean on Mitsrayim
shall fall, and the pride of her power shall come down.
From Miḡdol to Sewĕnĕh those within her shall fall by
the sword,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
7 “They shall be ruined amidst the wasted lands,
and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that
are dried up.
8 “And they shall know that I am HWHY, when I have
lit a fire in Mitsrayim and all her helpers are crushed.
9 “On that day messengers shall go forth before Me
in ships to make the complacent Kushites afraid, and
great anguish shall come upon them, as on the day
of Mitsrayim - for look, it is coming!”
10 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “I shall cause the crowd
of Mitsrayim to cease, by the hand of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel.
11 “He and his people with him, the ruthless ones of
the nations, are brought to destroy the land. And they
shall draw their swords against Mitsrayim, and shall
fill the land with the slain.
12 “And I shall make the rivers dry, and I shall sell the
land into the hand of evil ones. And I shall lay the land
waste, and all that is in it, by the hand of foreigners. I,
HWHY, have spoken.”
13 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “And I shall destroy the
idols, and make an end of the images in Noph, and
there shall no longer be a prince from the land of
Mitsrayim, and I shall put fear in the land of Mitsrayim.
14 “And I shall make Pathros a waste, and I shall light
fire to Tso’an, and I shall execute judgments in No.
1333

YEḤEZQĔL

“And I shall pour out My wrath on Sin, the
stronghold of Mitsrayim. And I shall cut off the crowd
of No.
16 “And I shall light a fire in Mitsrayim, Sin shall writhe
in anguish, No is to be split open, and Noph has
adversaries daily.
17 “The young men of Awen and Pi Ḇeseth shall fall
by the sword, while these cities go into captivity.
18 “And in Teḥaphneḥes the day shall be darkened,
when I shatter the yokes of Mitsrayim there. And the
pride of her strength shall cease in her, a cloud shall
cover her. And her daughters shall go into captivity.
19 “And I shall execute judgments on Mitsrayim, and
they shall know that I am HWHY.” ’ ”
20 And it came to be in the eleventh year, in the first
month, on the seventh of the month, that the word of
HWHY came to me, saying,
21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim. And see, it has not been
bound up for healing, to put a bandage to bind it, to
make it strong to hold a sword.
22 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘See, I am
against Pharaoh sovereign of Mitsrayim, and shall
break his arms, both the strong one and the one that
was broken, and shall make the sword fall out of his
hand,
23 and shall scatter the Mitsrites among the nations,
and disperse them throughout the lands,
24 and strengthen the arms of the sovereign of Baḇel.
And I shall put My sword in his hand. And I shall break
Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan before him with
the groanings of the slain before him.
25 ‘And I shall strengthen the arms of the sovereign
of Baḇel, but the arms of Pharaoh shall fall. And they
shall know that I am HWHY, when I put My sword into
15

1334

EZEKIEL

the hand of the sovereign of Baḇel and he shall
stretch it out against the land of Mitsrayim.
26 ‘And I shall scatter the Mitsrites among the
nations, and I shall disperse them throughout the
lands. And they shall know that I am HWHY.’ ”

31 And it came to be in the eleventh year, in the third
month, on the first of the month, that the word of HWHY
came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, say to Pharaoh sovereign of
Mitsrayim and to his crowd, ‘To whom are you to be
compared in your greatness?
3 ‘See, Ashshur was a cedar in Leḇanon, lovely
branches and forest shade, and of high stature. And
its top was among the thick foliage.
4 ‘The waters made him great, the deep gave it
height with its rivers running around its planting, and
sent their channels to all the trees of the field.
5 ‘Therefore its height was lifted up above all the
trees of the field, and its boughs were increased, and
its branches became long because of the many
waters, as it sent them out.
6 ‘All the birds of the shamayim made their nests in
its boughs, and under its branches all the beasts of
the field gave birth. And in its shadow all great nations
dwelt.
7 ‘And it was lovely in greatness and in the length of
its branches, for its roots reached to many waters.
8 ‘Cedars in the garden of Elohim did not hide it, fir
trees were not like its boughs, and the chestnut trees
were not like its branches. No tree in the garden of
Elohim was as pretty as it.
9 ‘I made it pretty by its many branches, so that all
the trees of Ĕḏen which were in the garden of Elohim
were jealous of it.’
1335

YEḤEZQĔL

“Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Because you
have increased in height, and it placed its top among
the thick foliage, and its heart was lifted up in its
height,
11 ‘I give it into the hand of the mighty one of the
nations, and he shall certainly deal with it. I have
driven it out for its wickedness.
12 ‘And foreigners, the most ruthless of the nations,
shall cut it down and leave it. Its branches shall fall on
the mountains and in all the valleys, its boughs lie
broken by all the rivers of the land. And all the peoples
of the earth shall come out from under its shadow and
leave it.
13 ‘On its ruin shall dwell all the birds of the
shamayim, and all the beasts of the field shall be on
its branches,
14 so that none of the trees by the waters would exalt
themselves because of their height, nor place their
tops among the thick foliage, and that no tree which
drinks water would ever be high enough to reach up
to them. ‘For all of them shall be given up to death, to
the depths of the earth, among the children of men
who go down to the pit.’
15 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘In the day when it is
brought down to the grave I shall cause mourning. I
shall cover the deep because of it and hold back its
streams, and many waters shall be confined. And I
shall make Leḇanon mourn for it, and all the trees of
the field shall wither away because of it.
16 ‘I shall make the nations shake at the sound of its
fall, when I bring it down to the grave together with
those who descend into the pit. And all the trees of
Ĕḏen, the choice and best of Leḇanon, all that drink
water, shall be comforted in the depths of the earth.
10

1336

EZEKIEL

‘They too shall go down to the grave with it, with
those slain by the sword. And those who were its
strength shall dwell in its shadows among the nations.
18 ‘To whom are you to be compared in esteem and
greatness among the trees in Ĕḏen? But you shall be
brought down with the trees of Ĕḏen to the depths of
the earth, lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with
those slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his
crowd,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.”
17

32 And it came to be in the twelfth year, in the
twelfth month, on the first of the month, that the word
of HWHY came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh
sovereign of Mitsrayim, and you shall say to him, ‘You
were like a young lion among the nations, and you are
like a dragon in the seas, and you burst forth in your
rivers, and trouble the waters with your feet, and
muddy their rivers.’
3 “Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘And I shall spread My
net over you with an assembly of many peoples, and
they shall bring you up in My net.
4 ‘And I shall leave you on the land, hurl you out on
the open fields, and make all the birds of the
shamayim dwell on you. And with you I shall satisfy
the beasts of all the earth.
5 ‘And I shall put your flesh on the mountains, and
fill the valleys with your height,
6 and water the land with the flow of your blood unto
the mountains, and let streams be filled with you.
7 ‘And when I extinguish you, I shall cover the
shamayim, and make its stars dark. I shall cover the
sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.

1337

YEḤEZQĔL

‘All the bright lights of the shamayim I shall make
dark over you, and I shall bring darkness upon your
land,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.
9 ‘And I shall trouble the hearts of many peoples,
when I bring your destruction among the nations, into
the lands which you have not known.
10 ‘And I shall make many peoples appalled at you,
and their sovereigns shall be greatly afraid of you
when I swing My sword before them. And they shall
tremble continually, every man for his own life, in the
day of your fall.’
11 “For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘The sword of the
sovereign of Baḇel shall come upon you.
12 ‘By the swords of the mighty men, all of them the
ruthless ones of the nations, I shall make your host
fall. And they shall ravage the arrogance of Mitsrayim,
and all its host shall be destroyed.
13 ‘And I shall destroy all its beasts from beside its
great waters, and let the foot of man trouble them no
more, nor let the hooves of beasts trouble them.
14 ‘Then I shall make their waters clear, and make
their rivers run like oil,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.
15 ‘When I lay the land of Mitsrayim waste, and the
land shall be stripped of all that once filled it, when I
have smitten all who dwell in it, then they shall know
that I am HWHY.
16 ‘This is the lamentation, and they shall lament her,
the daughters of the nations lament her. Over
Mitsrayim and over all her crowd they shall lament
her,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.”
17 And it came to be in the twelfth year, on the
fifteenth of the month, that the word of HWHY came to
me, saying,
18 “Son of man, wail over the crowd of Mitsrayim, and
send them down to the depths of the earth, her and
8

1338

EZEKIEL

the daughters of the mighty nations, with those going
down to the pit.
19 ‘Are you more pleasant than others? Go down, be
placed with the uncircumcised.’
20 “In the midst of those slain by the sword they fall.
She shall be given to the sword, drawing her and all
her crowds.
21 “The mightiest among the mighty speak to him out
of the midst of the grave with those who help him,
‘They have gone down, they lie with the
uncircumcised, slain by the sword.’
22 “Ashshur is there, and all her assembly, with their
graves all around her, all of them slain, fallen by the
sword,
23 whose graves are made in the sides of the pit, and
her assembly is all around her grave, all of them slain,
fallen by the sword, because they instilled fear in the
land of the living.
24 “There is Ĕylam and all her crowd, around her
grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who have
gone down uncircumcised to the lower parts of the
earth, because they instilled fear in the land of the
living. And they bear their shame with those going
down to the pit.
25 “They have made her bed in the midst of the slain,
with all her crowd, with her graves all around it, all of
them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, for the fear
they instilled in the land of the living. So they bear
their shame with those going down to the pit. In the
midst of the slain they have been placed.
26 “There are Mesheḵ and Tuḇal and all her crowd,
with all their graves around it, all of them
uncircumcised, slain by the sword, because they
instilled fear in the land of the living.
1339

YEḤEZQĔL

“And they shall not lie with the mighty who are
fallen of the uncircumcised, who have gone down to
the grave with their battle gear, and whose swords
were laid under their heads. But their wickednesses
are on their bones, because of the fear of the mighty
in the land of the living.
28 “And you shall be broken in the midst of the
uncircumcised, and lie with those slain by the sword.
29 “There is Eḏom, her sovereigns and all her
princes, who shall be given up in their might, with
those slain by the sword. With the uncircumcised they
lie, and with those going down to the pit.
30 “There are the princes of the north, all of them, and
all the Tsiḏonians, who have gone down with the
slain, because of the fear they instilled. They are
ashamed of their might. And they lie uncircumcised
with those slain by the sword, and bear their shame
with those going down to the pit.
31 “Pharaoh - Pharaoh and all his army - shall see
them, and he shall be comforted for all his host that
were slain by the sword,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
32 “For I have put a fear of him in the land of the living,
yet he shall be placed in the midst of the
uncircumcised with those slain by the sword Pharaoh and all his host,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
27

33 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, speak to the children of your people,
and you shall say to them, ‘When I bring the sword
upon a land, and the people of the land shall take a
man from their borders and shall make him their
watchman,
3 and he sees the sword coming upon the land, and
shall blow the ram’s horn and shall warn the people,
2

1340

EZEKIEL

then whoever shall hear the sound of the ram’s
horn and shall not take warning, if the sword comes
and takes him away, his blood is on his own head.
5 ‘He heard the sound of the ram’s horn, but he did
not take warning, his blood is on himself. But he who
takes warning shall deliver his being.
6 ‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and
shall not blow the ram’s horn, and the people shall not
be warned, and the sword comes and takes any being
from among them, he is taken away in his
wickedness, and his blood I require at the
watchman’s hand.’
7 “And you, son of man, I have made you a
watchman for the house of Yisra’ĕl. And you shall
hear a word from My mouth and you shall warn them
for Me.
8 “When I say to the wicked, ‘O wicked one, you
shall certainly die!’ and you have not spoken to warn
the wicked from his way, that wicked one shall die in
his wickedness, and his blood I require at your hand.
9 “But when you have warned the wicked to turn
from his way, and he has not turned from his way, he
shall die in his wickedness, but you have delivered
your being.
10 “And you, O son of man, say to the house of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘This is what you have said, “If our
transgressions and our sins lie upon us, and we pine
away in them, how then shall we live?” ’
11 “Say to them, ‘As I live,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY,
‘I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn back, turn
back from your evil ways! For why should you die, O
house of Yisra’ĕl?’
12 “And you, O son of man, say to the children of your
people, ‘The righteousness of the righteous man shall
4

1341

YEḤEZQĔL

not deliver him in the day of his transgression. And as
for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not stumble
because of it in the day that he turns from his
wickedness. And the righteous shall not be able to
live because of his righteousness in the day that he
sins.’
13 “When I say to the righteous that he shall live, and
he has trusted in his righteousness, and shall do
unrighteousness, none of his righteousness shall be
remembered, but because of his unrighteousness
that he has done, he shall die.
14 “Again, when I say to the wicked, ‘You shall
certainly die,’ if he turns from his sin and does right
and righteousness,
15 if the wicked restores the pledge, gives back what
he has stolen, and walks in the Laws of ḥai without
doing wickedness, he shall certainly live; he shall not
die.
16 “None of his sins which he has committed shall be
remembered against him - he has done right and
righteousness; he shall certainly live.
17 “And the children of your people have said, ‘The
Way of HWHY is not fair.’ But it is their way which is not
fair!
18 “When the righteous turns from his righteousness
and does unrighteousness, he shall die because of it.
19 “But when the wicked turns from his wickedness
and does right and righteousness, he shall live
because of it.
20 “And you have said, ‘The Way of HWHY is not fair.’
O house of Yisra’ĕl, I shall judge every one of you
according to his own ways.”
21 And it came to be in the twelfth year of our exile,
in the tenth month, on the fifth of the month, that one
1342

EZEKIEL

who had escaped from Yerushalayim came to me and
said, “The city has been smitten!”
22 And the hand of HWHY came upon me the evening
before the man came who had escaped. And He had
opened my mouth, before he came to me in the
morning. And my mouth was opened. And I was no
longer silent.
23 Then the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
24 “Son of man, they who inhabit those ruins in the
land of Yisra’ĕl are saying, ‘Aḇraham was only one,
and he inherited the land. But we are many, let the
land be given to us as a possession.’
25 “Therefore say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“You eat meat with blood, and you lift up your eyes
toward your idols, and shed blood. Should you then
possess the land?
26 “You depend on your sword, and you commit
abominations, and each of you defiles his neighbour’s
wife. Should you then possess the land?” ’
27 “Say this to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “As
I live, those who are in the ruins shall fall by the sword,
and the one who is in the open field I shall give to the
beasts to be devoured, and those who are in the
strongholds and caves shall die of the pestilence.
28 “And I shall make the land a desert and a waste,
the arrogance of her strength shall cease, and the
mountains of Yisra’ĕl shall be a waste, with none
passing through.
29 “And they shall know that I am HWHY, when I have
made the land a desert and a waste, because of all
their abominations which they have done.” ’
30 “As for you, son of man, the children of your
people are talking about you beside the walls and in
the doors of the houses. And they speak to each
1343

YEḤEZQĔL

other, each saying to his brother, ‘Please come and
hear what the word is that comes from HWHY.’
31 “And they come to you as people do, and they sit
before you as My people, and they hear your words,
but they do not do them. For with their mouth they
show much love - their hearts pursue their greedy
gain.
32 “And see, you are to them as a very lovely song of
one who has a pleasant voice and playing well on an
instrument. And they hear your words, but they do not
do them.
33 “And when it comes - see, it shall come - then they
shall know that a naḇi has been in their midst.”

34 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, naḇa against the shepherds of
Yisra’ĕl, naḇa and say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon
HWHY to the shepherds, “Woe to the shepherds of
Yisra’ĕl who have been feeding themselves! Should
not the shepherds feed the flock?
3 “You eat the fat and you put on the wool. You
slaughter the fatlings - you do not feed the flock.
4 “You have not strengthened the weak, nor have
you healed the sick, nor bound up the broken, nor
brought back the straying, nor sought what was lost;
but you have ruled them with might and harshness.
5 “And they were scattered because there was no
shepherd. And they became food for all the beasts of
the field when they were scattered.
6 “My sheep wandered through all the mountains,
and on every high hill. And My sheep were scattered
over all the face of the earth, and no one was seeking
or searching for them.”
7 ‘Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of HWHY:
2

1344

EZEKIEL

“As I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “because My
flock became a prey, and My flock became food for
every beast of the field, from not having a shepherd,
and My shepherds did not search for My flock, but the
shepherds fed themselves and did not feed My flock,”
9 therefore, O shepherds, hear the word of HWHY!
10 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am against the
shepherds, and shall require My flock at their hand,
and shall make them cease feeding the sheep, and
the shepherds shall feed themselves no more. And I
shall deliver My flock from their mouths, and they
shall no longer be food for them.”
11 ‘For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I Myself shall
search for My sheep and seek them out.
12 “As a shepherd seeks out his flock on the day he
is among his scattered sheep, so I shall seek out My
sheep and deliver them from all the places where they
were scattered in a day of cloud, dense cloud.
13 “And I shall bring them out from the peoples and
gather them from the lands, and shall bring them to
their own land. And I shall feed them on the
mountains of Yisra’ĕl, in the valleys, and in all the
dwellings of the land.
14 “In good pasture I shall feed them, and their fold
shall be on the high mountains of Yisra’ĕl. They shall
lie there in a good fold and feed in rich pasture on the
mountains of Yisra’ĕl.
15 “I shall feed My flock and make them lie down,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY.
16 “I shall seek out the lost and bring back the
strayed. And I shall bind up the broken and
strengthen what was sick, but the fat and the strong I
shall destroy. I shall feed them with Right-Ruling.”
8

1345

YEḤEZQĔL

‘And as for you, O My flock, thus said the Aḏon
HWHY, “See, I am judging between sheep and sheep,
between rams and goats.
18 “Is it not enough for you to have eaten up the good
pasture, and the rest of your pasture you trample with
your feet. Or that you should drink of the clear waters,
and the rest you muddy with your feet?
19 “And as for My flock, they eat what you have
trampled with your feet, and they drink what you have
muddied with your feet.”
20 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY to them, “See,
I Myself shall judge between fat and lean sheep.
21 “Because you have pushed with flank and
shoulder, and thrust at all the weak ones with your
horns, and scattered them abroad,
22 therefore I shall save My flock, and let them no
longer be a prey. And I shall judge between sheep
and sheep.
23 “And I shall raise up over them one shepherd, My
servant Dawiḏ, and he shall feed them. He shall feed
them and be their shepherd.
24 “And I, HWHY, shall be their Elohim, and My servant
Dawiḏ a prince in their midst. I, HWHY, have spoken.
25 “And I shall make a Covenant of peace with them,
and make evil beasts cease from the land. And they
shall dwell safely in the wilderness and sleep in the
forest.
26 “And I shall make them and the places all around
My hill a beraḵah, and shall cause showers to come
down in their season - showers of beraḵah they are.
27 “And the trees of the field shall yield their fruit and
the earth yield her increase, and they shall be safe in
their land. And they shall know that I am HWHY, when
I have broken the bars of their yoke. And I shall deliver
them from the hand of those who enslaved them,
17

1346

EZEKIEL

and they shall no longer be a prey for the gentiles,
and the beast of the earth shall not devour them. And
they shall dwell safely, with no one to make them
afraid.
29 “And I shall raise up for them a planting place of
name, and they shall no longer be consumed by
hunger in the land, nor bear the shame of the gentiles
any more.
30 “And they shall know that I, HWHY their Elohim, am
with them, and that they, the house of Yisra’ĕl, are My
people,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
31 “And you, My flock, the flock of My pasture, are
men, and I am your Elohim,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.’ ”
28

35 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, turn your face against Mount Sĕ’ir
and naḇa against it,
3 and you shall say to it, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“See, O Mount Sĕ’ir, I am against you, and shall
stretch out My hand against you, and shall make you
a ruin and a waste.
4 “Your cities I destroy, and let you be a ruin. And
you shall know that I am HWHY.
5 “Because you have had a continuous enmity, and
handed the children of Yisra’ĕl over to the power of
the sword at the time of their calamity, at the time of
the wickedness of the end.
6 “Therefore, as I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “I
shall appoint you for blood, and let blood pursue you.
Since you did not hate blood, therefore blood shall
pursue you.
7 “And I shall make Mount Sĕ’ir a ruin and a waste,
and cut off from it the one who leaves and the one
who returns,
2

1347

YEḤEZQĔL

and shall fill its mountains with the slain, those
slain by the sword falling on your hills and in your
valleys and in all your ravines.
9 “I shall make you an everlasting ruin, and your
cities uninhabited. And you shall know that I am HWHY.
10 “Because you have said, ‘These two nations and
these two lands are mine, and we shall possess
them,’ although HWHY was there,
11 therefore, as I live,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “I
shall do according to your displeasure and according
to your envy which you showed in your hatred against
them. And I shall make Myself known among them
when I judge you.
12 “And you shall know that I am HWHY. I have heard
all your scorns which you have spoken against the
mountains of Yisra’ĕl, saying, ‘They are laid waste,
they were given to us for food.’
13 “And with your mouth you have boasted against
Me and increased your words against Me - I Myself
have heard.”
14 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “As all the earth is
rejoicing I shall make you a ruin.
15 “As you rejoiced because the inheritance of the
house of Yisra’ĕl was laid waste, so I do to you: be a
ruin, O Mount Sĕ’ir, as well as all of Eḏom, all of it!
And they shall know that I am HWHY.” ’
8

36 “And you, son of man, naḇa to the mountains of
Yisra’ĕl, and you shall say, ‘O mountains of Yisra’ĕl,
hear the word of HWHY!
2 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because the enemy
has said of you, ‘Aha! The heights of old have
become our possession,’ ” ’
3 therefore naḇa, and you shall say, ‘Thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, “Because they laid you waste and
1348

EZEKIEL

swallowed you up on every side, so that you became
the possession of the rest of the gentiles, and you are
taken up by the lips of talkers and slandered by the
people,”
4 therefore, O mountains of Yisra’ĕl, hear the word
of the Aḏon HWHY! Thus said the Aḏon HWHY to the
mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, and to the deserted ruins, and to the cities
that have been forsaken, which became a prey and a
mocking to the rest of the gentiles all around;
5 therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Have I not
spoken in My burning jealousy against the rest of the
gentiles and against all Eḏom, who gave My land to
themselves as a possession, with all joy of heart, with
scorn in their being, to drive it out for a prey?” ’
6 “Therefore naḇa concerning the land of Yisra’ĕl,
and you shall say to mountains, and to hills, to rivers,
and to valleys, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I
have spoken in My jealousy and My wrath, because
you have borne the shame of the gentiles.”
7 ‘Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “I have lifted
My hand in an oath that the gentiles that are around
you shall bear their own shame.
8 “But you, O mountains of Yisra’ĕl, put forth your
branches and bear your fruit to My people Yisra’ĕl, for
they are about to come!
9 “For look, I am for you, and I shall turn to you, and
you shall be tilled and sown.
10 “And I shall increase men upon you, all the house
of Yisra’ĕl, all of it. And the cities shall be inhabited
and the ruins rebuilt.
11 “And I shall increase upon you man and beast, and
they shall increase and bear young. And I shall make
you inhabited as of old, and do better for you than at
your beginnings. And you shall know that I am HWHY.
1349

YEḤEZQĔL

“And I shall let men, My people Yisra’ĕl, walk upon
you, and let them possess you, and you shall be their
inheritance, and no longer let you add to their
bereavement.”
13 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Because they say to
you, ‘You devour men and have bereaved your
nation,’
14 therefore you shall no longer devour men, and no
longer bereave your nation,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
15 “And no longer shall I let you hear the insults of the
gentiles. And the reproach of the peoples you shall
bear no more, and no longer cause your nations to
stumble,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.’ ”
16 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
17 “Son of man, when the house of Yisra’ĕl dwelt in
their own land, they defiled it by their own ways and
deeds. To Me their way was like the uncleanness of
a woman in her monthly period.
18 “So I poured out My wrath on them for the blood
they had shed on the land, and for their idols they
defiled it.
19 “And I scattered them among the gentiles, and
they were dispersed throughout the lands. I have
judged them according to their ways and their deeds.
20 “And when they came to the gentiles, wherever
they went, they profaned My qodesh Name for it was
said of them, ‘These are the people of HWHY, and yet
they have gone out of His land.’
21 “But I had compassion on My qodesh Name,
which the house of Yisra’ĕl had profaned among the
gentiles wherever they went.
22 “Therefore say to the house of Yisra’ĕl, ‘Thus said
the Aḏon HWHY, “I do not do this for your sake, O
house of Yisra’ĕl, but for My qodesh Name’s sake,
12

1350

EZEKIEL

which you have profaned among the gentiles
wherever you went.
23 “And I shall qadosh My great Name, which has
been profaned among the gentiles, which you have
profaned in their midst. And the gentiles shall know
that I am HWHY,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “when I am
qadosh in you before their eyes.
24 “And I shall take you from among the gentiles, and
I shall gather you out of all lands, and I shall bring you
into your own land.
25 “And I shall sprinkle clean water on you, and you
shall be clean - from all your filthiness and from all
your idols I cleanse you.
26 “And I shall give you a new heart and put a new
spirit within you. And I shall take the heart of stone out
of your flesh, and I shall give you a heart of flesh,
27 and put My Ruaḥ within you. And I shall cause you
to walk in My Laws and guard My Right-Rulings and
shall do them.
28 “And you shall dwell in the land that I gave to your
fathers. And you shall be My people, and I shall be
your Elohim.
29 “And I shall save you from all your uncleannesses.
And I shall call for the grain and increase it, and I shall
bring no scarcity of food upon you.
30 “And I shall increase the fruit of your trees and the
increase of your fields, so that you need never again
bear the reproach of scarcity of food among the
gentiles.
31 “And you shall remember your evil ways and your
deeds that were not good. And you shall loathe
yourselves in your own eyes, for your wickednesses
and your abominations.

1351

YEḤEZQĔL

“Not for your sake am I acting,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY, “let it be known to you. Be ashamed and blush
for your ways, O house of Yisra’ĕl!”
33 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “On the day that I
cleanse you from all your wickednesses, I shall cause
the cities to be inhabited, and the ruined places shall
be rebuilt,
34 and the land that was laid waste tilled instead of
being a ruin before the eyes of all who pass by.
35 “And they shall say, ‘This land that was laid waste
has become like the garden of Ĕḏen. And the wasted,
the deserted, and the destroyed cities are now walled
and inhabited.’
36 “Then the gentiles which are left all around you
shall know that I, HWHY, have rebuilt the destroyed
places and planted what was laid waste. I, HWHY,
have spoken it, and I shall do it.”
37 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Once again I shall let
the house of Yisra’ĕl inquire of Me to do for them: I
shall increase their men like a flock.
38 “As a qodesh flock, as the flock at Yerushalayim
at her Appointed Times, so shall the wasted cities be
filled with flocks of men. And they shall know that I am
HWHY.” ’ ”
32

37 The hand of HWHY was upon me and took me out
by the Ruaḥ of HWHY, and put me down in the midst of
the valley. And it was filled with bones.
2 And He made me pass among them, all around,
and see, there were very many on the surface of the
valley, and see, they were very dry.
3 And He said to me, “Son of man, would these
bones live?” And I said, “O Aḏonai HWHY, You know.”

1352

EZEKIEL

Again He said to me, “Naḇa to these bones, and
you shall say to them, ‘O dry bones, hear the word of
HWHY!
5 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY to these bones, “See, I
am bringing into you a spirit, and you shall live.
6 “And I shall put sinews on you and bring flesh upon
you, and cover you with skin and put a spirit in you,
and you shall live. And you shall know that l am
HWHY.” ’ ”
7 And I naḇu as I was commanded. And as I naḇu,
there was a noise, and there was a rattling. And the
bones came together, bone to bone.
8 And I looked and saw sinews and flesh came upon
them, and skin covered them, but there was no spirit
in them.
9 He then said to me, “Naḇa to the spirit, naḇa, son
of man, and you shall say to the spirit, ‘Thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, “Come from the four winds, O spirit, and
breathe on these slain, so that they live.” ’ ”
10 And I naḇu as He commanded me, and the spirit
came into them, and they lived, and stood upon their
feet, a very great army.
11 And He said to me, “Son of man, these bones are
all the house of Yisra’ĕl. See, they say, ‘Our bones
are dry, our expectancy has perished, and we
ourselves have been cut off!’
12 “Therefore naḇa, and you shall say to them, ‘Thus
said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, O My people, I am opening
your graves, and shall bring you up from your graves,
and shall bring you into the land of Yisra’ĕl.
13 “And you shall know that I am HWHY, when I open
your graves, O My people, and bring you up from your
graves.
14 “And I shall put My Ruaḥ in you, and you shall live,
and I shall settle you in your own land. And you shall
4

1353

YEḤEZQĔL

know that I HWHY have spoken, and I have done it,”
declares HWHY.’ ”
15 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
16 “And you, son of man, take a stick for yourself and
write on it, ‘For Yahuḏah and for the children of
Yisra’ĕl, his companions.’ Then take another stick
and write on it, ‘For Yosĕph, the stick of Ephrayim,
and for all the house of Yisra’ĕl, his companions.’
17 “Then bring them together for yourself into one
stick, and they shall become one in your hand.
18 “And when the children of your people speak to
you, saying, ‘Won’t you show us what you mean by
these?’
19 say to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am
taking the stick of Yosĕph, which is in the hand of
Ephrayim, and the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, his companions.
And I shall give them unto him, with the stick of
Yahuḏah, and make them one stick, and they shall be
one in My hand.” ’
20 “And the sticks on which you write shall be in your
hand before their eyes.
21 “And speak to them, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
“See, I am taking the children of Yisra’ĕl from among
the gentiles, wherever they have gone, and shall
gather them from all around, and I shall bring them
into their land.
22 “And I shall make them one nation in the land, on
the mountains of Yisra’ĕl. And one sovereign shall be
sovereign over them all, and let them no longer be
two nations, and let them no longer be divided into
two reigns.
23 “And they shall no longer defile themselves with
their idols, nor with their filthiness, nor with any of their
transgressions. And I shall save them from all their
dwelling places in which they have sinned, and I shall
1354

EZEKIEL

cleanse them. And they shall be My people, and I be
their Elohim,
24 while Dawiḏ My servant is sovereign over them.
And they shall all have one shepherd and walk in My
Right-Rulings and guard My Laws, and shall do them.
25 “And they shall dwell in the land that I have given
to Ya’aqoḇ My servant, where your fathers dwelt. And
they shall dwell in it, they and their children and their
children’s children, forever, and My servant Dawiḏ be
their prince forever.
26 “And I shall make a Covenant of peace with them
- an everlasting Covenant it is with them. And I shall
place them and increase them, and shall place My
Miqdash in their midst, forever.
27 “And My Dwelling Place shall be over them. And I
shall be their Elohim, and they shall be My people.
28 “And the gentiles shall know that I, HWHY, am
making Yisra’ĕl qadosh, when My Miqdash is in their
midst - forever.” ’ ”

38 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
“Son of man, turn your face against Goḡ, of the
land of Maḡoḡ, the prince of Rosh, Mesheḵ, and
Tuḇal, and naḇa against him.
3 “And you shall say, ‘Thus says the Aḏon HWHY,
“See, I am against you, O Goḡ, the prince of Rosh,
Mesheḵ, and Tuḇal.
4 “And I shall turn you around, and I shall put hooks
into your jaws, and shall lead you out, with all your
army, horses and horsemen, clad perfectly, a great
assembly with armour and shields, all of them
handling swords.
5 “Paras, Kush, and Put are with them, all of them
with shield and helmet,
2

1355

YEḤEZQĔL

“Gomer and all its bands, the house of Toḡarmah
from the far north and all its bands, many peoples with
you.
7 “Be ready, prepare yourself, you and all your
assemblies that are assembled unto you. And you
shall be a guard for them.
8 “After many days you shall be called up. In the
latter years you shall come into the land of those
brought back from the sword and gathered from many
people on the mountains of Yisra’ĕl, which had been
a continual waste. But they were brought out of the
gentiles, and all of them shall dwell safely.
9 “And you shall go up, coming like a storm,
covering the land like a cloud, you and all your bands
and many peoples with you.”
10 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “And it shall be in that
day that words arise in your heart, and you shall
devise an evil plan:
11 “And you shall say, ‘Let me go up against a land
of unwalled villages, let me go to those at rest who
dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and
having neither bars nor gates,’
12 to take plunder and to take booty, to stretch out
your hand against the waste places that are again
inhabited, and against a people gathered from the
gentiles, acquiring livestock and goods, who dwell in
the middle of the land.
13 “Sheḇa, and Deḏan, and the merchants of
Tarshish, and all their young lions shall say to you,
‘Have you come to take plunder? Have you gathered
your army to take booty, to bear away silver and gold,
to take away livestock and goods, to take great
plunder?’ ” ’
6

1356

EZEKIEL

“Therefore, son of man, naḇa, and you shall say to
Goḡ, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “In that day when My
people Yisra’ĕl dwell safely, would you not know?
15 “And you shall come from your place out of the far
north, you and many peoples with you, all of them
riding on horses, a great assembly and a mighty
army.
16 “And you shall come up against My people Yisra’ĕl
like a cloud, to cover the land - in the latter days it
shall be. And I shall bring you against My land, in
order that the gentiles know Me, when I am qadosh in
you, O Goḡ, before their eyes.”
17 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Are you the one I
spoke of in former days by My servants the neḇi’im of
Yisra’ĕl, who naḇu for years in those days, to bring
you against them?
18 “And it shall be on that day, on the day when Goḡ
comes against the land of Yisra’ĕl,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY, “that My wrath shall come up in My face.
19 “For in My jealousy and in the fire of My wrath I
have spoken, ‘On that day there shall be a great
shaking in the land of Yisra’ĕl,
20 so that the fish of the sea, and the birds of the
shamayim, and the beasts of the field, and all
creeping creatures that creep on the earth, and all
men who are on the face of the earth shall shake at
My presence. And the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall
fall to the ground.’
21 “And I shall call for a sword against Goḡ on all My
mountains,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “the sword of
each one being against his brother.
22 “And I shall judge him with pestilence and blood,
and rain down flooding rain and hailstones, fire and
14

1357

YEḤEZQĔL

sulphur, on him and on his bands and on the many
peoples who are with him.
23 “And I shall exalt Myself and qadosh Myself, and I
shall be known in the eyes of many nations. And they
shall know that I am HWHY.” ’

39 “And you, son of man, naḇa against Goḡ, and you
shall say, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “See, I am
against you, O Goḡ, the prince of Rosh, Mesheḵ, and
Tuḇal,
2 and shall turn you around and lead you on, and
bring you up from the uttermost parts of the north, and
bring you against the mountains of Yisra’ĕl,
3 and shall smite the bow out of your left hand, and
make the arrows fall from your right hand.
4 “On the mountains of Yisra’ĕl you shall fall, you
and all your bands and the peoples who are with you.
To the birds of prey of every sort and to the beasts of
the field I shall give you for food.
5 “On the face of the field you shall fall, for I have
spoken,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
6 “And I shall send fire upon Maḡoḡ and on those
who live undisturbed in the coastlands. And they shall
know that I am HWHY.
7 “And I shall make My qodesh Name known in the
midst of My people Yisra’ĕl, and not let My qodesh
Name be profaned any more. And the gentiles shall
know that I am HWHY, the Qadosh One in Yisra’ĕl.
8 “See, it shall come, and it shall be done,” declares
the Aḏon HWHY. “This is the day of which I have
spoken.
9 “And those who inhabit the cities of Yisra’ĕl shall
go out and light on fire and burn the weapons, both
the shields and armour, the bows and arrows, the
1358

EZEKIEL

clubs and spears. And they shall make fires with them
for seven years,
10 and take no wood from the field nor cut down any
from the forests, for with the weapons they make fire.
And they shall plunder those who plundered them,
and loot those who looted them,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
11 “And it shall be on that day that I give Goḡ a burial
site there in Yisra’ĕl, the valley of those passing by
east of the sea, and stopping those passing by,
because there they shall bury Goḡ and all his crowd,
and shall call it the Valley of Hamon Goḡ.
12 “And the house of Yisra’ĕl shall bury them for
seven months, in order to cleanse the land.
13 “And all the people of the land shall bury them, and
it shall be for a name to them on the day that I am
esteemed,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
14 “And they shall separate men who continually
pass through the land, burying those who were
passing through, those left on the surface of the
ground, in order to cleanse it. At the end of seven
months they shall search,
15 and those passing through shall pass through the
land, and when anyone sees a man’s bone, he shall
put up a sign beside it, till the buriers have buried it in
the Valley of Hamon Goḡ.
16 “And also a city named Hamonah shall be there.
So they shall cleanse the land.” ’
17 “And you, son of man, thus said the Aḏon HWHY,
‘Speak to every sort of bird and to every beast of the
field, “Assemble yourselves and come, gather from all
around to My offering which I am slaughtering for you,
a great offering on the mountains of Yisra’ĕl, and you
shall eat flesh and drink blood.
1359

YEḤEZQĔL

“Eat the flesh of the mighty, drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, of rams and lambs, of goats and
bulls, all of them fatlings of Bashan.
19 “And you shall eat fat till you are filled, and drink
blood till you are drunk, at My offering which I am
slaughtering for you.
20 “And you shall be satisfied at My table with horses
and riders, with mighty men and with all the men of
battle,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
21 “And I shall place My esteem among the gentiles.
And all gentiles shall see My judgment which I have
executed, and My hand which I have laid on them.
22 “And the house of Yisra’ĕl shall know that I am
HWHY their Elohim from that day onward.
23 “And the gentiles shall know that the house of
Yisra’ĕl went into exile for their wickedness, because
they have trespassed against Me, so that I hid My
face from them, and I gave them into the hand of their
adversaries, and they all fell by the sword.
24 “According to their uncleanness and according to
their transgressions I have dealt with them, and
hidden My face from them.” ’
25 “Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, ‘Now I am
going to bring back the captives of Ya’aqoḇ. And I
shall have compassion on all the house of Yisra’ĕl,
and shall be jealous for My qodesh Name.
26 ‘And they shall have borne their shame, and all
their trespass they committed against Me, when they
dwell safely in their own land, with none to make them
afraid,
27 when I have brought them back from the peoples
and gathered them out of the lands of their enemies.
And I shall be qadosh in them before the eyes of
many gentiles.
18

1360

EZEKIEL

‘And they shall know that I am HWHY their Elohim,
who sent them into exile among the gentiles, and then
gathered them back to their own land, and left none
of them behind.
29 ‘And no longer do I hide My face from them, for I
shall have poured out My Ruaḥ on the house of
Yisra’ĕl,’ declares the Aḏon HWHY.”
28

40 In the twenty-fifth year of our exile, at the
beginning of the year, on the tenth of the month, in
the fourteenth year after the city was smitten, on that
same day the hand of HWHY came upon me and He
brought me there.
2 In visions of Elohim He brought me into the land of
Yisra’ĕl and put me on a very high mountain, and
upon it toward the south was as the structure of a city.
3 So He brought me there, and look, a man whose
appearance was like the appearance of bronze, and
a line of flax and a measuring qanĕh in his hand, and
he stood in the gateway.
4 And the man said to me, “Son of man, see with
your eyes and hear with your ears, and lay your heart
on all that I am showing you, for you were brought
here in order to show them to you. Declare to the
house of Yisra’ĕl all that you are seeing.”
5 And look: a wall all around the outside of the
House, and in the man’s hand a measuring qanĕh six
ammah long, each being an ammah and a tophaḥ.
And he measured the width of the wall structure, one
qanĕh, and the height one qanĕh.
6 Then he came to the gate facing east. And he went
up its stairs and measured the threshold of the gate,
one qanĕh wide, and the other threshold, one qanĕh
wide,
1361

YEḤEZQĔL

and the little room one qanĕh long and one qanĕh
wide, and between the little rooms a space of five
ammah. And the threshold of the gate inwards from
the porch of the gate was one qanĕh.
8 Then he measured the porch of the inside gate,
one qanĕh.
9 And he measured the porch of the gate, eight
ammah, and its posts two ammah. And the porch of
the gate was on the inside.
10 And the little rooms of the east gate three on one
side and three on the other, all three of the same size.
And posts were of the same size on this side and that
side.
11 And he measured the width of the entrance of the
gate, ten ammah, and the length of the gate thirteen
ammah.
12 And the border in front of the little rooms, one
ammah on this side and one ammah on that side. And
the gate room was six ammah on this side and six
ammah on that side.
13 And he measured the gate from the roof of one
little room to the roof of the other, the width was
twenty-five ammah, door to door.
14 And he measured the posts, sixty ammah high,
even to the post of the courtyard all around the gate.
15 And from the front of the entrance gate to the front
of the porch of the inner gate was fifty ammah.
16 And there were narrowed window frames in the
little rooms and to their posts at the inside of the gate
all around, and for the porches too. And there were
windows all around on the inside. And on each post
were palm trees.
17 And he brought me into the outer courtyard, and
look, rooms and a pavement made all around the
courtyard, thirty rooms on the pavement.
7

1362

EZEKIEL

And the pavement was by the side of the gates,
equal to the length of the gates - the lower pavement.
19 And he measured the width from the front of the
lower gate to the front of the inner courtyard on the
outside, one hundred ammah toward the east and the
north.
20 And the gate of the outer courtyard facing north he
measured its length and its width.
21 And its little rooms, three on this side and three on
that side, its posts and its porches, had the same
measurements as the first gate, its length was fifty
ammah and its width twenty-five ammah.
22 And its windows and its porches, and its palm
trees, had the same measurements as the gate facing
east. And they went up to it by seven steps, and its
porch was in front of it.
23 And the gate of the inner courtyard was opposite
the northern gate, and at the eastern gate. And he
measured from gate to gate, one hundred ammah.
24 And he took me toward the south, and look, a gate
toward the south. And he measured its posts and
porches according to these measurements.
25 And windows were in it and in its porches all
around like those windows, its length was fifty ammah
and its width twenty-five ammah.
26 And seven steps led up to it, and its porch was in
front of them. And it had palm trees on its posts, one
on this side and one on that side.
27 And the inner courtyard had a gate toward the
south. And he measured from gate to gate toward the
south, one hundred ammah.
28 And he brought me to the inner courtyard through
the south gate, and he measured the southern gate
according to these measurements.
18

1363

YEḤEZQĔL

And its little rooms, and its posts, and its porches
were according to these measurements. And
windows were in it and in its porches all around - fifty
ammah long and twenty-five ammah wide.
30 And there were porches all around, twenty-five
ammah long and five ammah wide.
31 And its porches were toward the outer courtyard,
and palm trees were on its posts, and eight steps led
up to it.
32 And he brought me into the inner courtyard toward
the east, and he measured the gate according to
these measurements.
33 And its little rooms, and its posts, and its porches
were according to these measurements. And
windows were in it and in its porches all around - fifty
ammah long and twenty-five ammah wide.
34 And its porches were toward the outer courtyard,
and palm trees were on its posts on this side and on
that side, and eight steps led up to it.
35 And he brought me to the north gate, and he
measured it according to these measurements,
36 its little rooms, its posts, and its porches. And it
had windows all around, its length was fifty ammah
and its width twenty-five ammah.
37 And its posts were toward the outer courtyard, and
palm trees were on its posts on this side and on that
side, and eight steps led up to it.
38 And there was a room with its entrance by the
posts of the gate, where they washed the burnt
offering.
39 And in the porch of the gate were two tables on
this side and two tables on that side, on which to
slaughter the burnt offering, and the sin offering, and
the guilt offering.
29

1364

EZEKIEL

And on the outer side, as one went up to the
entrance of the north gate, were two tables. And on
the other side of the porch of the gate were two tables.
41 Four tables were on this side and four tables on
that side, by the side of the gate, eight tables on which
they slaughtered.
42 And there were four tables of hewn stone for the
burnt offering, one ammah and a half long, one
ammah and a half wide, and one ammah high. On
these they placed the instruments with which they
slaughtered the burnt offering and the offering.
43 And the double hooks, a tophaḥ wide, were
fastened all around. And on the tables was the flesh
of the offerings.
44 And on the outside of the inner gate were the
rooms for the singers in the inner courtyard, one at
the side of the north gate and facing south, and the
other at the side of the south gate facing north.
45 And he said to me, “This room facing south is for
the kohenim who guard the duty of the House.
46 “And the room facing north is for the kohenim who
guard the duty of the altar, they are the sons of
Tsaḏoq, from the sons of Lĕwi, who come near HWHY
to serve Him.”
47 And he measured the courtyard, one hundred
ammah long and one hundred ammah wide, a
square. And the altar was in front of the House.
48 And he brought me to the porch of the House and
measured the doorposts of the porch, five ammah on
this side and five ammah on that side. And the width
of the gate was three ammah on this side and three
ammah on that side.
49 The length of the porch was twenty ammah, and
the width eleven ammah. And by the steps which led
40

1365

YEḤEZQĔL

up to it there were columns by the doorposts, one on
this side and one on that side.

41 And he brought me into the Hĕyḵal, and he
measured the doorposts, six ammah wide on one side
and six ammah wide on the other side, the width of the
Tent.
2 And the entrance was ten ammah wide, and the
side walls of the entrance were five ammah on this
side and five ammah on the other side. And he
measured its length, forty ammah, and twenty ammah
wide.
3 And he went inside and measured the doorposts,
two ammah, and the entrance six ammah high, and
the width of the entrance seven ammah.
4 And he measured the length, twenty ammah, and
the width twenty ammah, to the front of the Hĕyḵal.
And he said to me, “This is the Most Qodesh Place.”
5 And he measured the wall of the House, six
ammah, and the width of each side room all around
the House was four ammah on every side.
6 And the side rooms were three, one above the
other, thirty rooms on each, they rested on ledges
which were for the side rooms all around, to be
supported, but not fastened to the wall of the House.
7 And there was a broadening and a winding
upwards for the side rooms, for the winding around
the House went up like steps. And the width of the
structure increased as one went up from the lowest to
the highest by way of the middle one.
8 And I saw the height all around the House: the
foundation of the side rooms, a qanĕh’s length of six
ammah.

1366

EZEKIEL

The thickness of the outer wall of the side rooms
was five ammah, and that which was left between the
side rooms of the House
10 and the rooms was a width of twenty ammah all
around the House on every side.
11 And the door of the side room was toward the
open space, one door toward the north and another
toward the south. And the width of the place of the
open space was five ammah all around.
12 And the building that was in front of the separate
place at the side toward the west was seventy ammah
wide, and the wall of the building was five ammah
thick all around, and its length ninety ammah.
13 Then he measured the House, one hundred
ammah long. And the separate place with the building
and its walls, were one hundred ammah long,
14 and the width of the front of the House, and of the
separate place eastward, was one hundred ammah.
15 And he measured the length of the building to the
front of the separate place behind it, and its galleries
on the one side and on the other side, one hundred
ammah, as well as the inner Hĕyḵal and the porches
of the courtyard.
16 The doorposts and the narrowed window frames,
and the galleries all around, their three opposite the
threshold, were panelled with wood. From the ground
to the windows, and the windows were covered,
17 from the space above the door, even to the inner
House, as well as outside, and on every wall all
around, inside and outside, by measure.
18 And it was made with keruḇim and palm trees, and
a palm tree between keruḇ and keruḇ. A keruḇ had
two faces,
19 so that the face of a man was toward a palm tree
on one side, and the face of a young lion toward a
9

1367

YEḤEZQĔL

palm tree on the other side - made on all the House
all around.
20 From the floor to the space above the door, and
on the wall of the Hĕyḵal, keruḇim and palm trees
were carved.
21 The doorposts of the Hĕyḵal were square, and the
front of the qodesh place, the appearance of one was
like the appearance of the other.
22 The altar was of wood, three ammah high, and its
length two ammah. And its corners, and its length,
and its sides were of wood. And he said to me, “This
is the table that is before HWHY.”
23 And the Hĕyḵal and the qodesh place had two
doors.
24 And each of the doors had two panels, two folding
panels, two panels for one door and two panels for
the other door.
25 And keruḇim and palm trees were carved on the
doors of the Hĕyḵal, like those carved on the walls.
And thick wood was on the front of the porch outside.
26 And narrowed window frames and palm trees
were on one side and on the other, on the sides of the
porch, and on the side rooms of the House, and thick
wood.

42 And he brought me out into the outer courtyard,
the way toward the north. And he brought me into the
room which was opposite the separate place, and
which was opposite the building to the north.
2 Along the length which was one hundred ammah,
was the north door, the width was fifty ammah.
3 Opposite the inner courtyard of twenty, and
opposite the pavement of the outer courtyard, gallery
against gallery in threes.
1368

EZEKIEL

And before the rooms, toward the inside, was a
walk ten ammah wide, a way of one ammah. And their
doors were to the north.
5 And the upper rooms were shorter, because the
galleries took away space from them more than from
the lower and middle of the building.
6 For they were in threes and had no columns like
the columns of the courtyards, so the upper was
staggered from the lower and middle from the ground
up.
7 As for the outer wall by the side of the rooms,
toward the outer courtyard facing the rooms, its length
was fifty ammah.
8 For the length of the rooms toward the outer
courtyard was fifty ammah, and that facing the Hĕyḵal
was one hundred ammah.
9 And below these rooms was the entrance on the
east side, as one enters them from the outer
courtyard.
10 In the thickness of the wall of the courtyard toward
the east, opposite the separate place and opposite
the building, were rooms.
11 And the way in front of them was like the
appearance of the rooms which were toward the
north, as long and as wide as the others, and all their
exits and entrances were according to plan.
12 And according to the doors of the rooms that were
toward the south there was a door in front of the way,
the way in front of the wall toward the east, as one
enters them.
13 And he said to me, “The north rooms and the south
rooms, which are opposite the separate place, are the
qodesh rooms where the kohenim who approach
HWHY eat the most qodesh offerings. There they place
the most qodesh items, and the grain offering, and the
4

1369

YEḤEZQĔL

sin offering, and the guilt offering, for the place is
qodesh.
14 “When the kohenim enter, they are not to go out of
the qodesh room into the outer courtyard, but leave
their garments in which they attend there, for they are
qodesh, and shall put on other garments and shall
draw near to that which is for the people.”
15 And when he had ended measuring the inner
House, he brought me out through the gate that faces
east, and measured it all around.
16 He measured the east side with the measuring
qanĕh, five hundred qanĕh by the measuring qanĕh
all around.
17 He measured the north side, five hundred qanĕh
by the measuring qanĕh all around.
18 He measured the south side, five hundred qanĕh
by the measuring qanĕh.
19 He turned round to the west side and measured
five hundred qanĕh by the measuring qanĕh.
20 On the four sides he measured it. It had a wall all
around, five hundred long and five hundred wide, to
separate the qodesh places from the common.

43 And he led me to the gate, the gate facing east.
And see, the esteem of the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
came from the way of the east. And His voice was like
the sound of many waters, and the earth shone from
His esteem.
3 And it was like the appearance of the vision which
I saw, like the vision which I saw when He came to
destroy the city. And the visions were like the vision
which I saw by the River Keḇar, and I fell on my face.
4 And the esteem of HWHY came into the House by
way of the gate facing east.
2

1370

EZEKIEL

And the Ruaḥ took me up and brought me into the
inner courtyard. And see, the esteem of HWHY filled
the House.
6 And I heard someone speaking to me from the
House, while a man stood beside me.
7 And He said to me, “Son of man, this is the place
of My throne and the place of the soles of My feet,
when I dwell in the midst of the children of Yisra’ĕl
forever, and the house of Yisra’ĕl shall no longer
defile My qodesh Name, they nor their sovereigns, by
their whoring and by the corpses of their sovereigns
on their high places.
8 “When they placed their threshold by My
threshold, and their doorpost by My doorpost, with a
wall between them and Me, they defiled My qodesh
Name by the abominations which they have done. So
I consumed them in My displeasure.
9 “Now let them put their whoring and the corpses of
their sovereigns far away from Me, and I shall dwell
in their midst forever.
10 “Son of man, explain the House to the house of
Yisra’ĕl, and when they are ashamed of their
wickednesses,
they
shall
measure
the
measurements.
11 “And since they shall be ashamed of all that they
did, make known to them the design of the House and
its structure, and its exits and its entrances, its entire
design and all its laws, and all its forms and all its
Torot. And write it down before their eyes, so that they
observe its entire design and all its laws, and shall do
them.
12 “This is the Torah of the House: Upon the
mountaintop, all the boundary of it, all around, is most
qodesh. See, this is the Torah of the House.
5

1371

YEḤEZQĔL

“And these are the measurements of the altar in
ammah, that ammah being one ammah and a tophaḥ,
and the base one ammah high and one ammah wide,
with a rim all around its edge of one zereth. And this
is the upper part of the altar.
14 “And from the base on the ground to the lower
ledge, two ammah, and the width of the ledge one
ammah, and from the smaller ledge to the larger
ledge four ammah, and the width of the ledge one
ammah.
15 “And the altar hearth is four ammah high, and four
horns extending upward from the hearth.
16 “And the altar hearth is twelve ammah long, and
twelve wide, square at its four corners.
17 “And the ledge is fourteen long and fourteen wide
on its four sides, with a rim of half an ammah around
it, and its base one ammah all around, and its steps
face east.”
18 And He said to me, “Son of man, thus said the
Aḏon HWHY, ‘These are the laws for the altar on the
day when it is made, for offering burnt offerings on it,
and for sprinkling blood on it.
19 ‘And you shall give a young bull for a sin offering
to the kohenim, the Lĕwites who are of the seed of
Tsaḏoq, who approach unto Me,’ declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
20 ‘And you shall take some of its blood and put it on
the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the
ledge, and on the rim around it, and shall cleanse it
and make atonement for it.
21 ‘And you shall take the bull of the sin offering, and
shall burn it in the appointed place of the House,
outside the Miqdash.
13

1372

EZEKIEL

‘And on the second day you bring a male goat, a
perfect one, for a sin offering. And they shall cleanse
the altar, as they cleansed it with the bull.
23 ‘When you have ended cleansing it, bring a young
bull, a perfect one, and a ram from the flock, a perfect
one.
24 ‘And you shall bring them before HWHY, and the
kohenim shall throw salt on them and offer them up
as a burnt offering to HWHY.
25 ‘Prepare a goat for a sin offering daily for seven
days, and prepare a young bull and a ram from the
flock, perfect ones.
26 ‘For seven days they shall make atonement for the
altar and cleanse it, and ordain it.
27 ‘And when these days are completed it shall be,
on the eighth day and thereafter, that the kohenim
make your burnt offerings and your peace offerings
on the altar, and I shall accept you,’ declares the
Aḏon HWHY.”
22

44 And He brought me back to the outer gate of the
Miqdash which faces east, and it was shut.
2 And HWHY said to me, “This gate is shut, it is not
opened, and no one enters it, because HWHY Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl has entered by it, and it shall be shut.
3 “The prince, as prince, he sits in it to eat bread
before HWHY, coming in by way of the porch of the
gate, and going out the same way.”
4 And He brought me by way of the north gate to the
front of the House. And I looked and saw the esteem
of HWHY filled the House of HWHY, and I fell on my face.
5 And HWHY said to me, “Son of man, lay your heart
and see with your eyes and hear with your ears, all
that I say to you concerning all the laws of the House
of HWHY and all its Torot. And you shall lay your heart
1373

YEḤEZQĔL

to the entrance of the House, with all the exits of the
Miqdash,
6 and shall say to the rebellious, to the house of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “O house of
Yisra’ĕl, enough of all these abominations of yours,
7 that you brought in sons of a foreigner,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to
be in My Miqdash to profane it, My House! That you
brought near My food, the fat and the blood, and you
broke My Covenant because of all your abominations.
8 “And you did not guard the charge of that which is
qodesh to Me, but you have put others to guard the
charge of My Miqdash for you.”
9 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “No son of a foreigner,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh,
comes into My Miqdash, even any son of a foreigner
who is among the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 “And the Lĕwites who went far from Me, when
Yisra’ĕl went astray, who strayed away from Me after
their idols, they shall bear their wickedness.
11 “And they were attendants in My Miqdash, as
gatekeepers of the House and attendants of the
House, slaughtering the burnt offering and the
offering for the people, and standing before them to
attend to them.
12 “Because they attended to them before their idols
and became a stumbling-block of wickedness to the
house of Yisra’ĕl, therefore I have lifted My hand in
an oath against them,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “that
they shall bear their wickedness,
13 and not come near Me to serve as My kohĕn, nor
come near any of that which is qodesh to Me, nor into
the Most Qodesh Place. And they shall bear their
shame and their abominations which they have done.
1374

EZEKIEL

“Yet I shall make them those who guard the duty
of the House, for all its work, and for all that has to be
done in it.
15 “But the kohenim, the Lĕwites, the sons of Tsaḏoq,
who guarded the duty of My Miqdash when the
children of Yisra’ĕl went astray from Me, they shall
draw near to Me to serve Me, and shall stand before
Me to bring to Me the fat and the blood,” declares the
Aḏon HWHY.
16 “They shall enter My Miqdash, and they shall draw
near to My table to serve Me, and they shall guard My
charge.
17 “And it shall be, when they enter the gates of the
inner courtyard, that they put on linen garments, and
no wool shall come upon them while they attend
within the gates of the inner courtyard or within the
House.
18 “They shall have linen turbans on their heads and
linen trousers on their bodies, they shall not gird
themselves with sweat.
19 “And when they go out to the outer courtyard, to
the outer courtyard to the people, they shall take off
their garments in which they have attended, and shall
leave them in the qodesh rooms, and shall put on
other garments. And they shall qadosh the people in
their qodesh garments.
20 “And their heads they shall not shave, nor shall
they let their hair grow long - they shall keep their hair
well trimmed.
21 “And no kohĕn is to drink wine when he comes into
the inner court.
22 “And they do not take as wife a widow or a
divorced woman, but take maidens of the seed of the
house of Yisra’ĕl, or widows of kohenim.
14

1375

YEḤEZQĔL

“And they are to teach My people between the
qodesh and the profane, and make them know what
is unclean and clean.
24 “And they are to stand as judges in a dispute, and
judge it according to My Right-Rulings. And they are
to guard My Torot and My Laws in all My appointed
Festivals, and qadosh My Shabbathoth.
25 “And they are not to defile themselves by coming
near a dead man. Only for a father or mother, for a
son or daughter, for a brother or unmarried sister they
defile themselves.
26 “And after his cleansing, they count seven days for
him,
27 and on the day that he comes into the inner court
of the qodesh place to attend in the qodesh place, he
brings his sin offering,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
28 “And it shall be to them for an inheritance, I am
their inheritance. And you give them no possession in
Yisra’ĕl - I am their possession.
29 “The grain offering, and the sin offering, and the
guilt offering they are to eat, and all that is dedicated
in Yisra’ĕl is theirs.
30 “And the first of all the first-fruits of all, and every
contribution of all, of all your contributions, belong to
the kohenim. And the first of your ground meal you
give to the kohĕn, so that a beraḵah rests on your
house.
31 “The kohenim are not to eat any bird or beast
found dead or torn to pieces.
23

45 “And when you divide the land by lot into
inheritance, offer a contribution to HWHY, a qodesh
portion of the land, in length twenty-five thousand long,
and in width ten thousand, this being qodesh
throughout its border all around.
1376

EZEKIEL

“Of this a square plot is to be for the qodesh place,
five hundred by five hundred, with fifty ammah around
it for an open space.
3 “And from this measure you are to measure:
twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide.
And in it is to be the Miqdash, the Most Qodesh Place.
4 “This is to be a qodesh portion of the land,
belonging to the kohenim, the attendants of the
Miqdash, who draw near to serve HWHY. And it shall
be a place for their houses and qodesh ground for the
Miqdash.
5 “And twenty-five thousand in length and ten
thousand in width is for the Lĕwites, the attendants of
the House, for them for a possession, twenty rooms.
6 “And give the city as possession: five thousand
wide and twenty-five thousand long, beside the
contribution of the qodesh portion - it belongs to all
the house of Yisra’ĕl.
7 “And the prince is to have a portion on one side
and the other of the qodesh contribution and of the
possession of the city. And bordering on the qodesh
contribution and the possession of the city, on the
west side westward and on the east side eastward,
and the length alongside one of the portions, from the
west border to the east border.
8 “Of the land this is his possession in Yisra’ĕl, and
My princes shall no longer oppress My people. And
they shall give the land to the house of Yisra’ĕl,
according to their tribes.”
9 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “Enough, you princes
of Yisra’ĕl! Put away violence and plundering, and do
right-ruling and righteousness, and stop your
evictions of My people,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
10 “Have right scales, and a right ĕphah, and a right
bath.
2

1377

YEḤEZQĔL

“Let the ĕphah and the bath be of the same
measure, so that the bath contains one-tenth of a
ḥomer, and the ĕphah one-tenth of a ḥomer. Let their
measure be according to the ḥomer.
12 “And the sheqel is twenty gĕrahs. Your mina is
twenty sheqels, twenty-five sheqels, fifteen sheqels.
13 “This is the contribution which you present: you
shall give one-sixth of an ĕphah from a ḥomer of
wheat, and one-sixth of an ĕphah from a ḥomer of
barley.
14 “And the law concerning oil, the bath of oil, is onetenth of a bath from a kor. A kor is a ḥomer or ten
baths, for ten baths are a ḥomer.
15 “And one lamb from a flock, from two hundred,
from the watered pastures of Yisra’ĕl, for grain
offerings, and for a burnt offering, and for peace
offerings, to make atonement for them,” declares the
Aḏon HWHY.
16 “All the people of the land are to give this
contribution to the prince in Yisra’ĕl.
17 “And on the prince are the burnt offerings, and the
grain offerings, and drink offerings, at the Festival, the
New Moons, the Shabbathoth - in all the Appointed
Times of the house of Yisra’ĕl. He is to prepare the
sin offering, and the grain offering, and the burnt
offering, and the peace offerings to make atonement
for the house of Yisra’ĕl.”
18 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “In the first month, on
the first of the month, you are to take a young bull, a
perfect one, and shall cleanse the Miqdash.
19 “And the kohĕn shall take some of the blood of the
sin offering and put it on the doorposts of the House,
on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on
the posts of the gate of the inner courtyard.
11

1378

EZEKIEL

“And do the same on the seventh of the month for
anyone who makes a mistake or is foolish. And you
shall make atonement for the House.
21 “In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the
month, you have the Pesaḥ, a Festival of seven days,
unleavened bread is eaten.
22 “And on that day the prince shall prepare for
himself and for all the people of the land a bull for a
sin offering.
23 “And the seven days of the Festival he prepares a
burnt offering to HWHY, seven bulls and seven rams,
perfect ones, daily for seven days, and a male goat
daily for a sin offering.
24 “And he prepares a grain offering of one ĕphah for
each bull and one ĕphah for each ram, together with
a hin of oil for each ĕphah.
25 “In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the
month, at the Festival, he prepares like these seven
days, as the sin offering, as the burnt offering, as the
grain offering, and as the oil.”
20

46 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “The gate of the inner
courtyard facing east is shut the six days of work, but
on the Shabbath it is opened, and on the day of the
New Moon it is opened.
2 “And the prince shall enter by way of the porch of
that gate from the outside, and he shall stand by the
post. And the kohenim shall prepare his burnt offering
and his peace offerings. And he shall bow himself at
the threshold of the gate, and shall go out, but the
gate is not shut until evening.
3 “And the people of the land shall also bow
themselves at the entrance to this gate before HWHY,
on the Shabbathoth and on the New Moons.
1379

YEḤEZQĔL

“And the burnt offering which the prince brings to
HWHY on the Shabbath day is six lambs, perfect ones,
and a ram, a perfect one.
5 “And the grain offering is one ĕphah for a ram, and
the grain offering for the lambs, a gift of his hand, and
a hin of oil for an ĕphah.
6 “And on the day of the New Moon: a young bull, a
perfect one, six lambs, and a ram, they should be
perfect.
7 “And he prepares a grain offering of an ĕphah for
a bull, and an ĕphah for a ram, and for the lambs as
his hand attains, and a hin of oil for an ĕphah.
8 “And when the prince enters, he comes in by way
of the porch of that gate, and goes out the same way.
9 “And when the people of the land enter before
HWHY at the Appointed Times, whoever shall enter by
way of the north gate to bow himself, goes out by way
of the south gate. And whoever enters by way of the
south gate, goes out by way of the north gate, he shall
not return by way of the gate through which he came,
but goes out through the opposite one.
10 “And the prince is to be in their midst, entering
when they enter, and going out when they go out.
11 “And in the Festivals and in the Appointed Times
the grain offering is an ĕphah for a bull, and an ĕphah
for a ram, and for lambs the gift of his hand, and a hin
of oil for an ĕphah.
12 “And when the prince makes a spontaneous burnt
offering or spontaneous peace offerings to HWHY, the
gate facing east shall be opened for him. And he shall
prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings as
he did on the Shabbath day. And he shall go out, and
after he goes out the gate shall be shut.
4

1380

EZEKIEL

“And make a daily burnt offering to HWHY of a lamb
a year old a perfect one, preparing it morning by
morning.
14 “And prepare a grain offering with it morning by
morning, a sixth of an ĕphah, and a third of a hin of
oil to moisten the fine flour, a grain offering to HWHY continual everlasting laws.
15 “And prepare the lamb, and the grain offering, and
the oil, morning by morning, a continual burnt
offering.”
16 ‘Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “When the prince gives
a gift of some of his inheritance to any of his sons, it
belongs to his sons, it is their possession by
inheritance.
17 “And when he gives a gift of some of his
inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his
till the year of release, then it shall return to the prince.
Only the inheritance of his sons is theirs.
18 “And the prince does not take any of the people’s
inheritance by evicting them from their possession.
He is to give his sons their inheritance from his own
possession, so that none of My people are separated
from his possession.” ’ ”
19 And he brought me through the entrance, which
was at the side of the gate, into the qodesh rooms of
the kohenim facing north. And look, there was a place
at the extreme rear toward the west.
20 And he said to me, “This is the place where the
kohenim cook the guilt offering and the sin offering,
where they bake the grain offering, so as not to bring
them out into the outer courtyard to qadosh the
people.”
21 And he brought me out into the outer courtyard
and made me pass along to the four corners of the
13

1381

YEḤEZQĔL

courtyard. And look, in every corner of the courtyard
was another courtyard.
22 In the four corners of the courtyard were
courtyards covered over, forty ammah long and thirty
wide, these four corners having one measure,
23 and a row of building stones all around in them, all
around the four of them, and places for fire were
made under the rows, all around.
24 And he said to me, “These are the kitchens where
the attendants of the House cook the slaughterings of
the people.”

47 And he turned me back to the door of the House.
And look, water was flowing from under the threshold
of the House toward the east, for the House faced east,
and the water was flowing from under the right side of
the House, from the south of the altar.
2 And he led me out by way of the north gate, and
took me round on the outside to the outer gate facing
east. And look, water trickling out on the right side.
3 As the man went out to the east with the line in his
hand, he measured one thousand ammah, and he
made me pass over into water, water to the ankles.
4 And he measured one thousand and made me
pass over into water, water to the knees. And he
measured one thousand and made me pass over,
water to the loins.
5 And he measured one thousand, a stream that I
was unable to pass over, for the water had risen,
water to swim, a stream that is not passed over.
6 And he said to me, “Son of man, have you seen
this?” And he led me and brought me back to the bank
of the stream.

1382

EZEKIEL

When I returned, then look, along the bank of the
stream were very many trees on one side and the
other.
8 And he said to me, “These waters are flowing
toward the eastern country, and go down into the
Araḇah, and enter the sea, being made to flow into
the sea, and the waters shall be healed.
9 “And it shall be that every swarming creature,
wherever the stream goes, shall live. And there shall
be very many fish, for these waters shall go there, and
they are healed. And wherever the stream flows all
shall live.
10 “And it shall be that fishermen stand along it, from
Ĕyn Geḏi to Ĕyn Eḡlayim, being places for spreading
their nets. Their fish is to be of the same kind as the
fish of the Great Sea, very many.
11 “Its swamps and marshes shall not be healed, they
shall be given over to salt.
12 “And by the bank of the stream, on both sides,
grow all kinds of trees used for food, whose leaves do
not wither and fruit do not fail. They bear fruit every
month, because their water flows from the Miqdash.
And their fruit shall be for food, and their leaves for
healing.”
13 Thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “This is the border by
which you inherit the land, according to the twelve
tribes of Yisra’ĕl, two portions for Yosĕph.
14 “And you shall inherit it, each one the same as his
brother. For I lifted My hand in an oath to give it to
your fathers, and this land shall fall to you as your
inheritance.
15 “And this is the border of the land on the north:
from the Great Sea, the way of Ḥethlon, as one goes
to Tseḏaḏ,
7

1383

YEḤEZQĔL

“Ḥamath, Bĕrothah, Siḇrayim, which is between
the border of Dammeseq and the border of Ḥamath,
Ḥatsar ha’Tiḵon, which is on the border of Ḥawran.
17 “And the border shall be from the Sea to Ḥatsar
Ĕynan, the border of Dammeseq, and on the north
toward the north is the border of Ḥamath. This is the
north side.
18 “And the east side is from between Ḥawran, and
Dammeseq, and Gil’aḏ, and the land of Yisra’ĕl; the
Yardĕn, from the border to the eastern side of the sea
you are to measure. This is the east side.
19 “And the south side toward the Negeḇ is from
Tamar to the waters of Meriḇah by Qaḏĕsh, along the
Wadi to the Great Sea. This is the south side toward
the Negeḇ.
20 “And the west side is the Great Sea, from the
border to the point opposite Ḥamath. This is the west
side.
21 “And you shall divide this land among yourselves
according to the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
22 “And it shall be that you divide it by lot as an
inheritance for yourselves, and for the strangers who
sojourn in your midst and who bear children among
you. And they shall be to you as native-born among
the children of Yisra’ĕl - with you they have an
inheritance in the midst of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
23 “And it shall be that in whatever tribe the stranger
sojourns, there you give him his inheritance,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY.
16

48 “And these are the names of the tribes: From the
north end along the way to Ḥethlon at the entrance of
Ḥamath, to Ḥatsar Ĕynan, the border of Dammeseq
northward by the side of Ḥamath, from its east to its
west side, Dan: one.
1384

EZEKIEL

“And by the border of Dan, from the east side to
the west, Ashĕr: one.
3 “And by the border of Ashĕr, from the east side to
the west, Naphtali: one.
4 “And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side
to the west, Menashsheh: one.
5 “And by the border of Menashsheh, from the east
side to the west, Ephrayim: one.
6 “And by the border of Ephrayim, from the east side
to the west, Re’uḇĕn: one.
7 “And by the border of Re’uḇĕn, from the east side
to the west, Yahuḏah: one.
8 “And by the border of Yahuḏah, from the east side
to the west, is the contribution which you offer up,
twenty-five thousand in width, and in length the same
as one of the portions, from the east side to the west,
with the Miqdash in its midst.
9 “The contribution that you offer up to HWHY is
twenty-five thousand in length and ten thousand in
width.
10 “And of these is the qodesh contribution for the
kohenim: on the north twenty-five thousand, and on
the west ten thousand in width, and on the east ten
thousand in width, and on the south twenty-five
thousand in length. And the Miqdash of HWHY shall be
in its midst 11 for the kohenim of the sons of Tsaḏoq, who are
qodesh, who guarded My Charge, who did not go
astray when the children of Yisra’ĕl went astray, as
the Lĕwites went astray.
12 “So this contribution shall be to them, from the
contribution of the land, a most qodesh place by the
border of the Lĕwites.
13 “And alongside the border of the kohenim, the
Lĕwites have twenty-five thousand in length and ten
2

1385

YEḤEZQĔL

thousand in width, its entire length is twenty-five
thousand and its width ten thousand.
14 “And they do not sell any of it, nor exchange it, nor
transfer this best part of the land, for it is qodesh to
HWHY.
15 “And the five thousand in width that is left, facing
the twenty-five thousand, is for common use by the
city, for dwellings and open land. And the city shall be
in its midst.
16 “And these are its measurements: the north side
four thousand five hundred, and the south side four
thousand five hundred, and the east side four
thousand five hundred, and the west side four
thousand five hundred.
17 “And the open land of the city shall be: to the north
two hundred and fifty, and to the south two hundred
and fifty, and to the east two hundred and fifty, and to
the west two hundred and fifty.
18 “And the rest of the length, alongside the
contribution of the qodesh portion, is ten thousand to
the east and ten thousand to the west. And it shall be
alongside the contribution of the qodesh portion, and
its increase shall be food for the workers of the city.
19 “And the workers of the city, from all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl, shall till it.
20 “The entire contribution is twenty-five thousand by
twenty-five thousand, four-square. You are to offer up
the qodesh contribution with the possession of the
city.
21 “And the rest is for the prince, on one side and on
the other of the qodesh contribution and of the
possession of the city, facing the twenty-five
thousand ammah of the qodesh contribution as far as
the eastern border, and westward facing the twentyfive thousand as far as the western border, alongside
1386

EZEKIEL

the portions of the prince. And the qodesh
contribution, and the Miqdash of the House shall be
in its midst.
22 “So the possession of the Lĕwites and the
possession of the city are in the midst of what belongs
to the prince - between the border of Yahuḏah and
the border of Binyamin, it belongs to the prince.
23 “As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side to
the west side, Binyamin: one.
24 “And by the border of Binyamin, from the east side
to the west side, Shim’on: one.
25 “And by the border of Shim’on, from the east side
to the west side, Yissasḵar: one.
26 “And by the border of Yissasḵar, from the east side
to the west side, Zeḇulun: one.
27 “And by the border of Zeḇulun, from the east side
to the west side, Gaḏ: one
28 “And by the border of Gaḏ, on the south side
toward the Negeḇ, the border shall be from Tamar to
the waters of Meriḇah by Qaḏĕsh, along the Wadi to
the Great Sea.
29 “This is the land which you divide by lot as an
inheritance among the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, and these
are their portions,” declares the Aḏon HWHY.
30 “And these are the exits of the city, the gates of
the city according to the names of the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl: On the north side, measuring four thousand
five hundred,
31 the three gates northward: one gate for Re’uḇĕn,
one gate for Yahuḏah, one gate for Lĕwi.
32 “And on the east side, four thousand five hundred,
three gates: one gate for Yosĕph, one gate for
Binyamin, one gate for Dan.

1387

YEḤEZQĔL

“And on the south side, measuring four thousand
five hundred, three gates: one gate for Shim’on, one
gate for Yissasḵar, one gate for Zeḇulun.
34 “And on the west side, four thousand five hundred
with their three gates: one gate for Gaḏ, one gate for
Ashĕr, one gate for Naphtali.
35 “All around: eighteen thousand ammah. And the
name of the city from that day is: HWHY Shammah!”
33

1388

DANIEL

DANI’ĔL
‫ דניאל‬LAY!d

1 In the third year of the reign of Yahoyaqim,
sovereign of Yahuḏah, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, sovereign of
Baḇel came to Yerushalayim and besieged it.
2 And HWHY gave Yahoyaqim sovereign of Yahuḏah
into his hand, with some of the utensils of the House
of Elohim, which he brought to the land of Shin’ar to
the house of his mighty one. And he brought the
utensils into the treasure house of his mighty one.
3 And the sovereign said to Ashpenaz, the chief of
his eunuchs, to bring some of the children of Yisra’ĕl
and some of the sovereign’s descendants and some
of the nobles,
4 young men in whom there was no blemish, but
good-looking having insight in all wisdom, having
knowledge and understanding knowledge, capable to
stand in the sovereign’s palace, and to teach them the
writing and speech of the Kasdites.
5 And the sovereign appointed for them a daily
ration of the sovereign’s food and of the wine which
he drank, and three years of training for them, so that
at the end thereof they should stand before the
sovereign.
6 Now among them were from the sons of Yahuḏah:
Dani’ĕl, Ḥananyah, Misha’ĕl, and Azaryah.
7 And the chief of the eunuchs gave them names.
For he called Dani’ĕl, Bĕlteshatstsar; and Ḥananyah,
Shaḏraḵ; and Misha’ĕl, Mĕyshaḵ; and Azaryah,
Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo.
8 But Dani’ĕl laid it upon his heart that he would not
defile himself with the portion of the sovereign’s food,
1389

DANI’ĔL

nor with the wine which he drank. So he asked of the
chief of the eunuchs not to defile himself.
9 And Elohim granted Dani’ĕl kindness and
compassion from the chief of the eunuchs,
10 but the chief of the eunuchs said to Dani’ĕl, “I fear
my master the sovereign, who has appointed your
food and drink. For why should he see your faces
looking worse than the young men who are your age?
Then you would make my head guilty before the
sovereign!”
11 And Dani’ĕl said to the overseer whom the chief of
the eunuchs had put over Dani’ĕl, Ḥananyah,
Misha’ĕl, and Azaryah,
12 “Please try your servants for ten days, and let
them give us vegetables to eat and water to drink.
13 “Then let our appearances be examined before
you, and the appearances of the young men who eat
the portion of the sovereign’s food. And do with your
servants as you see fit.”
14 And he listened to them in this matter, and tried
them ten days.
15 And at the end of ten days their appearances
looked better and fatter in flesh than all the young
men who ate the portion of the sovereign’s food.
16 And it came to be that the overseer took away their
portion of food and the wine they were to drink, and
gave them vegetables.
17 As for these four young men, Elohim gave them
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom. And
Dani’ĕl had understanding in all visions and dreams.
18 And at the end of the days, when the sovereign
had said that they should be brought in, the chief of
the
eunuchs
brought
them
in
before
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar.
1390

DANIEL

And the sovereign spoke with them, and none
among them all were found like Dani’ĕl, Ḥananyah,
Misha’ĕl, and Azaryah so they stood before the
sovereign.
20 And in any word of wisdom and understanding
about which the sovereign examined them, he found
them ten times better than all the magicians, the
astrologers, who were in all his reign.
21 And Dani’ĕl continued until the first year of
Sovereign Koresh.
19

2 And in the second year of the reign of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had dreams. And
his spirit was so troubled that his sleep left him.
2 And the sovereign gave orders to call the
magicians, and the astrologers, and the practisers of
witchcraft, and the Kasdites to declare to the
sovereign his dreams. So they came and stood
before the sovereign.
3 And the sovereign said to them, “I have had a
dream, and my spirit is troubled to know the dream.”
4 And the Kasdites spoke to the sovereign in
Aramaic, “O sovereign, live forever! Relate the dream
to your servants, and we shall reveal the
interpretation.”
5 The sovereign answered and said to the Kasdites,
“My decision is firm: if you do not make known the
dream and its interpretation to me, your limbs shall be
taken from you, and your houses made dunghills.
6 “But if you reveal the dream and its interpretation,
you shall receive gifts, and rewards, and great
esteem from me. So reveal to me the dream and its
interpretation.”

1391

DANI’ĔL

They answered again and said, “Let the sovereign
relate to his servants the dream, and we shall reveal
its interpretation.”
8 The sovereign answered and said, “I know for
certain that you would gain time, because you see
that my decision is firm:
9 “If you do not make known the dream to me, there
is only one decree for you! For you have agreed to
speak lying and corrupt words before me till the time
has changed. So relate the dream to me, then I shall
know that you shall reveal its interpretation for me.”
10 The Kasdites answered the sovereign, and said,
“There is no one on earth who is able to reveal the
matter of the sovereign. Because no sovereign,
master, or ruler has ever asked a matter like this of
any magician, or astrologer, or Kasdite.
11 “And the matter that the sovereign is asking is
difficult, and there is no other who is able to reveal it
to the sovereign except the mighty ones, whose
dwelling is not with flesh.”
12 Because of this the sovereign was enraged and
very wroth, and gave orders to destroy all the wise
ones of Baḇel.
13 So the decree went out, and they began killing the
wise ones. And they sought Dani’ĕl and his
companions, to kill them.
14 Then with counsel and wisdom Dani’ĕl answered
Aryoḵ, the chief of the sovereign’s guard, who had
gone out to kill the wise ones of Baḇel 15 he answered and said to Aryoḵ the sovereign’s
officer, “Why is the decree from the sovereign so
urgent?” So Aryoḵ made the decision known to
Dani’ĕl.
7

1392

DANIEL

And Dani’ĕl went in and asked the sovereign to
give him time, and he would show the sovereign the
interpretation.
17 Then Dani’ĕl went to his house, and made the
decision known to Ḥananyah, Misha’ĕl, and Azaryah,
his companions,
18 to seek compassion from the Elah of the
shamayim concerning this secret, so that Dani’ĕl and
his companions should not perish with the rest of the
wise ones of Baḇel.
19 Then the secret was revealed to Dani’ĕl in a night
vision, and Dani’ĕl baraḵ the Elah of the shamayim.
20 Dani’ĕl responded and said, “Baruḵ be the Name
of Elah forever and ever, for wisdom and might are
His.
21 “And He changes the times and the seasons. He
removes sovereigns and raises up sovereigns. He
gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those
who possess understanding.
22 “He reveals deep and secret matters. He knows
what is in the darkness, and light dwells with Him.
23 “I thank You and praise You, O Elah of my fathers.
You have given me wisdom and might, and have now
made known to me what we asked of You, for You
have made known to us the sovereign’s matter.”
24 So Dani’ĕl went to Aryoḵ, whom the sovereign had
appointed to destroy the wise ones of Baḇel. He went
and said this to him, “Do not destroy the wise ones of
Baḇel. Bring me in before the sovereign, and I shall
show the interpretation to the sovereign.”
25 Then Aryoḵ brought Dani’ĕl in a hurry before the
sovereign, and said thus to him, “I have found a man
among the sons of the exile of Yahuḏah, who makes
known to the sovereign the interpretation.”
16

1393

DANI’ĔL

The sovereign answered and said to Dani’ĕl,
whose name was Bĕlteshatstsar, “Are you able to
make known to me the dream which I have seen, and
its interpretation?”
27 Dani’ĕl answered before the sovereign, and said,
“The secret which the sovereign is asking - the wise
ones, the astrologers, the magicians, and the diviners
are unable to show it to the sovereign.
28 “But there is an Elah in the shamayim who reveals
secrets, and He has made known to Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar what is to be in the latter days. Your
dream, and the visions of your head upon your bed,
were these:
29 “As for you, O sovereign, on your bed your
thoughts came up: What is going to take place after
this. And He who reveals secrets has made known to
you what shall be.
30 “As for me, this secret has not been revealed to
me because I have more wisdom than anyone living,
but for our sakes who make known the interpretation
to the sovereign, and that you should know the
thoughts of your heart.
31 “You, O sovereign, were looking on, and saw a
great image! This great image, and its brightness
excellent, was standing before you, and its form was
awesome.
32 “This image’s head was of fine gold, its chest and
arms of silver, its abdomen and thighs of bronze,
33 its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of
clay.
34 “You were looking on, until a stone was cut out
without hands, and it smote the image on its feet of
iron and clay, and broke them in pieces.
35 “Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and
the gold were crushed together, and became like
26

1394

DANIEL

chaff from the summer threshing-floors. And the wind
took them away so that no trace of them was found.
And the stone that smote the image became a great
mountain and filled all the earth.
36 “This is the dream, and its interpretation we
declare before the sovereign.
37 “You, O sovereign, are a sovereign of sovereigns.
For the Elah of the shamayim has given you a reign,
power, and strength, and esteem,
38 and wherever the children of men dwell, or the
beasts of the field and the birds of the shamayim, He
has given them into your hand, and has made you
ruler over them all. You are the head of gold.
39 “And after you rises up another reign lower than
yours, and another third reign of bronze that rules
over all the earth.
40 “And the fourth reign is as strong as iron, because
iron crushes and shatters all. So, like iron that breaks
in pieces, it crushes and breaks all these.
41 “Yet, as you saw the feet and toes, partly of
potter’s clay and partly of iron, the reign is to be
divided. But some of the strength of the iron is to be
in it, because you saw the iron mixed with muddy
clay.
42 “And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and
partly of clay, so the reign is partly strong and partly
brittle.
43 “And as you saw iron mixed with muddy clay, they
are mixing themselves with the seed of men, but they
are not clinging to each other, even as iron does not
mix with clay.
44 “And in the days of these sovereigns the Elah of
the shamayim shall appoint a reign which shall never
be destroyed, nor the reign pass on to other people 1395

DANI’ĔL

it crushes and puts to an end all these reigns, and it
shall stand forever.
45 “Because you saw that the stone was cut out of
the mountain without hands, and that it crushed the
iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold, the
great Elah has made known to the sovereign what
shall be after this. And the dream is true, and its
interpretation is trustworthy.”
46 Then Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar fell on his face,
and did obeisance before Dani’ĕl, and gave orders to
present to him an offering and incense.
47 The sovereign answered Dani’ĕl, and said, “Truly
your Elah is the Elah of elahin, the Aḏon of
sovereigns, and a revealer of secrets, since you were
able to reveal this secret.”
48 Then the sovereign made Dani’ĕl great and gave
him many great gifts, and made him ruler over all the
province of Baḇel, and chief of the nobles, over all the
wise ones of Baḇel.
49 And Dani’ĕl asked of the sovereign, and he
appointed Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo over
the work of the province of Baḇel, and Dani’ĕl in the
gate of the sovereign.

3 Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign made an image of
gold, whose height was sixty ammah and its width six
ammah. He put it up in the plain of Dura, in the
province of Baḇel.
2 And Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sent word to
gather together the viceroys, the nobles, and the
governors, the counsellors, the treasurers, the
judges, the magistrates, and all the officials of the
provinces, to come to the dedication of the image
which Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had put up.
1396

DANIEL

Then the viceroys, the nobles, and the governors,
the counsellors, the treasurers, the judges, the
magistrates, and all the officials of the provinces
gathered together for the dedication of the image that
Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had put up. And they
stood before the image that Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had put
up.
4 Then a herald loudly proclaimed, “To you it is
commanded, O peoples, nations, and languages,
5 that as soon as you hear the sound of the horn,
the flute, the zither, the lyre, the harp, the pipes, and
all kinds of instruments, you shall fall down and do
obeisance to the gold image that Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar has put up.
6 “And whoever does not fall down and do
obeisance is immediately thrown into the midst of a
burning furnace of fire.”
7 So as soon as all the people heard the sound of
the horn, the flute, the zither, the lyre, the harp, all
kinds of instruments, all the people, nations, and
languages fell down and did obeisance to the gold
image that Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had put up.
8 Thereupon, at that time, certain Kasdites came
forward and accused the Yahuḏim.
9 They
spoke
and
said
to
Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, “O sovereign, live forever!
10 “You, O sovereign, have made a decree that
everyone who hears the sound of the horn, the flute,
the zither, the lyre, the harp, the pipes, and all kinds
of instruments, shall fall down and do obeisance to
the gold image,
11 and whoever does not fall down and do obeisance
is thrown into the midst of a burning furnace of fire.
12 “There are certain Yahuḏim whom you have
appointed over the work of the province of Baḇel:
3

1397

DANI’ĔL

Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo. These men, O
sovereign, pay no heed to you. They do not serve
your mighty ones, and they are not doing obeisance
to the gold image which you have put up.”
13 Then Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, in rage and wrath, gave
orders to bring Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo.
Then they brought these men before the sovereign.
14 Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar spoke and said to them, “Is it
true, Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo, that you do
not serve my mighty ones, and you do not do
obeisance to the gold image which I have put up?
15 “Now if you are ready when you hear the sound of
the horn, the flute, the zither, the lyre, the harp, the
pipes, and all kinds of instruments, and you fall down
and do obeisance to the image which I have made,
good! But if you do not do obeisance, you are
immediately thrown into the midst of a burning
furnace of fire. And who is the mighty one who
delivers you from my hands?”
16 Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo answered
and said to the sovereign, “O Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, we
have no need to answer you in this matter.
17 “For if so, our Elah whom we serve is able to
deliver us from the burning furnace of fire and from
your hand, O sovereign - He delivers!
18 “But if not, let it be known to you, O sovereign, that
we do not serve your mighty ones, nor do we do
obeisance to the gold image which you have put up.”
19 Then Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar was filled with wrath, and
the expression on his face changed toward Shaḏraḵ,
Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo. He responded and gave
orders that they heat the furnace seven times more
than it was usual to heat it.

1398

DANIEL

And he commanded some of the strongest men of
his army to bind Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo,
and throw them into the burning furnace of fire.
21 So these men were bound in their coats, their
trousers, and their turbans, and their other garments,
and were thrown into the midst of the burning furnace
of fire.
22 Thereupon, because the sovereign’s order was
urgent, and the furnace exceedingly hot, the flame of
the fire killed those men who took up Shaḏraḵ,
Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo.
23 And these three men, Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and
Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo, fell down bound into the midst of the
burning furnace of fire.
24 Then Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar was amazed,
and stood up in haste and spoke and said to his
counsellors, “Did we not throw three men bound into
the midst of the fire?” They answered and said to the
sovereign, “Certainly, O sovereign.”
25 He answered and said, “Look! I see four men
loose, walking in the midst of the fire. And they are
not hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Bĕn of
Elah.”
26 Then Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar went near the mouth of the
burning furnace of fire. He spoke and said, “Shaḏraḵ,
Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo, servants of the Most High
Elah, come out, and come here.” Then Shaḏraḵ,
Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo came from the midst of the
fire.
27 And the viceroys, the nobles, and the governors,
and the sovereign’s counsellors gathered together,
seeing these men on whose bodies the fire had no
power, and the hair of their head was not singed nor
were their garments changed, nor did the smell of fire
come on them.
20

1399

DANI’ĔL

Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar responded and said, “Baruḵ be
the Elah of Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ, and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo, who
sent His Messenger and delivered His servants who
trusted in Him, and changed the sovereign’s order,
and gave up their bodies, that they should not serve
nor do obeisance to any mighty one except their own
Elah!
29 “Therefore I make a decree that whoever of any
people, nation, or language who speaks any
wickedness against the Elah of Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ,
and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo, his limbs shall be taken, and his
house made a dunghill, because there is no other
Elah who is able to deliver like this.”
30 Then the sovereign promoted Shaḏraḵ, Mĕyshaḵ,
and Aḇĕḏ-Neḡo in the province of Baḇel.
28

4 Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign, to all peoples,
nations and languages that dwell in all the earth:
Peace be increased to you.
2 I thought it good to declare the signs and wonders
which the Most High Elah has worked for me.
3 How great are His signs, and how mighty His
wonders! His reign is an everlasting reign, and His
rulership is from generation to generation.
4 I, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, was at rest in my house, and
prospering in my palace.
5 I saw a dream and it frightened me, and the
thoughts on my bed and the visions of my head
alarmed me.
6 So I issued a decree to bring in all the wise ones
of Baḇel before me, to make known to me the
interpretation of the dream.
7 So the magicians, the astrologers, the Kasdites,
and the diviners came in, and I related the dream to
1400

DANIEL

them, but its interpretation they did not make known
to me.
8 And at last Dani’ĕl, whose name is Bĕlteshatstsar,
according to the name of my mighty one, came before
me. In him is the Ruaḥ of the Qodesh Elah. So I
related the dream to him, saying,
9 “Bĕlteshatstsar, chief of the magicians, because I
know that the Ruaḥ of the Qodesh Elah is in you, and
no secret is too difficult for you, explain to me the
visions of my dream that I have seen, and its
interpretation.
10 “Now the visions of my head on my bed were
these: I looked, and saw a tree in the midst of the
earth, and its height great.
11 “The tree became great and strong, and its height
reached to the shamayim, and it was visible to the
ends of all the earth.
12 “Its leaves were lovely, and its fruit plenty, and in
it was food for all. The beasts of the field found shade
under it, and the birds of the shamayim dwelt in its
branches, and all flesh was fed from it.
13 “In the visions of my head on my bed, I looked and
saw a Watcher, even a qodeshi, coming down from
the shamayim.
14 “He cried aloud and said this, ‘Hew down the tree
and cut off its branches, strip off its leaves and scatter
its fruit. Let the beasts flee from under it, and the birds
from its branches.
15 ‘But leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even
with a band of iron and bronze, in the tender grass of
the field. And let it be wet with the dew of the
shamayim, and let his portion be with the beasts on
the grass of the earth.

1401

DANI’ĔL

‘Let his heart be changed from man’s, let him be
given the heart of a beast, and seven times pass over
him.
17 ‘This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and
the command by the word of the qodeshim, so that
the living know that the Most High is ruler in the reign
of men, and gives it to whomever He wants, and
appoints over it the lowest of men.’
18 “This
dream have I seen, I, Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar. And you, Bĕlteshatstsar, reveal its
interpretation, since all the wise ones of my reign are
unable to make known to me the interpretation. But
you are able, for the Ruaḥ of the Qodesh Elah is in
you.”
19 Then Dani’ĕl, whose name was Bĕlteshatstsar,
was stunned for a short time, and his thoughts
alarmed him. The sovereign responded and said,
“Bĕlteshatstsar, do not let the dream or its
interpretation alarm you.” Bĕlteshatstsar answered
and said, “My master, the dream is to those who hate
you, and its interpretation to your enemies!
20 “The tree you saw, which became great and
strong, whose height reached to the shamayim and
was visible to all the earth,
21 whose leaves were lovely and its fruit plenty, and
in it was food for all, under which the beasts of the
field dwelt, and on whose branches the birds of the
shamayim sat 22 it is you, O sovereign, for you have become great
and strong. And your greatness has grown, and has
reached to the shamayim and your rulership to the
end of the earth.
23 “And as the sovereign saw a Watcher, even a
qodeshi, coming down from the shamayim, and he
said, ‘Hew down the tree and destroy it, but leave the
16

1402

DANIEL

stump of its roots in the earth, even with a band of
iron and bronze in the tender grass of the field. And
let it be wet with the dew of the shamayim, and let his
portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times
pass over him’ 24 this is the interpretation, O sovereign, and this is
the decree of the Most High, which has come upon
my master the sovereign:
25 “That you are going to be driven away from men,
and your dwelling be with the beasts of the field, and
you be given grass to eat like oxen, and you be wetted
with the dew of the shamayim, and seven times pass
over you, till you know that the Most High is ruler in
the reign of men, and that He gives it to whomever He
wants.
26 “And they that gave the command to leave the
stump of its roots of the tree: your reign remains
yours, from the time you come to know that the
shamayim are ruling.
27 “Therefore, O sovereign, let my counsel be
acceptable to you, and break off your sins by
righteousness, and your wickednesses by showing
favour to the poor - your prosperity might be
extended.”
28 All this came upon Sovereign Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar.
29 At the end of the twelve months he was walking
about the palace of the reign of Baḇel.
30 The sovereign spoke and said, “Is not this great
Baḇel, which I myself have built, for the house of the
reign, by the might of my power and for the esteem of
my splendour?”
31 The word was still in the sovereign’s mouth, when
a voice fell from the shamayim, “Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, to you it is spoken: the reign has
been taken away from you,
1403

DANI’ĔL

and you are driven away from men, and your
dwelling is to be with the beasts of the field. You are
given grass to eat like oxen, and seven seasons shall
pass over you, until you know that the Most High is
ruler in the reign of men, and He gives it to whomever
He wants.”
33 In that hour the word was executed on
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, and he was driven from men and
he ate grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the
dew of the shamayim till his hair had grown like
eagles’ and his nails like birds’.
34 And at the end of the days I, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar,
lifted my eyes to the shamayim, and my
understanding returned to me. And I baraḵ the Most
High and praised and made Him great who lives
forever, whose rule is an everlasting rule, and His
reign is from generation to generation.
35 And all the inhabitants of the earth are of no
account, and He does as He wants with the host of
the shamayim and among the inhabitants of the earth.
And there is none to strike against His hand or say to
Him, “What have You done?”
36 At the same time my understanding returned to
me, and for the esteem of my reign, my esteem and
splendour were returning to me. And my counsellors
and nobles sought me out, and I was re-established
to my reign, and excellent greatness was added to
me.
37 Now I, Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, am praising and exalting
and esteeming the Sovereign of the shamayim, for all
His works are truth, and His Ways right. And those
who walk in pride He is able to humble.
32

1404

DANIEL

5 Bĕlshatstsar the sovereign made a great feast for
a thousand of his great men, and drank wine in the
presence of the thousand.
2 While tasting the wine, Bĕlshatstsar gave orders
to bring the gold and silver vessels which his father
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had taken from the Hĕyḵal which
had been in Yerushalayim, that the sovereign and his
great men, his wives, and his concubines could drink
from them.
3 Then they brought the gold vessels that had been
taken from the Hĕyḵal of the House of Elah which had
been in Yerushalayim. And the sovereign and his
great men, his wives, and his concubines drank out
of them.
4 They drank wine, and praised the mighty ones of
gold, and of silver, of bronze, of iron, of wood and of
stone.
5 At that moment the fingers of a man’s hand
appeared and wrote opposite the lampstand on the
plaster of the wall of the sovereign’s palace. And the
sovereign saw the part of the hand that wrote.
6 Then the sovereign’s colour changed, and his
thoughts alarmed him, so that the joints of his hips
were loosened and his knees knocked against each
other.
7 The sovereign called loudly to bring in the
astrologers, the Kasdites, and the diviners. The
sovereign spoke and said to the wise ones of Baḇel,
“Whoever reads this writing, and shows me its
interpretation, is robed in purple and has a chain of
gold around his neck, and shall be the third ruler in
the reign.”

1405

DANI’ĔL

So all the sovereign’s wise ones came, but they
were unable to read the writing, or to make known its
interpretation to the sovereign.
9 Then
Sovereign Bĕlshatstsar was greatly
alarmed, and his colour changed, and his great men
were puzzled.
10 The sovereigness, because of the words of the
sovereign and his great men, came to the banquet
hall. And the sovereigness spoke and said, “O
sovereign, live forever! Do not let your thoughts alarm
you, nor let your colour change.
11 “There is a man in your reign in whom is the Ruaḥ
of the Qodesh Elah. And in the days of your father,
light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom
of the mighty ones, were found in him. And Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar your father, your father the
sovereign, made him chief of the magicians,
astrologers, Kasdites, and diviners,
12 because an excellent spirit, knowledge and
understanding, interpreting dreams, and explaining
riddles, and solving difficult problems were found in
this Dani’ĕl, whom the sovereign named
Bĕlteshatstsar. Now let Dani’ĕl be called, and let him
show the interpretation.”
13 So Dani’ĕl was brought in before the sovereign.
The sovereign spoke and said to Dani’ĕl, “Are you
that Dani’ĕl who is one of the sons of the exile from
Yahuḏah, whom my father the sovereign brought
from Yahuḏah?
14 “I have heard of you, that the Ruaḥ of Elah is in
you, and that light and understanding and excellent
wisdom are found in you.
15 “And the wise ones, the astrologers, have been
brought in before me, that they should read this
writing and make known to me its interpretation, but
8

1406

DANIEL

they were unable to show the interpretation of the
word.
16 “And I myself have heard of you, that you are able
to give interpretations and to solve difficult problems.
Now if you are able to read the writing and make
known its interpretation to me, you are to be robed in
purple and have a chain of gold around your neck,
and shall be the third ruler in the reign.”
17 Then Dani’ĕl answered and said before the
sovereign, “Let your gifts be for yourself, and give
your rewards to another. Yet I shall read the writing to
the sovereign, and make known the interpretation to
him.
18 “O
sovereign, the Most High Elah gave
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar your father a reign and greatness,
and esteem and honour.
19 “And because of the greatness which He gave
him, all peoples, nations, and languages trembled
and feared before him. Whomever he wanted he
executed, and whomever he wanted he kept alive,
and whomever he wanted he raised up, and
whomever he wanted he made low.
20 “But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit
was so strong as to act proudly, he was put down from
his throne of reign, and they took his esteem from
him.
21 “Then he was driven from the sons of men, and his
heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was
with the wild donkeys. He was given grass to eat like
oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of the
shamayim, till he knew that the Most High Elah is ruler
in the reign of men, and He appoints over it whomever
He wants.
22 “And you his son, Bĕlshatstsar, have not humbled
your heart, although you knew all this.
1407

DANI’ĔL

“And you have lifted yourself up against the Aḏon
of the shamayim. And they brought before you the
vessels of His House, and you and your great men,
your wives and your concubines, have been drinking
wine from them. And you have praised the mighty
ones of silver, and of gold, of bronze, of iron, of wood,
and of stone, which neither see nor hear nor know.
But the Elah who holds your breath in His hand and
owns all your ways, you have not made great.
24 “Then the part of the hand was sent from Him, and
this writing was inscribed.
25 “And this is the writing that was inscribed: MENĔ,
MENĔ, TEQĔL, UPHARSIN.
26 “This is the interpretation of each word: MENĔ Elah has numbered your reign, and put an end to it.
27 “TEQĔL - You have been weighed on the scales,
and found lacking.
28 “PERĔS - Your reign has been divided, and given
to the Maḏites and Parasians.”
29 Then Bĕlshatstsar gave orders, and they robed
Dani’ĕl in purple and put a chain of gold around his
neck, and they proclaimed concerning him that he is
the third ruler in the reign.
30 In that night Bĕlshatstsar, sovereign of the
Kasdites, was slain.
31 And Dareyawesh the Maḏite took over the reign,
being about sixty-two years old.
23

6 It pleased Dareyawesh to appoint over the reign
one hundred and twenty viceroys, to be over all the
reign,
2 and over them three governors, of whom Dani’ĕl
was one, so that these viceroys should give account
to them, and the sovereign suffer no loss.
1408

DANIEL

Then this Dani’ĕl distinguished himself above the
governors and viceroys, because an excellent spirit
was in him. And the sovereign planned to appoint him
over all the reign.
4 Then the governors and viceroys sought to find
occasion against Dani’ĕl concerning the reign. But
they were unable to find occasion or corruption,
because he was steadfast, and no negligence or
corruption was found in him.
5 Then these men said, “We shall not find any
occasion against this Dani’ĕl unless we find it against
him concerning the Law of his Elah.”
6 Then these governors and viceroys tumultuously
gathered before the sovereign, and said this to him,
“Sovereign Dareyawesh, live forever!
7 “All the governors of the reign, the nobles and
viceroys, the counsellors and advisors, have
consulted together to establish a royal decree and to
make a strong interdict, that whoever petitions any
mighty one or man for thirty days, except you, O
sovereign, is thrown into the den of lions.
8 “Now, O sovereign, establish the interdict and sign
the writing, so that it is not to be changed, according
to the law of the Maḏites and Parasians, which does
not pass away.”
9 So Sovereign Dareyawesh signed the written
interdict.
10 And Dani’ĕl, when he knew that the writing was
signed, went home and in his upper room with his
windows open toward Yerushalayim he knelt down on
his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave
thanks before his Elah, as he had done before.
11 Then these men tumultuously gathered and found
Dani’ĕl praying and entreating before his Elah.
3

1409

DANI’ĔL

Then they approached the sovereign, and spoke
concerning the sovereign’s interdict, “Have you not
signed an interdict that every man who petitions any
mighty one or man within thirty days, except you, O
sovereign, is thrown into the den of lions?” The
sovereign answered and said, “The word is certain,
according to the law of the Maḏites and Parasians,
which does not pass away.”
13 Then they answered and said before the
sovereign, “Dani’ĕl, who is one of the sons of the exile
from Yahuḏah, pays no heed to you, O sovereign, nor
for the interdict that you have signed, but makes his
petition three times a day.”
14 Then the sovereign, when he heard these words,
was greatly displeased with himself, and laid his heart
on Dani’ĕl to deliver him. And he laboured till the
going down of the sun to deliver him.
15 Then these men tumultuously gathered before the
sovereign, and said to the sovereign, “Know, O
sovereign, that it is the law of the Maḏites and
Parasians that any interdict or decree which the
sovereign establishes is not to be changed.”
16 Then the sovereign gave orders, and they brought
Dani’ĕl and threw him into the den of lions. But the
sovereign spoke and said to Dani’ĕl, “Your Elah,
whom you serve continually, He Himself delivers
you.”
17 And a stone was brought and laid on the mouth of
the den, and the sovereign sealed it with his own
signet and with the signets of his great men, that the
situation concerning Dani’ĕl might not be changed.
18 And the sovereign went to his palace and spent
the night fasting. And no entertainment was brought
before him, and his sleep fled from him.
12

1410

DANIEL

Then the sovereign rose up very early in the
morning and hurried to the den of lions.
20 And when he came to the den, he called with a
grieved voice to Dani’ĕl. The sovereign spoke and
said to Dani’ĕl, “Dani’ĕl, servant of the living Elah, has
your Elah, whom you serve continually, been able to
deliver you from the lions?”
21 Then Dani’ĕl said to the sovereign, “O sovereign,
live forever!
22 “My Elah has sent His messenger and has shut
the lions’ mouths, and they did not harm me, because
I was found innocent before Him. And also before
you, O sovereign, I have done no harm.”
23 Then the sovereign was very glad and gave orders
that Dani’ĕl be taken up out of the den. And Dani’ĕl
was taken up out of the den, and no harm was found
on him, because he trusted in his Elah.
24 And the sovereign gave orders and they brought
those men who had accused Dani’ĕl, and they threw
them, their children, and their wives into the den of
lions. And the lions overpowered them, and broke all
their bones in pieces before they reached the floor of
the den.
25 Then Sovereign Dareyawesh wrote to all peoples,
nations, and languages that dwell in all the earth:
“Peace be increased to you.
26 “From before me is made a decree that throughout
every rule of my reign men are to tremble and fear
before the Elah of Dani’ĕl, for He is the living Elah,
and steadfast forever. And His reign is one which is
not destroyed, and His rule is unto the end.
27 “He delivers and rescues, and He works signs and
wonders in the shamayim and on earth, for He has
delivered Dani’ĕl from the power of the lions.”
19

1411

DANI’ĔL

And this Dani’ĕl prospered in the reign of
Dareyawesh and in the reign of Koresh the Parasian.

28

7 In the first year of Bĕlshatstsar sovereign of Baḇel,
Dani’ĕl had a dream and visions of his head on his bed.
Then he wrote down the dream, giving a summary of
the matters.
2 Dani’ĕl spoke and said, “I was looking in my vision
by night and saw the four winds of the shamayim
stirring up the Great Sea.
3 “And four great beasts came up from the sea,
different from one another.
4 “The first was like a lion, and had eagle’s wings. I
was looking until its wings were plucked off, and it
was lifted up from the earth and made to stand on two
feet like a man, and it was given a man’s heart.
5 “And see, another beast, a second, like a bear.
And it was raised up on one side, and had three ribs
in its mouth between its teeth. And they said this to it,
‘Arise, devour much flesh!’
6 “After this I looked and saw another, like a leopard,
which had on its back four wings of a bird. The beast
also had four heads, and rule was given to it.
7 “After this I looked in the night visions and saw a
fourth beast, fearsome and burly, exceedingly strong.
And it had great iron teeth. It devoured and crushed,
and trampled down the rest with its feet. And it was
different from all the beasts that were before it, and it
had ten horns.
8 “I was thinking about the horns, then saw another
horn, a little one, coming up among them, and three
of the first horns were plucked out by the roots before
it. And see, eyes like the eyes of a man were in this
horn, and a mouth speaking greatness.
1412

DANIEL

“I was looking until thrones were placed, and the
Ancient of Days was seated. His garment was white
as snow, and the hair of His head was like clean wool,
His throne was flames of fire, its wheels burning fire.
10 “A stream of fire was flowing and coming forth from
His presence, and a thousand thousands served Him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
Him, the Judge was seated, and the books were
opened.
11 “I was looking. Then, because of the sound of the
great words which the horn was speaking, I was
looking until the beast was slain, and its body
destroyed and given to the burning fire,
12 and the rest of the beasts had their rule taken
away. But a lengthening of life was given to them, for
a season and a time.
13 “I was looking in the night visions and saw One like
the Bĕn of Enosh, coming with the clouds of the
shamayim! And He came to the Ancient of Days, and
they brought Him near before Him.
14 “And to Him was given rulership and esteem and
a reign, that all peoples, nations, and languages
should serve Him. His rule is an everlasting rule which
shall not pass away, and His reign that which shall not
be destroyed.
15 “As for me, Dani’ĕl, my spirit was pierced within
my body, and the visions of my head alarmed me.
16 “I drew near to one of those who stood by, and
asked him the certainty of all this. And he spoke to me
and made known to me the interpretation of the
matters:
17 ‘These great beasts, which are four, are four
sovereigns which rise up from the earth.
9

1413

DANI’ĔL

‘Then the qodeshim of the Most High shall receive
the reign, and possess the reign forever, even forever
and ever.’
19 “Then I desired for certainty concerning the fourth
beast, which was different from all the others, very
fearsome, with its teeth of iron and its nails of bronze,
which devoured, crushed, and trampled down the rest
with its feet,
20 and concerning the ten horns that were on its
head, and of the other that came up, before which
three fell - this horn which had eyes and a mouth
which spoke greatness, whose appearance was
greater than his fellows.
21 “I was looking, and this horn was fighting against
the qodeshim, and was prevailing against them,
22 until the Ancient of Days came, and right-ruling
was given to the qodeshim of the Most High, and the
time came and the qodeshim took possession of the
reign.
23 “This is what he said, ‘The fourth beast is the
fourth reign on earth, which is different from all other
reigns, and it devours all the earth, tramples it down
and crushes it.
24 ‘And the ten horns are ten sovereigns from this
reign. They shall rise, and another shall rise after
them, and it is different from the first ones, and it
humbles three sovereigns,
25 and it speaks words against the Most High, and it
wears out the qodeshim of the Most High, and it
intends to change Appointed Times and Law, and
they are given into its hand for a time and times and
half a time.
26 ‘But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away its rule, to cut off and to destroy, until the end.
18

1414

DANIEL

‘And the reign, and the rulership, and the
greatness of the reigns under all the shamayim, shall
be given to the people, the qodeshim of the Most
High. His reign is an everlasting reign, and all
rulerships shall serve and obey Him.’
28 “This is the end of the matter. As for me, Dani’ĕl,
my thoughts greatly alarmed me, and my colour
changed. And I kept the matter in my heart.”
27

8 In the third year of the reign of Bĕlshatstsar the
sovereign, a vision appeared to me, Dani’ĕl, after the
one that appeared to me the first time.
2 And I looked in the vision, and it came to be while
I was looking, that I was in the citadel of Shushan,
which is in the province of Ĕylam. And I looked in the
vision, and I was by the River Ulai.
3 And I lifted my eyes and looked and saw a ram
standing beside the river, and it had two horns, and
the two horns were high. And the one was higher than
the other, and the higher one came up last.
4 I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward,
and southward, so that no beast could stand before
him, and there was no one to deliver from his hand,
while he did as he pleased and became great.
5 And I was observing and saw a male goat came
from the west, over the surface of all the earth,
without touching the ground. And the goat had a
conspicuous horn between his eyes.
6 And he came to the ram that had two horns, which
I had seen standing beside the river, and ran at him
in the rage of his power.
7 And I saw him come close to the ram, and he
became embittered against him, and smote the ram,
and broke his two horns. And there was no power in
the ram to withstand him, but he threw him down to
1415

DANI’ĔL

the ground and trampled on him. And there was no
one to deliver the ram from his hand.
8 And the male goat became very great. But when
he was strong, the large horn was broken, and in
place of it four conspicuous ones came up toward the
four winds of the shamayim.
9 And from one of them came a little horn which
became exceedingly great toward the south, and
toward the east, and toward the Splendid Land.
10 And it became great, up to the host of the
shamayim. And it caused some of the host and some
of the stars to fall to the earth, and trampled them
down.
11 It even exalted itself as high as the Prince of the
host. And it took that which is continual away from
Him, and threw down the foundation of His Miqdash.
12 And because of transgression, an army was given
over to oppose that which is continual. And it threw
the truth down to the ground, and it acted and
prospered.
13 Then I heard a certain qodeshi speaking. And
another qodeshi said to that certain one who was
speaking, “Till when is the vision, concerning that
which is continual, and the transgression that lays
waste, to make both the qodesh place and the host to
be trampled under foot?”
14 And he said to me, “For two thousand three
hundred evening - morning, then that which is qodesh
shall be made right.”
15 And it came to be, when I, Dani’ĕl, had seen the
vision, that I sought understanding, and see, before
me stood one having the appearance of a mighty
man.

1416

DANIEL

And I heard a man’s voice between Ulai, who
called, and said, “Gaḇri’ĕl, make this man understand
the vision.”
17 He then came near where I stood. And when he
came I feared and I fell on my face, but he said to me,
“Understand, son of man, for the vision is for the time
of the end.”
18 And, as he was speaking with me, I fell stunned
upon my face to the ground, but he touched me, and
stood me up straight,
19 and said, “Look, I am making known to you what
shall take place in the latter time of the wrath, for at
the appointed time shall be the end.
20 “The ram which you saw, having two horns, are
the sovereigns of Maḏai and Paras.
21 “And the male goat is the sovereign of Yawan, and
the large horn between its eyes is the first sovereign.
22 “And that it was broken and four stood up in its
place: are four rulerships arising out of that nation, but
not in its power.
23 “And in the latter time of their rule, when the
transgressors have filled up their measure, a
sovereign, fierce of face and skilled at intrigues, shall
stand up.
24 “And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power, and he shall destroy incredibly, and shall
prosper and thrive, and destroy mighty men, and the
qodesh people.
25 “And through his skill he shall make deceit prosper
in his hand, and hold himself to be great in his heart,
and destroy many who are at ease, and even stand
against the Prince of princes - yet without hand he
shall be broken.
16

1417

DANI’ĔL

“And what was said in the vision of the evenings
and mornings is truth. And hide the vision, for it is after
many days.”
27 And I, Dani’ĕl, was stricken and became sick for
days. Then I rose up and went about the sovereign’s
work. And I was amazed at the vision, but there was
no understanding.
26

9 In the first year of Dareyawesh the son of
Aḥashwĕrosh, of the seed of the Maḏites, who was
appointed as sovereign over the reign of the Kasdites
2 in the first year of his reign I, Dani’ĕl, observed
from the Scriptures the number of the years,
according to the word of HWHY given to Yirmeyahu the
naḇi, for the completion of the wastes of
Yerushalayim would be seventy years.
3 So I turned my face toward HWHY the Elohim to
seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes.
4 And I prayed to HWHY my Elohim, and made
confession, and said, “O HWHY, great and awesome
Ĕl, guarding the Covenant and the kindness to those
who love Him, and to those who guard His
Commands.
5 “We have sinned and done wickedly, and did
wickedness and rebelled, to turn aside from Your
Commands and from Your Right-Rulings.
6 “And we have not listened to Your servants the
neḇi’im, who spoke in Your Name to our sovereigns,
our heads, and our fathers, and to all the people of
the land.
7 “O HWHY, to You is the righteousness, and to us
the shame of face, as it is this day - to the men of
Yahuḏah, to the inhabitants of Yerushalayim and all
1418

DANIEL

Yisra’ĕl, those near and those far off in all the lands
to which You have driven them, because of their
trespass which they have trespassed against You.
8 “O Aḏonai, to us is the shame of face, to our
sovereigns, to our heads, and to our fathers, because
we have sinned against You.
9 “To HWHY our Elohim are the compassions and
forgivenesses, for we have rebelled against Him.
10 “And we have not obeyed the voice of HWHY our
Elohim, to walk in His Torot, which He put before us
through His servants the neḇi’im.
11 “And all Yisra’ĕl have transgressed Your Torah,
and turned aside, so as not to obey Your voice. So
the curse and the oath written in the Torah of Mosheh
the servant of Elohim has been poured out on us, for
we have sinned against Him.
12 “And He has confirmed His words, which He spoke
against us and against our rulers who judged us, by
bringing upon us great evil. For under all the
shamayim there has not been done like what was
done to Yerushalayim.
13 “As it is written in the Torah of Mosheh, all this evil
has come upon us, and we have not entreated the
face of HWHY our Elohim, to turn back from our
wickednesses, and to study Your truth.
14 “Hence HWHY has watched over the evil and has
brought it upon us. For HWHY our Elohim is righteous
in all the works which He has done, but we have not
obeyed His voice.
15 “And now, O HWHY our Elohim, who brought Your
people out of the land of Mitsrayim with a strong hand,
and made Yourself a Name, as it is this day - we have
sinned, we have done wickedness!
16 “O HWHY, according to all Your righteousness, I
pray, let Your displeasure and Your wrath be turned
1419

DANI’ĔL

away from Your city Yerushalayim, Your qodesh
mountain. For, because of our sins, and because of
the wickednesses of our fathers, Yerushalayim and
Your people have become a reproach to all those
around us.
17 “And now, our Elohim, hear the prayer of Your
servant, and his supplications, and for the sake of
HWHY cause Your face to shine on Your Miqdash,
which is laid waste.
18 “O my Elohim, incline Your ear and hear. Open
Your eyes and see our wastes, and the city which is
called by Your Name. For we do not present our
supplications before You because of our righteous
deeds, but because of Your great compassions.
19 “O HWHY, hear! O HWHY, forgive! O HWHY, listen and
act! Do not delay for Your own sake, my Elohim, for
Your city and Your people are called by Your Name.”
20 And while I was speaking, and praying, and
confessing my sin and the sin of my people Yisra’ĕl,
and presenting my supplication before HWHY my
Elohim for the qodesh mountain of my Elohim,
21 while I was still speaking in prayer, the man
Gaḇri’ĕl, whom I had seen in the vision at the
beginning, came close to me, in swift flight about the
time of the evening offering.
22 And he made me understand, and talked with me,
and said, “O Dani’ĕl, I have now come forth to make
you wise concerning understanding.
23 “At the beginning of your supplications a word
went out, and I have come to make it known, for you
are greatly appreciated. So consider the word and
understand the vision:
24 “Seventy weeks are decreed for your people and
for your qodesh city, to put an end to the
transgression, and to seal up sins, and to cover
1420

DANIEL

wickedness,
and
to
bring
in
everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up vision and naḇi, and to
anoint the Most Qodesh.
25 “Know, then, and understand: from the going forth
of the command to restore and build Yerushalayim
until Mashiaḥ the Prince is seven weeks and sixty-two
weeks. It shall be built again, with streets and a
trench, but in times of affliction.
26 “And after the sixty-two weeks Mashiaḥ shall be
cut off and have naught. And the people of a coming
prince shall destroy the city and the qodesh place.
And the end of it is with a flood. And wastes are
decreed, and fighting until the end.
27 “And he shall confirm a covenant with many for
one week. And in the middle of the week he shall put
an end to slaughtering and meal offering. And on the
wing of abominations he shall lay waste, even until
the complete end and that which is decreed is poured
out on the one who lays waste.”

10 In the third year of Koresh sovereign of Paras a
word was revealed to Dani’ĕl, whose name was called
Bĕlteshatstsar. And the word was true, and the conflict
great. And he understood the word, and had
understanding of the vision.
2 In those days I, Dani’ĕl, was mourning three
weeks of days.
3 I did not eat desirable food, and meat and wine did
not come into my mouth, and I did not anoint myself
at all, till the completion of three weeks of days.
4 And on the twenty-fourth day of the first month,
while I was by the side of the great river, that is
Ḥiddeqel,

1421

DANI’ĔL

then I lifted my eyes and looked and saw a certain
man dressed in linen, whose loins were girded with
gold of Uphaz!
6 And his body was like beryl, and his face like the
appearance of lightning, and his eyes like torches of
fire, and his arms and feet like polished bronze in
appearance, and the sound of his words like the
sound of a crowd.
7 And I, Dani’ĕl, alone saw the vision, for the men
who were with me did not see the vision, but a great
trembling fell upon them, and they ran away to hide
themselves.
8 So I was left alone when I saw this great vision,
and no strength remained in me, for my comeliness
was destroyed in me, and I retained no strength.
9 But I heard the sound of his words. And while I
heard the sound of his words I was stunned lying with
my face to the ground.
10 And see, a hand touched me, and placed me
trembling on my knees and on the palms of my hands.
11 And he said to me, “O Dani’ĕl, man greatly
appreciated, understand the words that I speak to
you, and stand upright, for I have now been sent to
you.” And while he was speaking this word to me, I
stood trembling.
12 And he said to me, “Do not fear, Dani’ĕl, for from
the first day that you lay your heart to understand and
to humble yourself before your Elohim, your words
were heard, and I have come because of your words.
13 “But the head of the rule of Paras withstood me
twenty-one days. And see, Miḵa’ĕl, one of the chief
heads, came to help me, for I had been left alone
there with the sovereigns of Paras.
5

1422

DANIEL

“And I have come to make you understand what is
to befall your people in the latter days. For the vision
is yet for days to come.”
15 And when he had spoken such words to me, I
turned my face toward the ground and kept silent.
16 And see, one who looked like the sons of men
touched my lips, and I opened my mouth and spoke
and said to him who stood before me, “My master,
because of the vision I have been seized with pains,
and I have retained no strength.
17 “So how was this servant of my master able to
speak with you, my master? As for me, no strength
remains in me now, nor is any breath left in me.”
18 And again the one who looked like a man touched
me and strengthened me.
19 And he said, “Do not fear, O man greatly
appreciated! Peace be to you, be strong now, be
strong!” So when he spoke to me I was strengthened,
and said, “Let my master speak, for you have
strengthened me.”
20 And he said, “Do you know why I have come to
you? And now I return to fight with the head of Paras.
And when I have left, see, the head of Yawan shall
come.
21 “But let me declare to you what is written in the
Scripture of Truth, and there is no one supporting me
against these, except Miḵa’ĕl your head.
14

11 “And in the first year of Dareyawesh the Maḏite,
I myself stood up to support and protect him.
2 “And now I declare the truth to you: See, three
more sovereigns are to arise in Paras, and the fourth
is to become far richer than them all. And by his
power, through his riches, he stirs up all against the
rulership of Yawan.
1423

DANI’ĔL

“And a mighty sovereign shall arise, and he shall
rule with great authority, and do as he pleases.
4 “But when he has arisen, his rule shall be broken
up and divided toward the four winds of the
shamayim, but not among his descendants nor
according to his authority with which he ruled,
because his rule shall be uprooted, even for others
besides these.
5 “And a sovereign of the South shall become
strong, along with one of his princes who gains power
over him and shall rule - his rule being a great rule.
6 “And at the end of years they shall join themselves
together, and a daughter of the sovereign of the
South shall come to the sovereign of the North to
make an alliance. But she shall not retain the strength
of her power, nor would he or his power stand. And
she shall be given up, with those who brought her,
and he who brought her forth, and he who supported
her in those times.
7 “But from a branch of her roots one shall arise in
his place, and he shall come into the defence and
come into a stronghold of the sovereign of the North,
and shall act against them, and shall prevail,
8 and also their mighty ones, with their princes and
their precious utensils of silver and gold he shall seize
and bring to Mitsrayim. And he shall stand more years
than the sovereign of the North.
9 “Then he shall enter the reign of the sovereign of
the South, but shall return to his own land.
10 “But his sons shall stir themselves up, and
assemble a great army. And he shall certainly come
and overflow and pass through, then return to his
stronghold, and be stirred up.
11 “Then the sovereign of the South shall be enraged
and go out to fight with him, with the sovereign of the
3

1424

DANIEL

North, who shall raise a large army. But the army shall
be given into the hand of his enemy,
12 and he shall capture the army, his heart being
exalted. And he shall cause tens of thousands to fall,
but not prevail.
13 “And the sovereign of the North shall return and
raise an army greater than the former, and certainly
come at the end of some years with a great army and
much supplies.
14 “And in those times many shall rise up against the
sovereign of the South, while some violent ones
among your people exalt themselves to establish the
vision, but they shall stumble.
15 “Then the sovereign of the North shall come in and
build a siege mound, and capture a city of
strongholds. And the arms of the South shall not
stand, nor his choice people, for there is no strength
to stand.
16 “So his opponent shall do as he pleases - with no
one standing against him - and stand in the Splendid
Land with destruction in his hand.
17 “And he shall turn his face to enter with the
strength of his entire rule, and make an alliance with
him. And he shall do so, and give him the daughter of
women to corrupt her. But she shall not stand, neither
be for him.
18 “Then he shall turn his face to the coastlands and
capture many. But a ruler shall bring the reproach
against them to an end. And with the reproach
removed, he shall turn back on him.
19 “Then he shall turn his face toward the strongholds
of his own land, but shall stumble and fall, and not be
found.

1425

DANI’ĔL

“And in his place one shall stand up who imposes
taxes of the honoured reign, but within a few days he
is destroyed, but not in wrath or in battle.
21 “And in his place shall arise a despised one, to
whom they shall not give the excellency of the rule.
But he shall come in peaceably, and seize the rule by
flatteries.
22 “And the arms of the flood shall be swept away
from before him and be broken, and also the prince
of the covenant.
23 “And after they joined him, he shall work deceit,
and shall come up and become strong with a small
nation.
24 “He shall enter peaceably, even into the richest
places of the province, and do what his fathers have
not done, nor his forefathers: distribute among them
plunder and spoil and supplies, and devise his plots
against the strongholds, but only for a time.
25 “And he shall stir up his power and his heart
against the sovereign of the South with a great army,
and the sovereign of the South shall be stirred up to
battle with a very great and mighty army, but not
stand, for they shall devise plots against him.
26 “And those who have been eating his food shall
destroy him, and his army be swept away, and many
fall down slain.
27 “And both these sovereigns’ hearts are to do evil,
and speak lies at the same table, but not prosper, for
the end is still for an appointed time.
28 “Then he shall return to his land with much
supplies, and his heart be against the qodesh
Covenant. And he shall act, and shall return to his
land.
20

1426

DANIEL

“At the appointed time he shall return and go
toward the south, but it shall not be like the former or
the latter.
30 “For ships from Kittim shall come against him, and
he shall lose heart, and shall return in rage against
the qodesh Covenant, and shall act, and shall return
and consider those who forsake the qodesh
Covenant.
31 “And strong ones shall arise from him and profane
the Miqdash, the stronghold, and shall takeaway that
which is continual, and place the abomination that
lays waste.
32 “And by flatteries he shall profane those who do
wickedness against the Covenant, but the people
who know their Elohim shall be strong, and shall act.
33 “And those of the people who have insight shall
give understanding to many. And they shall stumble
by sword and flame, by captivity and plundering, for
days.
34 “And when they stumble, they shall be helped, a
little help, but many shall join them, by flatteries.
35 “And some of those who have insight shall
stumble, to refine them, and to cleanse them, and to
make them white, until the time of the end, for it is still
for an appointed time.
36 “And the sovereign shall do as he pleases, and
exalt himself and show himself to be great above
every mighty one, and speak incredible matters
against the Ĕl of mighty ones, and shall prosper until
the wrath has been accomplished - for what has been
decreed shall be done 37 and have no regard for the mighty ones of his
fathers nor for the desire of women, nor have regard
for any mighty one, but exalt himself above them all.
29

1427

DANI’ĔL

“But in his place he shall give esteem to a mighty
one of strongholds. And to a mighty one which his
fathers did not know he shall give esteem with gold
and silver, with precious stones and costly gifts.
39 “And
he shall act against the strongest
strongholds with a foreign mighty one, which he shall
acknowledge. He shall increase in esteem and cause
them to rule over many, and divide the land for gain.
40 “At the time of the end the sovereign of the South
shall push at him, and the sovereign of the North rush
against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with
horsemen, and with many ships. And he shall enter
the lands, and shall overflow and pass over,
41 and shall enter the Splendid Land, and many shall
stumble, but these escape from his hand: Eḏom, and
Mo’aḇ, and the chief of the sons of Ammon.
42 “And he shall stretch out his hand against the
lands, and the land of Mitsrayim shall not escape.
43 “And he shall rule over the treasures of gold and
silver, and over all the riches of Mitsrayim, and
Libyans and Kushites shall be at his steps.
44 “Then reports from the east and the north shall
disturb him, and he shall go out with great wrath to
destroy and put many under the ban,
45 and he shall pitch the tents of his palace between
the seas and the splendid qodesh mountain, but shall
come to his end with none to help him.
38

12 “Now at that time Miḵa’ĕl shall stand up, the great
head who is standing over the sons of your people.
And there shall be a time of distress, such as never
was since there was a nation, until that time. And at
that time your people shall be delivered, every one who
is found written in the Book,
1428

DANIEL

and many of those who sleep in the dust of the
earth wake up, some to everlasting ḥai, and some to
reproaches, everlasting abhorrence.
3 “And those who have insight shall shine like the
brightness of the expanse, and those who lead many
to righteousness like the stars forever and ever.
4 “But you, Dani’ĕl, hide the words, and seal the
book until the time of the end. Many shall diligently
search and knowledge shall increase.”
5 Then I, Dani’ĕl, looked and saw two others
standing, one on this bank of the river and the other
on that bank.
6 And one said to the man dressed in linen, who was
above the waters of the river, “How long until the end
of these wonders?”
7 And I heard the man dressed in linen, who was
above the waters of the river, and he held up his right
hand and his left hand to the shamayim, and swore
by Him who lives forever, that it would be for an
appointed time, appointed times, and a half. And
when they have ended scattering the power of the
qodesh people, then all these shall be completed.
8 And I heard, but I did not understand, so I said,
“My master, what is the latter end of these?”
9 And he said, “Go, Dani’ĕl, for the words are hidden
and sealed till the time of the end.
10 “Many shall be cleansed and made white, and
refined. But the wicked shall do wickedness - and
none of the wicked shall understand, but those who
have insight shall understand.
11 “And from the time that which is continual is taken
away, and the abomination that lays waste is placed,
is one thousand two hundred and ninety days.
2

1429

DANI’ĔL

“Baruḵ is he who is waiting earnestly, and comes
to the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five
days.
13 “But you, go your way till the end. And rest, and
arise to your lot at the end of the days.”
12

1430

HOSEA

HOSHĔA
‫[ הוׁשע‬vWh

1 The word of HWHY that came to Hoshĕa son of
Be’ĕri, in the days of Uzziyah, Yotham, Aḥaz, and
Ḥizqiyah, sovereigns of Yahuḏah, and in the days of
Yaroḇ’am son of Yo’ash, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
2 The beginning of the word of HWHY with Hoshĕa.
And HWHY said to Hoshĕa, “Go, take yourself a
woman of whoring and children of whoring, for the
land has utterly whored away from HWHY.”
3 So he went and took Gomer, daughter of Diḇlayim,
and she conceived and bore him a son.
4 And HWHY said to him, “Call his name Yizre’ĕl, for
in a little while I shall revenge the bloodshed of
Yizre’ĕl on the house of Yahu, and put an end to the
reign of the house of Yisra’ĕl.
5 “And it shall be in that day that I shall break the
bow of Yisra’ĕl in the Valley of Yizre’ĕl.”
6 And she conceived again and bore a daughter.
And He said to him, “Call her name Lo-Ruḥamah, for
no longer do I have compassion on the house of
Yisra’ĕl so as to forgive them at all.
7 “But I shall have compassion on the house of
Yahuḏah and save them by HWHY their Elohim, and
not save them by bow or by sword or battle, by horses
or horsemen.”
8 And she weaned Lo-Ruḥamah, and conceived
and bore a son,
9 then He said, “Call his name Lo-Ammi, for you are
not My people, and I am not for you.
10 “Yet the number of the children of Yisra’ĕl shall be
as the sand of the sea, which is not measured nor
1431

HOSHĔA

counted. And it shall be in the place where it was said
to them, ‘You are not My people,’ they shall be called,
‘You are the sons of the living Ĕl.’
11 “And the children of Yahuḏah and the children of
Yisra’ĕl shall be gathered together, and appoint for
themselves one head, and shall come up out of the
earth, for great is the day of Yizre’ĕl!

2 “Say to your brothers, ‘O my people,’ and to your
sisters, ‘O, compassioned one.’
2 “Strive with your mother, strive, for she is not My
wife, nor am I her Husband! Let her put away her
whorings from her face, and her adulteries from
between her breasts,
3 lest I strip her naked, and shall establish her as on
the day she was born, and shall make her like a
wilderness, and shall appoint her like a dry land, and
shall put her to death with thirst.
4 “And I shall not have compassion on her children,
for they are the children of whorings.
5 “For their mother has whored, she who conceived
them has acted shamelessly. For she said, ‘I go after
my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my
wool and my linen, my oil and my drink.’
6 “Therefore, see, I am hedging up your way with
thorns, and I shall wall her in, so that she does not
find her paths.
7 “And she shall pursue her lovers but not overtake
them, and shall seek them but not find them. Then
she shall say, ‘Let me go and return to my first
husband, for then it was better for me than now.’
8 “And she did not acknowledge that I gave her
grain, and new wine, and oil, and increased her silver
and gold which they prepared for Ba’al.
1432

HOSEA

“Therefore I shall turn back and shall take My grain
in its time and My new wine in its season, and I shall
take away My wool and My linen covering her
nakedness.
10 “And now I shall uncover her shame before the
eyes of her lovers, and no one shall deliver her from
My hand.
11 “And I shall cause all her rejoicing, her Festivals,
her New Moons, and her Shabbathoth, even all her
Appointed Times, to cease,
12 and lay waste her vines and her fig trees, of which
she has said, ‘these are my rewards that my lovers
have given me.’ And I shall make them a forest, and
the beasts of the field shall eat them.
13 “And I shall punish her for the days of the Ba’als to
which she burned incense and adorned herself with
her rings and jewelry, and went after her lovers, and
forgot Me,” declares HWHY.
14 “Therefore, see, I am alluring her, and shall lead
her into the wilderness, and shall speak to her heart,
15 and give to her vineyards from there, and the
Valley of Aḵor as a door of expectation. And there she
shall respond as in the days of her youth, as in the
day when she came up from the land of Mitsrayim.
16 “And it shall be, in that day,” declares HWHY, “that
you call Me ‘My Husband,’ and no longer call Me ‘My
Ba’al.’
17 “And I shall remove the names of the Ba’als from
her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by
their name.
18 “And in that day I shall make a covenant for them
with the beasts of the field, and with the birds of the
shamayim, and with the creeping creatures of the
9

1433

HOSHĔA

ground, when bow, and sword, and battle I break from
the earth. And I shall make them lie down in safety.
19 “And I shall take you as a bride unto Me forever,
and take you as a bride unto Me in righteousness,
and in right-ruling, and kindness and compassion.
20 “And I shall take you as a bride unto Me in
trustworthiness, and you shall know HWHY.
21 “And it shall be in that day that I answer,” declares
HWHY, “that I answer the shamayim, and they answer
the earth,
22 and the earth answer the grain and the new wine
and the oil, and they answer Yizre’ĕl.
23 “And I shall sow her for Myself in the earth, and I
shall have compassion on her who had not obtained
compassion. And I shall say to those who were not
My people, ‘You are My people,’ while they say, ‘My
Elohim!’ ”

3 Then HWHY said to me, “Go again, love a woman
loved by a friend, and an adulteress, according to the
love of HWHY for the children of Yisra’ĕl, though they
are turning to other mighty ones and love their raisin
cakes.”
2 So I bought her for myself for fifteen pieces of
silver, and a letheḵ of barley.
3 And I said to her, “You are to remain with me many
days, you are not to whore, nor become any man’s,
and so I shall also be towards you.”
4 For many days the children of Yisra’ĕl are to
remain without sovereign and without prince, and
without slaughtering, and without pillar, and without
shoulder garment or house idols.
5 Afterward the children of Yisra’ĕl shall return, and
seek HWHY their Elohim, and Dawiḏ their sovereign,
and revere HWHY and His goodness, in the latter days.
1434

HOSEA

4 Hear the word of HWHY, you children of Yisra’ĕl, for
HWHY has a case against the inhabitants of the land:
“For there is no truth or kindness or knowledge of
Elohim in the land.
2 “Swearing, and lying, and murdering, and stealing,
and committing adultery have increased. And
bloodshed follows bloodshed.
3 “Therefore the land mourns, and everyone living
there languishes, with the beasts of the field and the
birds of the shamayim. And the fish of the sea are
taken away.
4 “However, let no one strive or reprove another, for
your people are like those striving with a kohĕn.
5 “And you shall stumble in the day, and the naḇi
shall also stumble with you in the night. And I shall
make your mother perish.
6 “My people have perished for lack of knowledge.
Because you have rejected knowledge, I reject you
from being kohĕn for Me. Since you have forgotten
the Torah of your Elohim, I also forget your children.
7 “As they were increased, so they sinned against
Me. My esteem they have changed into shame.
8 “They eat the sin of My people, and lift up their
desire to their wickedness.
9 “And it shall be: like people, like kohĕn. And I shall
punish them for their ways, and reward them for their
deeds.
10 “And they shall eat but not be satisfied, they shall
whore but not increase, for they have stopped
obeying HWHY.
11 “Whoring, and wine, and new wine enslave the
heart.
1435

HOSHĔA

“My people ask from their wood, and their staff
declares to them. For a spirit of whorings has led
them astray, and they went whoring from under their
Elohim.
13 “They slaughter on the mountaintops, and burn
incense on the hills, under oak and poplars and
terebinth, because its shade is good. Therefore your
daughters commit whoring, and your brides commit
adultery.
14 “I would not punish your daughters when they
commit whoring, nor your brides when they commit
adultery, for they go aside with whores, and offer with
cult prostitutes - a people that do not understand are
thrust down!
15 “Though you are a whore, Yisra’ĕl, let not
Yahuḏah become guilty. Do not come up to Gilgal,
nor go up to Bĕyth Awen, nor swear an oath, saying,
‘As HWHY lives!’
16 “For Yisra’ĕl is stubborn, like a stubborn calf.
Would HWHY now feed them like a lamb in a broad
place?
17 “Ephrayim is joined to idols, let him alone.
18 “Their drink is sour, they have whored continually.
Her rulers wildly loved shame.
19 “A wind has bound her up in its wings, and they
are ashamed because of their slaughterings.
12

5 “Hear this, O kohenim! And listen, O house of
Yisra’ĕl! Give ear, O house of the sovereign! For the
judgment is for you, for you have been a snare to
Mitspah and a net spread on Taḇor.
2 “And they have made deep the pit of Shittim, so I
reprove them all.

1436

HOSEA

“I have known Ephrayim, and Yisra’ĕl has not
been hidden from Me. For now, O Ephrayim, you
have whored, Yisra’ĕl is defiled.
4 “Their deeds do not allow them to turn back to their
Elohim, for the spirit of whorings is among them, and
they do not know HWHY.
5 “And the Excellency of Yisra’ĕl shall witness to his
face, and Yisra’ĕl and Ephrayim stumble in their
wickedness. Yahuḏah shall also stumble with them.
6 “With their flocks and herds they go to seek HWHY,
but do not find Him - He has withdrawn from them.
7 “They have acted treacherously against HWHY, for
they have brought forth strange children. Now a new
moon shall devour them with their portions.
8 “Blow the ram’s horn in Gib’ah, the trumpet in
Ramah! Shout, O Bĕyth Awen! Behind you, O
Binyamin!
9 “Ephrayim is laid waste in the day of rebuke.
Among the tribes of Yisra’ĕl I shall make known what
is certain.
10 “The chiefs of Yahuḏah shall be like those who
remove a border - on them I pour out my wrath like
water.
11 “Ephrayim is oppressed, crushed in judgment,
because he walked after the command when it
pleased him.
12 “So I am to Ephrayim like a moth, and to the house
of Yahuḏah like rottenness.
13 “When Ephrayim saw his sickness, and Yahuḏah
saw his wound, then Ephrayim went to Ashshur and
sent to Sovereign Yarĕḇ. But he is unable to heal you,
or to remove the wound from you.
3

1437

HOSHĔA

“For I am like a lion to Ephrayim, and like a young
lion to the house of Yahuḏah. I Myself tear them and
go, I take them away, and there is no one to deliver.
15 “I shall go, I shall return to My place, until they
confess their guilt and seek My face, in their distress
diligently search for Me.
14

6 ‘Come, and let us turn back to HWHY. For He has
torn but He heals us, He has stricken but He binds us
up.
2 ‘After two days He shall revive us, on the third day
He shall raise us up, so that we live before Him.
3 ‘So let us know, let us pursue to know HWHY. His
going forth is as certain as the morning. And He
comes to us like the rain, like the latter rain watering
the earth.’
4 “Ephrayim, what would I do with you? Yahuḏah,
what would I do with you? For your trustworthiness is
like a morning cloud, and like the early dew it goes
away.
5 “Therefore I have hewn by the neḇi’im, I have slain
them by the words of My mouth. And My RightRulings break forth as the light.
6 “For I delight in kindness and not slaughtering, and
in the knowledge of Elohim more than burnt offerings.
7 “But like Aḏam they transgressed the Covenant.
There they acted treacherously against Me.
8 “Gil’aḏ is a city of workers of wickedness - tracked
up with blood.
9 “And as bands of robbers lie in wait for a man, so
the company of kohenim murder on the way to
Sheḵem, for they have done wickedness.
10 “I have seen a horrible matter in the house of
Yisra’ĕl: the whoring of Ephrayim is there, Yisra’ĕl is
defiled.
1438

HOSEA

“Also, a harvest is appointed for you, O Yahuḏah,
when I turn back the captivity of My people.

11

7 “Whenever I would heal Yisra’ĕl, then the
wickedness of Ephrayim is uncovered, and the evil
deeds of Shomeron. For they have wrought falsehood,
and a thief comes in, a band of robbers raids outside.
2 “And they do not say to their hearts that I
remember all their evil. Now their own deeds have
surrounded them, they have been before Me.
3 “With their evil they make a sovereign glad, and
rulers with their lies.
4 “All of them are adulterers, as an oven heated by
a baker, who ceases stirring the fire after kneading
the dough, until it is leavened.
5 “In the day of our sovereign rulers became sick,
inflamed with wine. He extended his hand with
scoffers.
6 “For they have drawn near, their heart is like an
oven. While they lie in wait all the night their baker
sleeps. In the morning it burns like a flaming fire.
7 “All of them are as hot as an oven, and they
consumed their rulers. All their sovereigns have fallen
- not one among them calls on Me.
8 “Ephrayim mixes himself among the peoples,
Ephrayim has become a cake unturned.
9 “Strangers have devoured his strength, but he
does not know it. Grey hairs are also sprinkled on
him, and he does not know it.
10 “And the Excellency of Yisra’ĕl witnessed to his
face, but they did not return to HWHY their Elohim, nor
did they seek Him for all this.

1439

HOSHĔA

“And Ephrayim has become a simple dove without
heart, they have called on Mitsrayim, they have gone
to Ashshur.
12 “When they go I spread My net over them, I bring
them down like the birds of the shamayim, I chastise
them so their congregation hears.
13 “Woe to them, for they have strayed from Me!
Destruction to them, because they have transgressed
against Me! And I Myself have ransomed them, yet
they have spoken falsehoods against Me,
14 and did not cry out to Me with their heart when they
wailed upon their beds. For grain and new wine they
assemble themselves; they turn away from Me.
15 “And I instructed, I strengthened their arms, but
they plot evil against Me.
16 “They return, but not to the Most High. They have
been like a slack bow. Their rulers fall by the sword
for the cursings of their tongue. This is their scorn in
the land of Mitsrayim.
11

8 “Put the ram’s horn to your mouth, like an eagle
against the House of HWHY, because they have
transgressed My Covenant, and they have rebelled
against My Torah.
2 “They cry out to Me, ‘My Elohim - we, Yisra’ĕl,
know You!’
3 “Yisra’ĕl has rejected what is good, an enemy
pursues him.
4 “They have made sovereigns, but not from Me.
They have made rulers, and I have not known. From
their silver and gold they made idols for themselves,
so that they are cut off.
5 “O Shomeron, your calf has been cast off! My
wrath has burned against them. How long shall they
be incapable of innocence?
1440

HOSEA

“For from Yisra’ĕl is even this: a workman made it,
and it is not Elohim! For the calf of Shomeron is
splinters!
7 “For they sow the wind, and reap the whirlwind.
The stalk has no bud, it yields no grain. If it yields,
strangers swallow it up.
8 “Yisra’ĕl has been swallowed up. They have now
become among the nations as a vessel in which is no
pleasure.
9 “For they themselves have gone up to Ashshur. A
wild donkey alone by itself is Ephrayim, they have
hired lovers.
10 “Also, although they sold themselves among the
nations, this time I shall gather them, when they have
suffered for a while from the burden of a sovereign, of
rulers.
11 “Since Ephrayim has made many altars for sin,
they have been altars for sinning to him.
12 “I have written for him numerous matters of My
Torah - they were regarded as strange.
13 “As for My offerings: they slaughter flesh and they
eat. HWHY shall not accept them. Now He remembers
their wickedness and punishes their sins. Let them
return to Mitsrayim!
14 “For Yisra’ĕl has forgotten his Maker, and has built
palaces. And Yahuḏah has increased walled cities.
But I shall send fire upon his cities, and it shall devour
his strongholds.”
6

9 O Yisra’ĕl, do not rejoice with exultation like the
peoples, for you have whored from your Elohim. You
have loved a love-fee at all threshing-floors.
2 Threshing-floor and winepress shall not feed
them, and new wine shall fail in her.
1441

HOSHĔA

They shall not dwell in the land of HWHY, but
Ephrayim shall return to Mitsrayim, and eat
uncleanness in Ashshur.
4 They do not pour wine offerings to HWHY, nor are
their offerings pleasing to Him - it being like bread of
mourners to them, all who eat it are defiled. For their
bread is for their life, it does not come into the House
of HWHY.
5 What do you do for the Appointed Meeting, and in
the day of the Festival of HWHY?
6 For look, they shall go because of destruction Mitsrayim gathers them up, Moph buries them, nettles
possess their valuables of silver, thorns are in their
tents.
7 The days of punishment have come, the days of
retribution have come. Yisra’ĕl knows! The naḇi is a
fool, the ‘man of the Ruaḥ’ is mad, because of the
greatness of your wickedness, and great is the
enmity.
8 Elohim’s watchman over you, Ephrayim, is the
naḇi, but a trapper’s snare is in all his ways. Enmity is
in the House of his Elohim.
9 They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the
days of Giḇ’ah. He remembers their wickedness, He
punishes their sins.
10 “I found Yisra’ĕl like grapes in the wilderness. I
saw your fathers as the first-fruits on the fig tree in its
beginning. They themselves have gone to Ba’al
Pe’or, and separated themselves to shame, and
became as abominable as that which they loved.
11 “Ephrayim is like a bird, their esteem has flown
away - no birth, and none with child, and no
conception!
3

1442

HOSEA

“Though they bring up their children, I shall make
them childless, without man. For it is woe to them
when I turn away from them!
13 “I have seen Ephrayim, like Tsor, planted in a
pleasant place. But Ephrayim shall bring out his
children to the murderer.”
14 Give them, O HWHY - give what? Give them a
miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
15 “All their evil is in Gilgal, for there I have hated
them. Because of the evil of their deeds I drive them
from My house, no more do I love them. All their rulers
are rebels.
16 “Ephrayim has been smitten, their root has dried
up, they yield no fruit. Even if they bear children, I
shall put to death the precious ones of their womb.”
17 My Elohim rejects them, because they have not
obeyed Him, so that they become wanderers among
the gentiles!
12

10 Yisra’ĕl is a degenerate vine, he brings forth fruit
for himself. As his fruit increased, he increased the
altars. And the better his land, the better they made the
pillars.
2 Their heart has been slippery, now they are guilty.
He breaks down their altars, He destroys their pillars.
3 For now they say, “We have no sovereign,
because we did not revere HWHY. What would the
sovereign do for us?”
4 They have spoken words, swearing falsely in
making a covenant. Therefore judgment shall spring
up like poisonous weeds in the furrows of the field.
5 The inhabitants of Shomeron fear because of the
calf of Bĕyth Awen. For its people shall mourn for it,
1443

HOSHĔA

as well as its priests who used to rejoice over it,
because of its esteem that has departed from it.
6 It is also brought to Ashshur as a present for
Sovereign Yarĕḇ. Ephrayim receives shame, and
Yisraĕl is put to shame through his counsel.
7 Shomeron is cut off, her sovereign is like a twig on
the surface of the water.
8 And the high places of Awen, the sin of Yisra’ĕl,
shall be destroyed, thorn and thistle come up on their
altars. And they shall say to the mountains, “Cover
us!” and to the hills, “Fall on us!”
9 “O Yisra’ĕl, you have sinned from the days of
Giḇ’ah. There they stood! The battle in Giḇ’ah against
the children of perversity did not overtake them.
10 “When I desire, then I bind them. And peoples
shall be gathered against them when I bind them for
their double guilt.
11 “And Ephrayim is a trained heifer, loving to thresh
grain. But I Myself shall pass over her comely neck I put Ephrayim to the yoke, Yahuḏah ploughs,
Ya’aqoḇ harrows for him.”
12 Sow for yourselves righteousness, reap according
to kindness, break up your tillable ground, it is time to
seek HWHY, till He comes and rains righteousness on
you.
13 You have ploughed wickedness, you have reaped
unrighteousness, you have eaten the fruit of lying,
because you trusted in your own way, in your many
mighty men.
14 And uproar shall arise among your people, and all
your strongholds shall be ravaged as Shalman
ravaged Bĕyth Arbĕl in the day of battle - a mother
dashed in pieces on her children.

1444

HOSEA

Thus it shall be done to you, O Bĕyth Ĕl, because
of the evil of your wickedness. At dawn the sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl is completely cut off!

15

11 “When Yisra’ĕl was a child, I loved him, and out
of Mitsrayim I called My son.
2 “They called to them, so they went from their face.
They slaughtered to the Ba’als, and burned incense
to carved images.
3 “And I taught Ephrayim to walk, taking them by
their arms, but they did not know that I healed them.
4 “I drew them with ropes of man, with cords of love,
and I was to them as those who take the yoke from
their neck. And I bent down, fed them.
5 “No, let him return to the land of Mitsrayim, and let
Ashshur be his sovereign, because they refused to
repent!
6 “And the sword shall whirl in his cities, and it shall
demolish his gate bars, and consume, because of
their own counsels.
7 “My people are bent towards backsliding from Me.
Though they call to the Most High, He lifts none of
them up.
8 “How could I give you up, Ephrayim? How could I
hand you over, Yisra’ĕl? How could I make you like
Aḏmah? How could I place you like Tseḇoyim? My
heart turns within Me, all My compassion is kindled.
9 “I shall not let the heat of My wrath burn, I shall not
turn to destroy Ephrayim. For I am Ĕl, and not man,
the Qadosh One in your midst, and I shall not come
in enmity.
10 “Let them follow HWHY. Like a lion He roars. When
He roars, then sons shall tremble from the west.
1445

HOSHĔA

“They shall tremble like a bird from Mitsrayim, and
like a dove from the land of Ashshur. And I shall let
them dwell in their own houses,” declares HWHY.
12 “Ephrayim has surrounded Me with lying, and the
house of Yisra’ĕl with deceit. But Yahuḏah is still
wandering with Ĕl, and is true to the Qadosh One.”
11

12 Ephrayim is feeding on wind, and pursuing an
east wind. All the day he increases falsehood and ruin.
And they make a covenant with Ashshur, and oil is sent
to Mitsrayim.
2 And HWHY has a controversy with Yahuḏah, to
punish Ya’aqoḇ - according to his ways, to repay him
according to his deeds.
3 He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and
in his strength he strove with Elohim.
4 He strove with the Messenger and overcame, he
wept and sought His favour. He found Him in Bĕyth
Ĕl, and there He spoke to us 5 even HWHY Elohim of hosts, HWHY is His
remembrance.
6 Therefore, return to your Elohim. Guard kindness
and right-ruling, and wait on your Elohim continually.
7 A merchant! In his hand are scales of deceit, he
loved to oppress.
8 And Ephrayim says, “Indeed, I have become rich,
I have found wealth for myself. In all my labours they
shall find in me no wickedness that is sin.”
9 “But I am HWHY your Elohim since the land of
Mitsrayim, again I shall make you dwell in tents as in
the days of the Appointed Time.
10 “And I have spoken to the neḇi’im, and have
increased visions. And through the neḇi’im I gave
parables.”
1446

HOSEA

Is Gil’aḏ wicked? Certainly, they have been false!
In Gilgal they have offered bulls. Also their altars are
as heaps on a ploughed field.
12 And when Ya’aqoḇ fled to the country of Aram,
Yisra’ĕl served for a wife, and for a wife he kept
watch.
13 And by a naḇi HWHY brought Yisra’ĕl out of
Mitsrayim, and by a naḇi he was watched over.
14 Ephrayim has provoked most bitterly. So his Aḏon
left his blood-guilt on him, and repaid him for his
reproach.
11

13 When Ephrayim spoke there was trembling, he
was lifted up in Yisra’ĕl. But through Ba’al he became
guilty, and he died.
2 And now they sin more and more, and make for
themselves moulded images from their silver, idols
according to their skill, all of them the work of
craftsmen. They say of them, “Let the men who
slaughter kiss the calves!”
3 Therefore they shall be like a morning cloud, and
like dew that goes away early, like chaff blown off
from a threshing-floor, and like smoke from a window.
4 “But I am HWHY your Elohim since the land of
Mitsrayim, and an Elohim besides Me you shall not
know, for there is no Saviour besides Me.
5 “I knew you in the wilderness, in the land of
drought.
6 “When they were fed they were satisfied. They
were satisfied and their heart was exalted, therefore
they forgot Me.
7 “So I become like a lion to them, like a leopard I
watch by the way,
1447

HOSHĔA

like a bear robbed of her young I attack them and
rip open the enclosure of their heart. And there I
devour them like a lion, a wild beast tears them apart.
9 “You have destroyed yourself, O Yisra’ĕl, but your
help is in Me.
10 “Where is your sovereign now to save you in all
your cities, and your rulers of whom you said, ‘Give
me a sovereign and rulers’?
11 “I gave you a sovereign in My displeasure, but I
took away in My wrath.
12 “The wickedness of Ephrayim is bound up, his sin
is hidden.
13 “Pains of a woman in labour shall come upon him.
He is not a wise son, for it is not the time that he
should delay at the breaking forth of children.
14 “From the power of the grave I ransom them, from
death I redeem them. Where is your plague, O
Death? Where is your destruction, O Grave?
Repentance is hidden from My eyes.
15 Though he bears fruit among his brothers, an east
wind comes, a wind from HWHY comes up from the
wilderness, and it dries up his fountain, and his spring
becomes dry - it plunders a treasure of all desirable
objects.
16 “Shomeron is held guilty, for she has rebelled
against her Elohim - they fall by the sword, their
infants are dashed in pieces, and their pregnant
women ripped open.”
8

14 O Yisra’ĕl, return to HWHY your Elohim, for you
have stumbled by your wickedness.
2 Take words with you, and return to HWHY. Say to
Him, “Take away all wickedness, and accept what is
good, and we render the bulls of our lips.
1448

HOSEA

“Ashshur does not save us. We do not ride on
horses, nor ever again do we say to the work of our
hands, ‘Our mighty ones.’ For the fatherless finds
compassion in You.”
4 “I shall heal their backsliding, I shall love them
spontaneously, for My displeasure has turned away
from him.
5 “I shall be like the dew to Yisra’ĕl. He shall
blossom like the lily, and cast out his roots like
Leḇanon.
6 “His branches shall spread, and his splendour
shall be like an olive tree, and his fragrance like
Leḇanon.
7 “Those who dwell under his shadow shall return.
They shall revive like grain, and blossom like the vine,
and become as fragrant as the wine of Leḇanon.
8 “What more has Ephrayim to do with idols? It is I
who answer and look after him. I am like a green
cypress tree, your fruit comes from Me.”
9 Who is wise and understands these? Discerning
and knows them? For the Ways of HWHY are straight,
and the righteous walk in them, but the transgressors
stumble in them.
3

1449

JOEL

YO’ĔL
‫ יואל‬LAWY

1 The word of HWHY that came to Yo’ĕl son of
Pethu’ĕl.
2 Hear this, you elders, and give ear, all you
inhabitants of the land! Has this been in your days, or
even in the days of your fathers?
3 Relate it to your children, and your children to their
children, and their children to the generation after
them.
4 What the gnawing locust left the swarming locust
has eaten, and what the swarming locust left the
crawling locust has eaten, and what the crawling
locust left the consuming locust has eaten.
5 Wake up, you drunkards, and weep. And wail, all
you drinkers of wine, on account of the new wine, for
it has been cut off from your mouth.
6 For a nation has come up against My land, strong,
and innumerable. Its teeth are the teeth of a lion, and
it has the fangs of a lioness.
7 It has laid waste My vine and splintered My fig
tree. It has made it entirely bare and cast it away, its
branches became white.
8 Wail like a maiden girded with sackcloth for the
husband of her youth.
9 The grain offering and the drink offering have been
cut off from the House of HWHY. The kohenim,
servants of HWHY, have mourned.
10 The field is ravaged, the ground has mourned, for
the grain is ruined, the new wine has dried up, the oil
fails.

1450

YO’ĔL

The farmers are ashamed, the vinedressers wail
over the wheat and over the barley, for the harvest of
the field is destroyed.
12 The vine has dried up, and the fig tree droops,
pomegranate, also palm, and apple tree, all the trees
of the field are dried up, because joy has dried up
among the sons of men.
13 Gird yourselves and lament, you kohenim. Wail,
you attendants of the altar. Come, lie all night in
sackcloth, you attendants of my Elohim. For the grain
offering and the drink offering are withheld from the
House of your Elohim.
14 Qadosh a fast. Call an assembly, gather the
elders, all the inhabitants of the land, into the House
of HWHY your Elohim, and cry out to HWHY.
15 Alas for the day! For the day of HWHY is near, and
it comes as destruction from Ĕl Shaddai.
16 Is not the food cut off before our eyes, joy and
gladness from the House of our Elohim?
17 The
seed has rotted under their clods,
storehouses are laid waste, granaries are broken
down, for the grain has withered.
18 How the beasts moan! The herds of cattle are
restless, because they have no pasture. The flocks of
sheep also perish.
19 I cry to You HWHY, for fire has consumed the
pastures of the wilderness, and a flame has lit on fire
all the trees of the field.
20 Even the beasts of the field cry out to You, for the
water streams are dried up, and fire has consumed
the pastures of the wilderness.
11

2 Blow a ram’s horn in Tsiyon, and sound an alarm in
My qodesh mountain! Let all the inhabitants of the
1451

JOEL

earth tremble, for the day of HWHY is coming, for it is
near:
2 a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds,
dense clouds, like the morning clouds spread over the
mountains - a people many and strong, the like of
whom has never been, nor shall there ever be again
after them, to the years of many generations.
3 Ahead of them a fire has consumed, and behind
them a flame burns. Before them the land is like the
Garden of Ĕḏen, and behind them a desert waste.
And from them there is no escape.
4 Their appearance is like the appearance of
horses, and they run like steeds.
5 As the noise of chariots they leap over
mountaintops, as the noise of a flaming fire
consuming stubble, as a mighty people placed in
battle array.
6 Before them peoples are in anguish, all faces
become flushed.
7 They run like mighty men, they climb the wall like
men of battle, every one goes on his way, and they
do not break ranks.
8 And they do not press one another, every one
goes in his path. They fall among the weapons, but
they do not stop.
9 They rush on the city, they run on the wall. They
climb into the houses, they enter at the windows like
a thief.
10 The earth shall tremble before them, the
shamayim shall shake. Sun and moon shall be
darkened, and the stars withdraw their brightness.
11 And HWHY shall give forth His voice before His
army, for His camp is very great, for mighty is the doer
of His Word. For the day of HWHY is great and very
awesome, and who can bear it?
1452

YO’ĔL

“Yet even now,” declares HWHY, “turn to Me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning.”
13 And tear your heart and not your garments, and
turn back to HWHY your Elohim, for He shows favour
and is compassionate, patient, and of great kindness,
and He shall relent concerning the evil.
14 Who knows - He might turn and relent, and leave
a beraḵah behind Him, a grain offering and a drink
offering for HWHY your Elohim?
15 Blow a ram’s horn in Tsiyon, qadosh a fast, call an
assembly.
16 Gather the people, qadosh the assembly,
assemble the elders, gather the children and those
that nurse on breasts. Let a bridegroom come out
from his room, and a bride from her dressing room.
17 Let the kohenim, servants of HWHY, weep between
the porch and the altar. And let them say, “Spare Your
people, O HWHY, and do not give Your inheritance to
reproach, for the gentiles to rule over them. Why
should they say among the peoples, ‘Where is their
Elohim?’ ”
18 And let HWHY be jealous for His land, and spare
His people.
19 And let HWHY answer and say to His people, “See,
I am sending you the grain and the new wine and the
oil, and you shall be satisfied by them. And no longer
do I make you a reproach among the gentiles.
20 “And the Northerner I shall remove far from you,
and drive him away into a dry and deserted land, with
his face toward the eastern sea and his rear toward
the western sea. And his stench shall come up and
his smell rise, for he has done greatness.”
21 Do not fear, O land, be glad and rejoice, for HWHY
has done greatness!
12

1453

JOEL

Do not fear, you beasts of the field, for the
pastures of the wilderness shall spring forth, and the
tree shall bear its fruit, the fig tree and the vine shall
yield their strength.
23 And you children of Tsiyon, be glad and rejoice in
HWHY your Elohim, for He shall give you the Teacher
of Righteousness, and cause the rain to come down
for you, the former rain and the latter rain, as before.
24 And the threshing-floors shall be filled with grain,
and the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.
25 “Then I shall repay you the years that the
swarming locust has eaten, the crawling locust, and
the consuming locust, and the gnawing locust, My
great army which I sent among you.
26 “Then you shall eat - eat and be satisfied - and
shall praise the Name of HWHY your Elohim, who has
done with you so wondrously. And My people shall
never be put to shame.
27 “And you shall know that I am in the midst of
Yisra’ĕl, and that I am HWHY your Elohim and there is
no one else. And My people shall never be put to
shame.
28 “And after this it shall be that I pour out My Ruaḥ
on all flesh. And your sons and your daughters shall
naḇa, your old men dream dreams, your young men
see visions.
29 “And also on the male servants and on the female
servants I shall pour out My Ruaḥ in those days.
30 “And I shall give signs in the shamayim and upon
the earth: blood and fire and columns of smoke,
31 the sun is turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood, before the coming of the great and awesome
day of HWHY.
32 “And it shall be that everyone who calls on the
Name of HWHY shall be delivered. For on Mount
22

1454

YO’ĔL

Tsiyon and in Yerushalayim there shall be an escape
as HWHY has said, and among the remnant whom
hWhY calls.

3 “For look, in those days and at that time, when I
turn back the captivity of Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim,
2 then I shall gather all gentiles, and bring them
down to the Valley of Yahoshaphat. And I shall enter
into judgment with them there for My people, My
inheritance Yisra’ĕl, whom they have scattered
among the gentiles, and they have divided up My
land.
3 “And they have cast lots for My people, and have
given a young man for a whore, and sold a girl for
wine, and drank it.
4 “And also, what are you to Me, O Tsor and Tsiḏon,
and all the coasts of Pelesheth? Are you repaying
Me? And if you are repaying Me, I would swiftly and
speedily return your reward on your own head.
5 “For you have taken My silver and My gold, and
brought My treasures into your temples,
6 and the people of Yahuḏah and the people of
Yerushalayim you have sold to the sons of Yawan, to
remove them far from their borders.
7 “See, I am stirring them up out of the place to
which you have sold them, and I shall return on your
own head what you have done,
8 and shall sell your sons and your daughters into
the hand of the people of Yahuḏah, and they shall sell
them to the Sheḇaites, to a nation far off. For HWHY
has spoken.”
9 Proclaim this among the gentiles, “Prepare for
battle! Wake up the mighty men, let all the men of
battle draw near, let them come up.
1455

JOEL

“Beat your ploughshares into swords and your
pruning-hooks into spears, let the weak say, ‘I am
strong.’ ”
11 Hasten and come, all you gentiles, and gather
together all around. O HWHY, let Your mighty men
come down here.
12 “Let the gentiles be aroused, and come up to the
Valley of Yahoshaphat. For there I shall sit to judge
all the gentiles on every side.
13 “Put in the sickle, for the harvest has grown ripe.
Come, go down, for the winepress is filled, the vats
overflow, for their evil is great.”
14 Crowds, crowds in the valley of decision! For the
day of HWHY is near in the valley of decision.
15 Sun and moon shall become dark, and stars shall
withdraw their brightness.
16 And HWHY shall roar from Tsiyon, and give forth
His voice from Yerushalayim. And the shamayim and
earth shall shake, but HWHY shall be a refuge for His
people, and a stronghold for the children of Yisra’ĕl.
17 “Then you shall know that I am HWHY your Elohim,
dwelling in Tsiyon, My qodesh mountain. And
Yerushalayim shall be qodesh, and foreigners shall
not pass through her again.
18 “And it shall be in that day that the mountains drip
with new wine, and the hills flow with milk. And all the
streams of Yahuḏah shall be flooded with water, and
a fountain flow from the House of HWHY and water the
wadi Shittim.
19 “Mitsrayim shall become a ruin, and Eḏom a ruin,
a wilderness, because of violence done to the people
of Yahuḏah, whose innocent blood they shed in their
land.
20 “But
Yahuḏah shall dwell forever, and
Yerushalayim to all generations.
10

1456

YO’ĔL

“And I shall avenge their blood, which I have not
avenged. And HWHY shall be dwelling in Tsiyon!”

21

1457

AMOS

AMOS
‫ עמוס‬sWm[

1 The words of Amos, who was among the herdsmen
of Teqowa, which he saw concerning Yisra’ĕl in the
days of Uzziyah sovereign of Yahuḏah, and in the days
of Yaroḇ’am son of Yo’ash, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, two
years before the earthquake.
2 And he said, “HWHY roars from Tsiyon, and gives
forth His voice from Yerushalayim. And the pastures
of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Karmel
shall wither.”
3 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Dammeseq, and for four, I do not turn it back,
because they threshed Gil’aḏ with threshing
implements of iron.
4 “But I shall send fire upon the house of Ḥaza’ĕl,
and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-Haḏaḏ.
5 “And I shall break the bar of Dammeseq, and cut
off the inhabitant from the Valley of Awen, and the
one who holds the sceptre from Bĕyth Ĕḏen. And the
people of Aram shall go exiled to Qir,” said HWHY.
6 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Azzah, and for four, I do not turn it back, because they
took into exile an entire exile, to surrender it to Eḏom.
7 “But I shall send fire upon the wall of Azzah, and it
shall consume its palaces.
8 “And I shall cut off the inhabitant from Ashdoḏ, and
the one who holds the sceptre from Ashqelon. And I
shall turn My hand against Eqron, and the remnant of
the Pelishtites shall perish,” said the Aḏon HWHY.
9 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of Tsor,
and for four, I do not turn it back, because they
1458

AMOS

surrendered an entire exile to Eḏom, and did not
remember the brotherly covenant.
10 “But I shall send fire upon the wall of Tsor, and it
shall consume its palaces.”
11 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Eḏom, and for four, I do not turn it back, because he
pursued his brother with the sword, and cast off all
compassion. And his displeasure tore incessantly,
and he kept his wrath forever.
12 “But I shall send fire upon Tĕman, and it shall
consume the palaces of Botsrah.”
13 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of the
children of Ammon, and for four, I do not turn it back,
because they ripped open the pregnant women in
Gil’aḏ, to enlarge their border.
14 “So I shall kindle a fire upon the wall of Rabbah,
and it shall consume its palaces, with a shout in the
day of battle, with a storm in the day of the whirlwind.
15 “And their sovereign shall go into exile, he and his
heads together,” said HWHY.

2 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Mo’aḇ, and for four, I do not turn it back, because he
burned the bones of the sovereign of Eḏom to lime.
2 “But I shall send fire upon Mo’aḇ, and it shall
consume the palaces of Qeriyoth. And Mo’aḇ shall die
amid uproar, with a cry and with the sound of a ram’s
horn.
3 “And I shall cut off the judge from its midst, and
slay all its heads with him,” said HWHY.
4 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Yahuḏah, and for four, I do not turn it back, because
they have rejected the Torah of HWHY, and did not
guard His Laws. And their lies after which their fathers
walked lead them astray.
1459

AMOS

“But I shall send fire upon Yahuḏah, and it shall
consume the palaces of Yerushalayim.”
6 Thus said HWHY, “For three transgressions of
Yisra’ĕl, and for four, I do not turn it back, because
they sell the righteous for silver, and the poor for a
pair of sandals,
7 who crush the head of the poor ones in the dust of
the earth, and turn aside the way of the meek. And a
man and his father go in to the same girl, to defile My
qodesh Name.
8 “And they lie down by every altar on garments
taken in pledge, and in the house of their mighty one
they drink the wine of those who have been fined.
9 “Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose
height was like the height of the cedars. And he was
as strong as the oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit from
above and his roots from beneath.
10 “And I brought you up from the land of Mitsrayim,
and led you forty years through the wilderness, to
possess the land of the Amorite.
11 “And I raised up some of your sons as neḇi’im, and
some of your young men as Nazirites. Not so? O you
children of Yisra’ĕl?” declares HWHY.
12 “But you made the Nazirites drink wine, and
commanded the neḇi’im saying, ‘Do not naḇa!’
13 “See, I am weighed down by you, as a wagon is
weighed down when filled with sheaves.
14 “And a place to flee shall perish from the swift, and
the strong not strengthen his power, and the mighty
not save his life,
15 and he who handles the bow not stand, and the
swift of foot not save, nor he who rides a horse save
his life,
16 and the bravest among the mighty flee naked, in
that day,” declares HWHY.
5

1460

AMOS

3 Hear this word that HWHY has spoken against you,
O children of Yisra’ĕl, against the entire clan which I
brought up from the land of Mitsrayim, saying,
2 “You alone have I known of all the clans of the
earth, therefore I punish you for all your
wickednesses.”
3 Would two walk together, without having met?
4 Does a lion roar in the forest, when he has no
prey? Does a young lion give forth his voice out of his
den unless he has caught?
5 Does a bird fall into a snare on the earth, where
there is no trap for it? Does a snare spring up from
the earth, if it has not captured prey?
6 If a ram’s horn is blown in a city, do the people not
tremble? If there is calamity in a city, shall not HWHY
have done it?
7 For the Aḏon HWHY does no matter unless He
reveals His secret to His servants the neḇi’im.
8 A lion has roared! Who is not afraid? The Aḏon
HWHY has spoken! Who would not naḇa?
9 “Cry out at the palaces in Ashdoḏ, and at the
palaces in the land of Mitsrayim, and say, ‘Gather on
the mountains of Shomeron, and see the many
unrests in her midst, and the oppressed ones within
her.
10 ‘But they do not know to do what is right,’ declares
HWHY, ‘these who store up plunder and loot in their
palaces.’ ”
11 Therefore thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “An enemy,
even all around the land! And he shall bring down
your strength from you, and your palaces shall be
plundered.”
12 Thus said HWHY, “As a shepherd rescues from the
mouth of a lion two legs or a piece of an ear, so are
1461

AMOS

the children of Yisra’ĕl who dwell in Shomeron to be
rescued - in the corner of a bed and in Dammeseq on
a couch!
13 “Hear and witness against the house of Ya’aqoḇ,”
declares the Aḏon HWHY, the Elohim of hosts.
14 “For in the day I visit Yisra’ĕl for their
transgressions, I shall also punish concerning the
altars of Bĕyth Ĕl. And the horns of the altar shall be
broken, and they shall fall to the ground.
15 “And I shall smite the winter house along with the
summer house. And the houses of ivory shall perish,
and the great houses shall be swept away,” declares
HWHY.

4 Hear this word, you cows of Bashan, who are on
the mountain of Shomeron, who are oppressing the
poor, who are crushing the needy, who are saying to
their masters, “Bring wine, let us drink!”
2 The Aḏon HWHY has sworn by His qodeshah, “See,
days are coming upon you when He shall take you
away with hooks, and your descendants with fishhooks,
3 and let you go out at the breaches, each woman
before her, and you shall be cast out toward Harmon,”
declares HWHY.
4 “Come to Bĕyth Ĕl and transgress, to Gilgal,
increase transgression. And bring your slaughterings
every morning, your tithes every three days.
5 “And burn an offering of thanks giving with leaven,
proclaim voluntary offerings, loudly. For you have
loved this, you children of Yisra’ĕl!” declares the Aḏon
HWHY.
6 “And I also gave you cleanness of teeth in all your
cities, and lack of bread in all your places. But you did
not turn back to Me,” declares HWHY.
1462

AMOS

“And I also withheld rain from you, three months
before the harvest. Then I would send rain on one
city, and on another city I would not send rain. One
part was rained upon, and where it did not rain the
part would dry up.
8 “Then two or three cities would wander to another
city to drink water, but they were not satisfied. But you
did not turn back to Me,” declares HWHY.
9 “I have smitten you with blight and with mildew.
The creeping locust devoured your many gardens,
and your vineyards, and your fig trees, and your olive
trees. But you did not turn back to Me,” declares
HWHY.
10 “I have sent among you a plague in the way of
Mitsrayim. I have slain your young men with a sword,
along with your captured horses. And I made the
stench of your camps come up into your nostrils. But
you did not turn back to Me,” HWHY.
11 “I have overthrown some of you, as Elohim
overthrew Seḏom and Amorah, and you were like a
fire-brand plucked from the burning. But you did not
turn back to Me,” declares HWHY.
12 “Therefore I am doing this to you, O Yisra’ĕl. And
because I do this to you, prepare to meet your Elohim,
O Yisra’ĕl!”
13 For look, He who forms mountains, and creates
the wind, and who declares to man what His thought
is, and makes the morning darkness, and who treads
the high places of the earth, HWHY Elohim of hosts is
His Name.
7

5 Hear this word which I take up against you, this
lamentation, O house of Yisra’ĕl:

1463

AMOS

The maiden of Yisra’ĕl has fallen, not to rise again.
She lies forsaken on her land, with no one to lift her
up.
3 For thus said the Aḏon HWHY, “The city that goes
out by a thousand has a hundred left, and that which
goes out by a hundred has ten left to the house of
Yisra’ĕl.”
4 For thus said HWHY to the house of Yisra’ĕl, “Seek
Me and live,
5 but do not seek Bĕyth Ĕl, nor enter Gilgal, nor pass
over to Be’ĕrsheḇa. For Gilgal shall certainly go into
exile, and Bĕyth Ĕl come to naught.
6 “Seek HWHY and live, lest He break out like fire
upon the house of Yosĕph, and shall consume it, with
no one to quench it in Bĕyth Ĕl.
7 “O you who are turning right-ruling to wormwood,
and have cast down righteousness to the earth!”
8 He who made Kimah and Kesil, and who turns the
shadow of death into morning and darkened day into
night, who is calling for the waters of the sea and
pours them out on the face of the earth - HWHY is His
Name 9 who is flashing forth destruction upon the strong,
so that destruction comes upon the stronghold.
10 They hated the one who reproves in the gate, and
they despise the one who speaks the truth.
11 Therefore, because you trample on the poor and
take grain taxes from him - you have built houses of
hewn stone but you are not going to dwell in them,
you have planted pleasant vineyards but not drink
wine from them.
12 For I know your transgressions are many and your
sins are great, afflicting the righteous and accepting
bribes, and turning aside the poor at the gate.
2

1464

AMOS

Therefore the wise keep silent at that time, for it is
an evil time.
14 Seek good and not evil, so that you live. And let
HWHY Elohim of hosts be with you, as you have
spoken.
15 Hate evil and love good, and establish RightRuling in the gate. It might be that HWHY Elohim of
hosts shows favour to the remnant of Yosĕph.
16 Therefore HWHY Elohim of hosts, HWHY, said this,
“There is wailing in all open squares, and in all the
streets they say, ‘Alas! Alas!’ and shall call the farmer
to mourning, and skilled lamenters to wailing.
17 “And in all vineyards there is wailing, for I pass
through your midst,” said HWHY.
18 Woe to you who are longing for the day of HWHY!
What does the day of HWHY mean to you? It is
darkness, and not light,
19 as when a man flees from a lion, and a bear shall
meet him; or entered his house, rested his hand on
the wall, and a serpent shall bite him.
20 Is not the day of HWHY darkness, and not light? Is
it not very dark, with no brightness in it?
21 “I have hated, I have despised your festivals, and
I am not pleased with your assemblies.
22 “Though you offer Me burnt offerings and your
grain offerings, I do not accept them, nor do I look on
your fattened peace offerings.
23 “Take away from Me the noise of your songs, for I
do not hear the sound of your stringed instruments.
24 “And let Right-Ruling roll on like water, and
righteousness like a mighty stream.
25 “You brought Me slaughterings and meal offerings
in the wilderness for forty years, O house of Yisra’ĕl,
13

1465

AMOS

but you took up Sikkuth your sovereign and
Kiyyun, your idols, your astral mighty ones, which you
made for yourselves!
27 “Therefore I shall send you into exile beyond
Dammeseq,” said HWHY Elohim of hosts - His Name.
26

6 Woe to those at ease in Tsiyon, and those trusting
in Mount Shomeron, the distinguished ones among the
chief of the nations, to whom the house of Yisra’ĕl
comes!
2 Pass over to Kalnĕh and see, and from there go to
Ḥamath the great. Then go down to Gath of the
Pelishtites. Are you better than these reigns, or is
their border greater than your border?
3 You who are putting off the day of evil, yet bring
near the seat of violence,
4 who are lying on beds of ivory, and are stretched
out on your couches, and are eating lambs from the
flock and calves from the midst of the stall,
5 who sing idly to the sound of the harp, having
composed songs for themselves like Dawiḏ,
6 who are drinking wine from bowls, and anoint with
the finest ointments, yet they have not grieved over
the breach of Yosĕph!
7 Therefore they shall now go into exile, with the first
of the exiles, and the feasting of the stretched-out
ones shall cease!
8 The Aḏon HWHY has sworn by Himself, HWHY
Elohim of hosts declares, “I am loathing the pride of
Ya’aqoḇ, and I have hated his palaces. Therefore I
shall deliver up the city and all that is in it.”
9 And it shall be, that if ten men remain in one
house, they shall die.
10 And if a relative, or his undertaker, brings the
remains out of the house, he shall say to one inside
1466

AMOS

the house, “Is anyone with you?” and he says, “No,”
then he shall say, “Hush!” For we have not
remembered the Name of HWHY!
11 For look, HWHY is commanding, and He shall smite
the great house with breaches, and the little house
with clefts.
12 Do horses run on a rock? Does one plough it with
oxen? For you have turned right-ruling into poison,
and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood,
13 you who are rejoicing over a matter of naught, who
say, “Have we not taken horns for ourselves by our
own strength?”
14 “For look, I am raising up a nation against you, O
house of Yisra’ĕl,” declares HWHY Elohim of hosts,
“and they shall oppress you from the entrance of
Ḥamath to the wadi to the wadi Araḇah.”

7 This is what the Aḏon HWHY showed me, and see,
He was forming locust swarms at the beginning of the
late crop. And see, it was the late crop after the
mowings of the sovereign.
2 And it came to be, when they had finished eating
the grass of the land, that I said, “O Aḏonai HWHY,
forgive, I pray! How does Ya’aqoḇ survive, for he is
small?”
3 HWHY relented concerning this. “It shall not be,”
said HWHY.
4 This is what the Aḏon HWHY showed me, and see,
the Aḏon HWHY was calling to contend by fire, and it
consumed the great deep and devoured the portion,
5 and I said, “O Aḏonai HWHY, please stop! How
does Ya’aqoḇ survive, for he is small?”
6 HWHY relented concerning this. “This shall not be
either,” said the Aḏon HWHY.
1467

AMOS

This is what He showed me, and see, HWHY stood
on a wall made with a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in
His hand,
8 and HWHY said to me, “Amos, what do you see?”
And I said, “A plumb-line.” And HWHY said, “See, I am
putting a plumb-line in the midst of My people Yisra’ĕl,
no longer do I pardon them.
9 And the high places of Yitsḥaq shall be laid waste,
and the miqdashim of Yisra’ĕl shall be destroyed. And
I shall rise with the sword against the house of
Yaroḇ’am.”
10 Then Amatsyah the kohĕn of Bĕyth Ĕl sent to
Yaroḇ’am sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “Amos has
conspired against you in the midst of the house of
Yisra’ĕl. The land is not able to endure all his words,
11 for this is what Amos said, ‘Yaroḇ’am shall die by
the sword, and Yisra’ĕl certainly be exiled from their
own land.’ ”
12 And Amatsyah said to Amos, “Go, you seer! Flee
to the land of Yahuḏah, and eat bread and naḇa
there,
13 but do not naḇa any more at Bĕyth Ĕl, for it is the
sovereign’s miqdash and it is the house of the reign.”
14 And Amos answered and said to Amatsyah, “I am
not a naḇi, nor am I a son of a naḇi, for I am a
herdsman and a grower of sycamore figs.
15 “But HWHY took me from behind the flock, and
HWHY said to me, ‘Go, naḇa to My people Yisra’ĕl.’
16 “And now, hear the word of HWHY. You are saying,
‘Do not naḇa against Yisra’ĕl, and do not preach
against the house of Yitsḥaq.’
17 “Therefore thus said HWHY, ‘Your wife shall
become a whore in the city, and your sons and
daughters fall by the sword, and your land be divided
7

1468

AMOS

by a measuring line, and you die in a defiled land, and
Yisra’ĕl shall certainly be exiled from its land.’ ”

8 This is what the Aḏon HWHY showed me, and see, a
basket of summer fruit.
2 And He said, “Amos, what do you see?” And I said,
“A basket of summer fruit.” And HWHY said to me, “The
end has come upon my people Yisra’ĕl, no longer do
I pardon them.
3 “And the songs of the Hĕyḵal shall be wailing in
that day,” declares the Aḏon HWHY, “many dead
bodies everywhere, thrown into any place - hush!”
4 Hear this, you who are swallowing up the needy,
to do away with the poor of the land,
5 saying, “When does the New Moon pass so that
we sell grain, and the Shabbath so that we trade our
wheat, to make the ĕphah small and the sheqel large,
and to falsify the scales by deceit,
6 to buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair
of sandals, and sell the chaff of the wheat?”
7 HWHY has sworn by the excellency of Ya’aqoḇ, “I
shall never forget any of their works.
8 “Shall the land not tremble for this, and everyone
mourn who dwells in it? And all of it shall swell like the
River, heave and subside like the River of Mitsrayim.
9 “And it shall be in that day,” declares the Aḏon
HWHY, “that I shall cause the sun to go down at noon,
and shall darken the earth on a day of brightness,
10 and shall turn your festivals into mourning, and all
your songs into lamentation, and bring sackcloth on
all loins, and baldness on every head, and shall make
it like mourning for an only son, and its end like a day
of bitterness.
11 “See, days are coming,” declares the Aḏon HWHY,
“that I shall send a hunger in the land, not a hunger
1469

AMOS

for bread, nor a thirst for water, but for hearing the
Words of HWHY.
12 “And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from
north to east - they shall diligently search, seeking the
Word of HWHY, but they shall not find it.
13 “In that day the pretty maidens and strong young
men shall faint from thirst,
14 those swearing by the guilt of Shomeron, who say,
‘As your mighty one lives, O Dan!’ and, ‘As the way of
Be’ĕrsheḇa lives!’ And they shall fall and never rise
again.”

9 I saw HWHY standing by the altar, and He said,
“Smite the column head, so that the thresholds shake,
and break them off by the head, all of them. And the
last of them I slay with the sword. Not one of them
fleeing gets away, and not one fugitive of them
escapes.
2 “If they dig into the grave, from there my hand
takes them; and if they climb up to the shamayim,
from there I bring them down.
3 “And if they hide themselves on top of Karmel,
from there I shall search, and take them. And if they
hide from before My eyes at the bottom of the sea,
from there I shall command the serpent, and it shall
bite them.
4 “And if they go into captivity before their enemies,
from there I shall command the sword, and it shall
slay them. And I shall lay My eyes on them for evil
and not for good.”
5 And the Aḏon HWHY of hosts is He who touches
the earth so that it melts, and all who dwell in it mourn,
and all of it come up like the River, and subside like
the River of Mitsrayim 1470

AMOS

who is building His upper room in the shamayim,
and has founded His firmament on the earth, who is
calling for the waters of the sea, and pours
them out on the face of the earth - HWHY is His Name.
7 “Are you not like the people of Kush to Me, O
children of Yisra’ĕl?” declares HWHY. “Did I not bring
up Yisra’ĕl from the land of Mitsrayim, and the
Pelishtites from Kaphtor, and Aram from Qir?
8 “Look, the eyes of the Aḏon HWHY are on the sinful
reign, and I shall destroy it from the face of the earth,
except that, I do not completely destroy the house of
Ya’aqoḇ,” declares HWHY.
9 “For look, I am commanding, and I shall sift the
house of Yisra’ĕl among all the gentiles, as one sifts
with a sieve, yet not a grain falls to the ground.
10 “All the sinners of My people are going to die by
the sword, those who are saying, ‘Evil does not
overtake us nor meet us.’
11 “In that day I shall raise up the booth of Dawiḏ
which has fallen down. And I shall repair its breaches
and raise up its ruins. And I shall build it as in the days
of old,
12 so that they possess the remnant of Eḏom, and all
the gentiles on whom My Name is called,” declares
HWHY who does this.
13 “Look, the days are coming,” declares HWHY, “that
the ploughman shall overtake the reaper, and the
treader of grapes him who sows seed. And the
mountains shall drip new wine, and all the hills melt.
14 “And I shall turn back the captivity of My people
Yisra’ĕl. And they shall build the waste cities and
inhabit them. And they shall plant vineyards and drink
wine from them, and shall make gardens and eat their
fruit.
6

1471

AMOS

“And I shall plant them on their own land, and not
uproot them any more from their own land I have
given them,” said HWHY your Elohim!

15

1472

OBADIAH

OḆAḎYAH
‫ עבדיה‬hYdB[

1 The vision of Oḇaḏyah: This is what the Aḏon HWHY
said concerning Eḏom. We have heard a report from
HWHY, and a messenger has been sent among the
nations, saying, “Arise, and let us rise up against her
for battle!”
2 “See, I have made you small among the nations,
you are greatly despised.
3 “The pride of your heart has deceived you, you
who dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose dwelling is
high, who say in your heart, ‘Who shall bring me down
to the ground?
4 “Though you rise high as the eagle, and though
you place your nest among the stars, from there I
shall bring you down,” declares HWHY.
5 “If thieves came to you, if robbers by night, how
ruined you would have been! Would they not steal till
they had enough? If grape-gatherers had come to
you, would they not leave gleanings?
6 “How Ĕsaw shall be searched out! His hidden
treasures shall be sought out!
7 “All your allies shall send you forth to the border,
your friends shall deceive you and overpower you.
They make your bread a snare under you, without you
discerning it!
8 “In that day,” declares HWHY, “I shall destroy the
wise men from Eḏom, and discernment from the
mountains of Ĕsaw!
9 “And your mighty men shall be discouraged, O
Tĕman, so that everyone from the mountains of Ĕsaw
is cut off by slaughter.
1473

OḆAḎYAH

“Because of your violence against your brother
Ya’aqoḇ, let shame cover you. And you shall be cut
off forever.
11 “In the day that you stood on the other side, in the
day that strangers took captive his wealth, when
foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for
Yerushalayim, you also were like one of them!
12 “And you should not have looked on your brother’s
day in the day of his estrangement, nor rejoiced over
the children of Yahuḏah in the day of their destruction,
nor made your mouth great in the day of distress,
13 nor have entered the gate of My people in the day
of their calamity, nor looked down on their evil in the
day of their, calamity, nor have seized their wealth in
the day of their calamity,
14 nor have stood at the parting of the way to cut off
his fugitives, nor handed over his survivors in the day
of distress.
15 “For the day of HWHY is near upon all the gentiles.
As you have done, it shall be done to you, your reward
shall come back on your own head.
16 “For as you have drunk on my qodesh mountain,
so do all the gentiles drink continually. And they shall
drink and shall swallow, and they shall be as though
they had never been.
17 “But on Mount Tsiyon there shall be a remnant,
and they shall be qodesh. And the house of Ya’aqoḇ
shall possess their possessions.
18 “And the house of Ya’aqoḇ shall be a fire, and the
house of Yosĕph a flame, but the house of Ĕsaw for
stubble. And they shall burn among them and they
shall consume them, so that no survivor is left of the
house of Ĕsaw.” For HWHY has spoken.
19 And they shall possess the South with the
mountains of Ĕsaw, and low country with the
10

1474

OBADIAH

Pelishtites. And they shall possess the fields of
Ephrayim and the fields of Shomeron, and Binyamin
with Gil’aḏ,
20 and the exiles of this host of the children of
Yisra’ĕl, that of the Kena’anites as far as Tsarephath,
and the exiles of Yerushalayim who are in Sepharaḏ
possess the cities of the South.
21 And saviours shall come to Mount Tsiyon to judge
the mountains of Ĕsaw. And the reign shall belong to
HWHY.

1475

JONAH

YONAH
‫ יונה‬h!WY

1 And the word of HWHY came to Yonah son of Amittai,
saying,
2 “Arise, go to Ninewĕh, the great city, and cry out
against it, for their evils have come up before Me.”
3 But Yonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the
presence of HWHY, and went down to Yapho, and
found a ship going to Tarshish. And he paid the fare,
and went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish
from the presence of HWHY.
4 And HWHY sent out a great wind on the sea, and
there was a great storm on the sea, so that the ship
was thought to be broken up.
5 And the seamen were afraid, and each one cried
out to his mighty one, and threw the cargo which was
in the ship into the sea, to lighten the load. But Yonah
had gone down into the lowest parts of the ship, and
he lay down, and was fast asleep.
6 And the captain came to him, and said to him,
“What do you mean, sleeper? Arise, cry out to your
Elohim, if so be that Elohim shall think about us, so
that we do not perish.”
7 And they said to each other, “Come, and let us
cast lots, so that we know for whose sake this evil has
come upon us.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell on
Yonah.
8 So they said to him, “Please explain to us! For
whose sake is this evil upon us? What is your
occupation? And where do you come from? What is
your country? And from what people are you?”

1476

YONAH

And he said to them, “I am an Iḇri. And I revere
HWHY, the Elohim of the shamayim, who made the sea
and the dry land.”
10 And the men were exceedingly afraid, and said to
him, “Why have you done this?” For the men knew
that he fled from the presence of HWHY, for he had
informed them.
11 And they said to him, “What are we to do to you to
make the sea calm for us?” For the sea was growing
more stormy.
12 And he said to them, “Take me and throw me into
the sea, so that the sea becomes calm for you. For I
know that this great storm is because of me.”
13 However, the men rowed hard to bring the ship to
land, but were unable, for the sea continued to grow
more stormy against them.
14 And they cried out to HWHY and said, “We pray, O
HWHY, please, let us not perish for this man’s life, and
do not lay on us innocent blood. For You, O HWHY,
have done as it pleased You.”
15 Then they took Yonah and threw him into the sea,
and the sea stopped raging.
16 And the men revered HWHY exceedingly, and
brought an offering to HWHY and made vows.
17 But HWHY appointed a great fish to swallow Yonah.
And Yonah was in the stomach of the fish three days
and three nights.
9

2 And Yonah prayed to HWHY his Elohim from the
stomach of the fish.
2 And he said, “I called to HWHY because of my
distress, and He answered me. From the stomach of
the grave I cried, and You heard my voice.

1477

JONAH

“For You threw me into the deep, into the heart of
the seas, and the floods surrounded me. All Your
breakers and Your waves passed over me.
4 “So I said, ‘I have been driven away from Your
eyes. Would I ever look again toward Your qodesh
Hĕyḵal?’
5 “Waters encompassed me, unto life, the deep
closed around me, weeds were wrapped around my
head.
6 “I went down to the base of the mountains, the
earth with its bars were behind me forever. But You
brought up my life from the pit, O HWHY, my Elohim.
7 “When my life fainted within me, I remembered
HWHY. And my prayer went up to You, into Your
qodesh Hĕyḵal.
8 “Those observing false worthlessness forsake
their own kindness.
9 “But I offer to You with the voice of thanksgiving, I
pay what I have vowed. Deliverance is of HWHY.”
10 Then HWHY spoke to the fish, and it vomited Yonah
on the dry land.
3

3 And the word of HWHY came to Yonah the second
time, saying,
2 “Arise, go to Ninewĕh, that great city, and proclaim
to it the message that I am speaking to you.”
3 And Yonah arose and went to Ninewĕh, according
to the word of HWHY. Now Ninewĕh was a great city
before Elohim, of three day’s journey.
4 And Yonah began to go in to the city on the first
day’s walk. And he cried out and said, “Yet forty days,
and Ninewĕh shall be overthrown!”
5 And the men of Ninewĕh believed in Elohim, and
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the
greatest to the least of them.
1478

YONAH

And the word reached the sovereign of Ninewĕh,
so he arose from his throne and took off his robe, and
covered himself with sackcloth and sat in ashes.
7 And he proclaimed and said throughout Ninewĕh,
“By decree of the sovereign and his nobles: No man
or beast, herd or flock, shall taste whatever - let them
not eat, let them not even drink water.
8 “But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth,
and call mightily to Elohim. And let each one turn from
his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands.
9 “Who knows whether Elohim turns and relents,
and shall turn away from the heat of His displeasure,
so that we do not perish?”
10 And Elohim saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way. And Elohim relented from the evil which
He had said He would do to them, and He did not do
it.
6

4 But it greatly displeased Yonah, and he was
grieved.
2 And he prayed to HWHY, and he said, “Please,
HWHY, was this not what I said while I was in my own
land? This is why I went ahead and fled to Tarshish.
For I know that You are an Ĕl showing favour, and
compassionate, patient and of great kindness, and
relenting from doing evil.
3 “And now, O HWHY, please take my life from me,
for it is better for me to die than to live!”
4 And HWHY said, “Are you right to be displeased?”
5 Then Yonah went out of the city and sat on the
east side of the city, and made himself a shelter there,
and sat under it in the shade, to see what would
become of the city.
6 And HWHY Elohim appointed a plant and made it
come up over Yonah, to be a shade for his head to
1479

JONAH

deliver him from his discomfort. And Yonah greatly
rejoiced over the plant.
7 But as morning dawned the next day Elohim
appointed a worm which attacked the plant so that it
withered.
8 And it came to be when the sun came up, that
Elohim appointed a scorching east wind, and the sun
smote on Yonah’s head, so that he grew faint, and
asked for his life to die, and said, “It is better for me
to die than to live.”
9 And Elohim said to Yonah, “Have you rightly
become displeased over the plant?” And he said, “I
have rightly become displeased, even to death!”
10 And HWHY said, “You felt sorry for the plant for
which you have not laboured, nor made it grow, which
came up in a night and perished in a night.
11 “And should I not pardon Ninewĕh, that great city,
in which are more than one hundred and twenty
thousand beings who have not known their right hand
from their left, and much cattle?”

1480

MICAH

MIḴAH
‫ מיכה‬hKYm

1 The word of HWHY that came to Miḵah of Moresheth
in the days of Yotham, Aḥaz, Ḥizqiyah, sovereigns of
Yahuḏah, which he saw concerning Shomeron and
Yerushalayim.
2 Hear, all you peoples! Listen, O earth, and all who
are in it! And let the Aḏon HWHY be a witness against
you - HWHY from His qodesh Hĕyḵal.
3 For look, HWHY is coming out of His place, and He
shall come down and shall tread on the high places
of the earth.
4 And the mountains shall melt under Him, and the
valleys be cleft as wax before the fire, as waters
poured down a steep place.
5 All this is for the transgression of Ya’aqoḇ and for
the sins of the house of Yisra’ĕl. What is the
transgression of Ya’aqoḇ? Is it not Shomeron? And
what are the high places of Yahuḏah? Are they not
Yerushalayim?
6 “And I shall make Shomeron a heap in the field,
places for planting a vineyard. And I shall pour down
her stones into the valley, and uncover her
foundations.
7 “And all her carved images shall be beaten in
pieces, and all her gifts be burned with the fire. And
all her idols I shall lay waste, for she gathered it from
the hire of a whore, and they shall return to the hire of
a whore.”
8 Because of this I lament and howl. I go stripped
and naked. I make a lamentation like jackals, and
mourning like ostriches.
1481

MIḴAH

For her wounds are incurable. For it has come to
Yahuḏah, it has come to the gate of My people, to
Yerushalayim.
10 Do not declare it in Gath, weep not at all in Bĕyth
Aphrah, roll yourself in the dust.
11 Pass by in nakedness and shame, you inhabitant
of Shaphir. The inhabitant of Tsa’anan has not gone
out. The lamentation of Bĕyth ha’Ĕtsel takes from you
its standing place.
12 Though the inhabitants of Maroth waited for good,
yet evil came down from HWHY to the gate of
Yerushalayim.
13 O inhabitant of Laḵish, harness the chariot to the
horse - she was the beginning of sin to the daughter
of Tsiyon - for the transgressions of Yisra’ĕl were
found in you.
14 Therefore you shall give parting gifts to Moresheth
Gath, the houses of Aḵziḇ becoming a deception to
the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
15 Again I shall bring a dispossessor to you, O
inhabitant of Marĕshah. The esteem of Yisra’ĕl shall
come to Aḏullam.
16 Make yourself bald and cut off your hair for the
children of your delight. Enlarge your baldness like a
vulture, for they shall be exiled from you.
9

2 Woe to those plotting wickedness, and working out
evil upon their beds! In the light of the morning they
practise it, because it is in the might of their hand.
2 And they coveted fields and seized them, also
houses, and took them away. And they oppressed a
man and his house, a man and his inheritance.
3 Therefore thus said HWHY, “See, against this clan
I am planning evil, from which you do not remove your
necks, nor walk proudly, for this is a time of evil.
1482

MICAH

“In that day one shall lift up a proverb against you,
and he shall lament with a bitter lamentation, and
shall say, ‘We have been utterly ravaged! He changes
the inheritance of my people. How He removes it from
me! He apportions our fields to the backslider.’ ”
5 “Therefore you shall have no one in the assembly
of HWHY to divide the land by lot.
6 “You do not preach, they preach. They do not
preach to these, reproaches are not turned back.
7 “Are you called ‘House of Ya’aqoḇ’? Has the Ruaḥ
of HWHY been limited? Are these His doings? Do not
Words do good to the one walking uprightly?
8 “And lately My people have risen up as an enemy.
You strip off the robe with the garment from those
who trust you, as they pass by - those returning from
battle.
9 “You have driven the women of My people from
their pleasant houses. You have taken away My
splendour from their children forever.
10 “Arise and go, for this is not your rest, because
uncleanness destroys, and the destruction is
grievous.
11 “If a man walking after wind and falsehood has
lied: ‘I preach to you of wine and of strong drink,’ he
shall be the ‘preacher’ of this people!
12 “I shall certainly gather all of you, O Ya’aqoḇ, I
shall bring together the remnant of Yisra’ĕl, put them
together like sheep of the fold, like a flock in the midst
of their pasture, they being noisy because of men.
13 “The breach-maker shall go up before them. They
shall break out, and pass through the gate, and go out
by it, and their sovereign pass before them, with HWHY
at their head!”
4

1483

MIḴAH

3 Then I said, “Hear now, O heads of Ya’aqoḇ, and
you rulers of the house of Yisra’ĕl: Should you not
know Right-Ruling,
2 you who are hating good and loving evil, tearing
away the skin from My people, and the flesh from their
bones,
3 and who have eaten the flesh of My people, and
stripped off their skin, and have broken their bones,
and have cut it up as into a pot, like flesh in the
cooking pot?”
4 Therefore, when they cry to HWHY He does not
answer them, and hides His face from them at that
time, as they have made their deeds evil.
5 Thus said HWHY concerning the neḇi’im who lead
my people astray, who are biting with their teeth and
have called out, “Peace!” They even declare battle
against him who does not give for their mouths.
6 Therefore it shall be night to you without vision,
and darkness to you without divination. The sun shall
go down on the neḇi’im, and the day shall be dark for
them.
7 And the seers shall be ashamed, and the diviners
embarrassed. And they shall all cover their lips, for
there is no answer, O Elohim.
8 But truly I am filled with power, with the Ruaḥ of
HWHY, and with Right-Ruling and with might, to
declare to Ya’aqoḇ his transgression and to Yisra’ĕl
his sin.
9 Hear this, please, you heads of the house of
Ya’aqoḇ and you rulers of the house of Yisra’ĕl, who
despise Right-Ruling and distort all that is straight,
10 those building up Tsiyon with bloodshed and
Yerushalayim with unrighteousness.
1484

MICAH

Her heads judge for a bribe, her kohenim teach for
pay, and her neḇi’im divine for a price. Yet they lean
on HWHY, and say, “Is not HWHY in our midst? Evil does
not come upon us.”
12 Therefore, because of you, Tsiyon is ploughed like
a field, and Yerushalayim becomes heaps, and the
mountain of the House like a wooded height.
11

4 And in the latter days it shall be that the mountain
of the House of HWHY is established on the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills. And
peoples shall flow to it.
2 And many nations shall come and say, “Come,
and let us go up to the mountain of HWHY, to the
House of the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ, and let Him teach us
His Ways, and let us walk in His paths. For out of
Tsiyon comes forth the Torah, and the Word of HWHY
from Yerushalayim.”
3 And He shall judge among many peoples, and
reprove strong nations afar off. They shall beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks - nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither teach battle any more.
4 But each one shall sit under his vine and under his
fig tree, with no one to make them afraid, for the
mouth of HWHY of hosts has spoken.
5 For all the peoples walk, each one in the name of
his mighty one, but we walk in the Name of HWHY our
Elohim forever and ever.
6 “In that day,” declares HWHY, “I gather the lame,
and I bring together the outcast and those whom I
have afflicted.
7 “And I shall make the lame a remnant, and the
outcast a strong nation. And HWHY shall reign over
them in Mount Tsiyon, from now on and forever.
1485

MIḴAH

“And you, O tower of the flock, stronghold of the
daughter of Tsiyon, it shall come to you, the former
rule shall come, the reign of the daughter of
Yerushalayim.”
9 Now why do you cry aloud? Is there no sovereign
in you? Has your counsellor perished? For pain has
gripped you like a woman in labour.
10 Be in pain, and deliver, O daughter of Tsiyon, like
a woman in labour. For now you are to leave the city,
and you shall dwell in the field. And you shall go to
Baḇel, there you shall be delivered, there HWHY shall
redeem you from the hand of your enemies.
11 And now, many gentiles shall be gathered against
you, who are saying, “Let her be defiled, and let our
eyes look upon Tsiyon!”
12 But they do not know the thoughts of HWHY, nor do
they understand His counsel. For He has gathered
them like sheaves to the threshing-floor.
13 “Arise and thresh, O daughter of Tsiyon, for I make
your horn iron and your hooves bronze. And you shall
beat many peoples into pieces, and I shall seclude
their gain to HWHY, and their wealth to the Aḏon of all
the earth.”
8

5 Now you are raided, O daughter of raiders, a siege
has been laid against us. They strike the Judge of
Yisra’ĕl with a rod on the cheek.
2 “But you, Bĕyth Leḥem Ephrathah, you who are
little among the clans of Yahuḏah, out of you shall
come forth to Me the One to become Ruler in Yisra’ĕl.
And His comings forth are of old, from everlasting.”
3 Therefore He shall give them up, until the time that
she who is in labour has given birth, and the remnant
of His brothers return to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
1486

MICAH

And He shall stand and shepherd in the strength
of HWHY, in the excellency of the Name of HWHY His
Elohim. And they shall dwell, for at that time He shall
be great, to the ends of the earth.
5 And this shall be peace. When Ashshur comes
into our land, and when he treads in our palaces, we
shall raise against him seven shepherds and eight
leaders of men.
6 And they shall shepherd the land of Ashshur with
the sword, and the land of Nimroḏ at its entrances.
And He shall deliver us from Ashshur, when he
comes into our land and when he treads within our
borders.
7 And the remnant of Ya’aqoḇ shall be in the midst
of many peoples, as dew from HWHY, as showers on
the grass, which do not wait for man nor delay for the
sons of men.
8 And the remnant of Ya’aqoḇ shall be among the
gentiles, in the midst of many peoples, like a lion
among the beasts of a forest, like a young lion among
flocks of sheep, who, if he passes through, shall both
tread down and shall tear, and there is no one to
deliver.
9 Let your hand be lifted up against your
adversaries, and all your enemies be cutoff.
10 “And it shall be in that day,” declares HWHY, “that I
shall cut off your horses out of your midst, and I shall
destroy your chariots.
11 “And I shall cut off the cities of your land, and I
shall pull down all your strongholds.
12 “And I shall cut off witchcrafts out of your hand,
and let you have no magicians.
13 “And I shall cut off your carved images, and your
pillars from your midst, so that you no longer bow
down to the work of your hands.
4

1487

MIḴAH

“And I shall pluck your Ashĕrim out of your midst,
and I shall destroy your cities.
15 “And I shall take vengeance in wrath and rage on
the gentiles who did not obey.”
14

6 Hear now what HWHY is saying, “Arise, strive with
the mountains, and let the hills hear your voice.
2 “Hear, O you mountains, the controversy of HWHY,
and you everlasting foundations of the earth! For
HWHY has a controversy with His people and He shall
reprove Yisra’ĕl.
3 “My people, what have I done to you? And how
have I wearied you? Answer Me,
4 for I brought you up from the land of Mitsrayim,
and I ransomed you from the house of bondage. And
I sent Mosheh, Aharon, and Miryam before you.
5 “My people, remember, please, what Balaq
sovereign of Mo’aḇ counselled, and what Bil’am son
of Be’or answered him, from Shittim to Gilgal, in order
to know the righteousness of HWHY.”
6 With what shall I come before HWHY, bow myself
before the high Elohim? Shall I come before Him with
burnt offerings, with calves a year old?
7 Is HWHY pleased with thousands of rams or ten
thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my first-born for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
being?
8 He has declared to you, O man, what is good. And
what does HWHY require of you but to do right, and to
love kindness, and to walk humbly with your Elohim?
9 The voice of HWHY cries to the city - and let sound
wisdom see Your Name! “Hear the Rod and Him who
appointed it!

1488

MICAH

“Are there still treasures of wickedness in the
house of the wicked, and the short measure that is an
abomination?”
11 Would I be innocent with wicked scales, and with
a bag of false weights?
12 “For
her rich men are filled with cruel
unrighteousness, and her inhabitants have spoken
falsehood, and their tongue is deceit in their mouth.
13 “So I also, I shall smite you with a grievous wound,
to lay you waste because of your sins:
14 “You shall eat but not be satisfied, and your inside
be empty. And you shall store up but not save, and
what you save I shall give to the sword.
15 “You shall sow but not reap, you shall tread the
olives but not anoint yourselves with oil, and make
sweet wine but not drink wine.
16 “For the laws of Omri are strictly observed, and all
the works of the house of Aḥaḇ, and you walk in their
counsels. Therefore I give you for a ruin, and your
inhabitants for a hissing, and let you bear the
reproach of My people.”
10

7 Woe to me! For I am as gatherings of summer fruit,
as gleanings of the grape harvest. There is no cluster
to eat. My being has desired the first-ripe fruit.
2 The kind one has perished from the earth, and
there is no one straight among men. All of them lie in
wait for blood, everyone traps his brother with a net.
3 Both hands are on the evil, to do it well. The prince
asks for gifts, the judge seeks a bribe, and the great
man speaks the desire of his being. And they weave
it together.
4 The best of them is like a prickly plant, the most
straight is sharper than a thorn hedge. The day of
1489

MIḴAH

your watchman and your punishment has come, now
is their confusion.
5 Trust no friend, rely on no companion, guard the
doors of your mouth from her who lies in your bosom.
6 For son is despising father, daughter rises up
against her mother, daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law, the enemies of a man are the men of
his own house.
7 As for me, I look to HWHY, I wait for the Elohim of
my deliverance, my Elohim hears me.
8 Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy. When I have
fallen I have risen, when I sit in darkness HWHY is a
light to me.
9 I bear the displeasure of HWHY, for I have sinned
against Him, until He pleads my case, and shall
execute right-ruling for me. He brings me out into the
light and I look on His righteousness.
10 And let my enemy see it, and let shame cover her
who said to me, “Where is HWHY your Elohim?” Let my
eyes look on her: now she is trampled down like mud
in the streets.
11 The day for building your walls! Let the decree go
far and wide in that day 12 that day when they come to you from Ashshur and
the besieged cities of Mitsrayim, and from the siege
to the River, and from sea to sea, and mountain to
mountain.
13 But the earth shall become a waste because of
those who dwell in it, and for the fruit of their deeds.
14 Shepherd Your people with Your rod, the flock of
Your inheritance, who dwell alone in a forest, in the
midst of Karmel. Let them feed in Bashan and Gil’aḏ,
as in days of old.
15 “As in the days when you came out of the land of
Mitsrayim, I shall let him see wonders.”
1490

MICAH

Let the gentiles see and be ashamed of all their
might, let them put their hand over their mouth, let
their ears be deaf.
17 Let them lick the dust like a serpent, let them come
trembling from their strongholds like snakes of the
earth, let them be afraid of HWHY our Elohim and fear
because of You.
18 Who is an Ĕl like You - taking away wickedness
and passing over the transgression of the remnant of
His inheritance? He shall not retain His wrath forever,
for He Himself delights in kindness.
19 He shall turn back, He shall have compassion on
us, He shall trample upon our wickednesses! And
You throw all our sins into the depths of the sea!
20 You give truth to Ya’aqoḇ, kindness to Aḇraham,
which You swore to our fathers from the days of old!
16

1491

NAHUM

NAḤUM
‫ נחום‬mWX!

1 The message concerning Ninewĕh. The book of
the vision of Naḥum the Elqoshite.
2 HWHY is a jealous and revenging Ĕl, HWHY is a
revenger and a possessor of wrath. HWHY takes
vengeance on His adversaries, and He watches for
His enemies.
3 HWHY is patient and great in power, but by no
means leaves unpunished. HWHY has His way in the
whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the
dust of His feet.
4 He is rebuking the sea and dries it up. And all the
floods He has made dry, Bashan and Karmel are
withering, and the flower of Leḇanon is languishing.
5 Mountains have shaken before Him, and the hills
have melted. And the earth is lifted up at His
presence, and the world and all who dwell in it.
6 Who stands before His rage? And who rises up in
the heat of His displeasure? His wrath is poured out
like fire, and the rocks have been broken by Him.
7 HWHY is good, as a stronghold in the day of
distress. And He knows those who take refuge in Him.
8 But with an overwhelming flood He makes a
complete end of the place, and darkness pursues His
enemies.
9 What do you plot against HWHY? He makes a
complete end of it. Distress does not rise up a second
time.
10 Though they are as entangled thorns, and as
drunkards with their drink, they shall be consumed
like stubble thoroughly dried.
1492

NAḤUM

From you came forth one who plots evil against
HWHY, a counsellor of Beliya’al.
12 Thus said HWHY, “Though they are strong and
many, even so, they shall be cut off and pass away.
Though I have afflicted you, I afflict you no more.
13 “So now I break his yoke from you, and tear off
your shackles.”
14 And HWHY has commanded concerning you, “Your
name shall no longer be sown. From the house of
your mighty ones I shall cut off the carved image and
the moulded image. I shall appoint your grave, for you
have been of no account.”
15 See, on the mountains the feet of him who brings
good news, who proclaims peace! O Yahuḏah,
observe your Festivals, perform your vows. For
Beliya’al shall no more pass through you. He has
been cut off completely.
11

2 He who breaks in pieces has come up before your
face. Guard the ramparts! Watch the way! Strengthen
your loins! Strengthen your power greatly.
2 For HWHY shall turn back the splendour of Ya’aqoḇ
like the splendour of Yisra’ĕl, for the emptiers have
emptied them out and ruined their vine branches.
3 The shields of his mighty men have become red,
the men of battle are in scarlet. The chariots are like
flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the
cypresses shall reel.
4 The chariots dash about in the streets, they rush
one another in the broad ways. They look like flaming
torches, they run like lightning.
5 He remembers his noble ones, they stumble in
their walk, they hurry to her walls, and the defence is
prepared.
1493

NAHUM

The river gates have been opened, and the palace
is melted.
7 And it is established: she shall be exiled, she shall
be led away. And her female servants are moaning
as with the voice of doves, beating on their breasts.
8 And Ninewĕh of old was like a pool of water, now
they flee away. “Stop! Stop!” they cry, but no one
turns back.
9 Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold! There is no
limit to the treasure - a wealth of all precious objects.
10 She is empty, even emptiness and waste! And the
heart has melted, and the knees have knocked
together, and much pain is in all loins, and all their
faces have become flushed.
11 Where is the den of the lions, and the feeding
place of the young lions, where the lion, the lioness
and the lion’s cub walked, with no one to disturb
them?
12 The lion tore in pieces enough for his cubs, and
strangled for his lionesses, and filled his caves with
prey, and his dens with torn prey.
13 “See, I am against you,” declares HWHY of hosts,
“and I shall burn your chariots in smoke, and the
sword devour your young lions. And I shall cut off your
prey from the earth, and no longer is the voice of your
messengers heard.”
6

3 Woe to the city of blood! All of it is a lie, filled with
plunder, the prey is not lacking.
2 The sound of a whip and the sound of rattling
wheels, of galloping horses, of jolting chariots,
3 mounted horsemen with bright sword and
glittering spear, and many wounded, and a mass of
dead bodies, and no end of corpses, they stumble
over the corpses 1494

NAḤUM

because of the many whorings of the wellfavoured whore, the mistress of sorceries, who sells
nations by her whorings, and clans by her sorceries.
5 “See, I am against you,” declares HWHY of hosts,
“and shall lift up your skirts over your face, and shall
show nations your nakedness, and reigns your
shame.
6 “And I shall cast abominations upon you, and treat
you as foolish, and make a spectacle of you.
7 “And it shall be that all who see you flee from you,
and say, ‘Ninewĕh is laid waste! Who mourns for
her?’ Where do I seek comforters for you?”
8 Are you better than No Amon, who dwelt by the
Nile-streams, with waters around her, whose rampart
was like the sea, whose wall was like the sea?
9 Kush and Mitsrayim were her strength, even
unlimited. Put and Luḇim were your helpers.
10 Yet she was exiled, she went into captivity. At the
head of every street her young children were dashed
to pieces. Lots were cast for her esteemed men, and
all her great men were bound in chains.
11 You too are to become drunk, you are to go into
hiding. You too are to seek refuge from the enemy.
12 All your strongholds are fig trees with ripened figs,
when shaken they shall fall into the mouth of the
eater.
13 See, your people in your midst are women! The
gates of your land shall be opened wide to your
enemies. Fire shall consume your gate bars.
14 Draw for yourself water for the siege! Strengthen
your defences! Go into the clay and tread the mortar,
lay hold of the brick mould!
15 There a fire shall consume you, a sword cut you
off, eat you up like a locust. Make yourself many like
4

1495

NAHUM

the locust, make yourself many like the swarming
locust!
16 You have increased your merchants more than
the stars of the shamayim. The locust shall strip off
and fly away.
17 Your officials are like the locusts, and your
marshals are like the great grasshoppers, which
settle in the hedges on a cold day - when the sun rises
they flee away, and the place where they are is
unknown.
18 Your shepherds have slumbered, O sovereign of
Ashshur, your nobles lie down to rest. Your people
are scattered on the mountains, and no one gathers
them.
19 Your injury has no healing, your wound is
grievous. All who hear news of you shall clap their
hands over you. For over whom did your evil not pass
continually?

1496

HABAKKUK

ḤAḆAQQUQ
‫ חבקוק‬qWqBX

1 The message which the naḇi Ḥaḇaqquq saw.
O HWHY, till when shall I cry, and You not hear? I
cry to You, “Violence!” And You do not save.
3 Why do You show me wickedness, and cause me
to see perversity? For ruin and violence are before
me. And there is strife, and contention arises.
4 Therefore the Torah ceases, and Right-Ruling
never goes forth. For the wicked hem in the righteous
so that Right-Ruling comes out twisted.
5 “Look among the nations, and see, and be
amazed, be amazed! For a work is being wrought in
your days which you would not believe if it were told.
6 “See, I am raising up the Kasdites, a bitter and
hasty nation, who is going through the breadth of the
earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs.
7 “They are frightening and fearsome, their rightruling and their exaltation proceed from themselves.
8 “Their horses shall be swifter than leopards, and
more fierce than evening wolves. And their horsemen
shall charge ahead, and their horsemen come from
afar. They fly as the eagle, rushing to eat.
9 “All of them come for violence, the direction of their
faces is like the east wind, and they gather captives
like sand.
10 “And they scoff at sovereigns, and princes are a
laughing matter to them. They laugh at every
stronghold, for they pile up earth and seize it.
11 “Then shall he pass on as a wind, and transgress
and be guilty, and ascribe this power to his mighty
one.”
2

1497

ḤAḆAQQUQ

Are You not from everlasting, O HWHY My Elohim,
my Qadosh One? You do not die! O HWHY, You have
appointed them for right-ruling, O Rock, You have
established them for reproof.
13 Whose eyes are too clean to see evil, You are not
able to look on wickedness. Why do You look on
those who act treacherously - Keep silent, when the
wicked devours one more righteous than he?
14 And would You make men like fish of the sea, like
creeping creatures that have no ruler over them?
15 All of them have been pulled up with a hook,
caught in his net, and gathered in his dragnet.
Therefore he rejoices and exults.
16 Therefore he offers to his net, and burns incense
to his dragnet, for by them is his portion fat and his
food is rich.
17 Is he therefore to keep on emptying his net, and
slaying nations without sparing?
12

2 I stand at my watch, and station myself on the
watchtower, and wait to see what He says to me, and
what to answer when I am reproved.
2 And HWHY answered me and said, “Write the vision
and inscribe it on tablets, so that he who reads it runs.
3 “For the vision is yet for an appointed time, and it
speaks of the end, and does not lie. If it lingers, wait
for it, for it shall certainly come, it shall not delay.
4 “See, he whose being is not upright in him is
puffed up. But the righteous one lives by his
steadfastness.
5 “And also, because wine betrays him, a man is
proud, and he does not stay at home. Because he
enlarges his appetite as the grave, and he is like
death, and is not satisfied, and gathers to himself all
nations and heaps up for himself all peoples.
1498

HABAKKUK

“Shall not all these lift up a proverb against him,
and a mocking riddle against him, and say, ‘Woe to
him who increases what is not his! Till when is he to
load on himself many pledges’?
7 “Do not your creditors rise up suddenly? And those
who make you tremble wake up and you be plunder
for them?
8 “Because you have plundered many nations, all
the remnant of the people shall plunder you, because
of men’s blood, and doing violence to the land, to the
city, and to all who dwell in it.
9 “Woe to him who is getting evil gain for his house,
in order to put his nest on high, to escape the clutches
of evil!
10 “You have counselled shame for your house, to
cut off many peoples, and your being is sinning.
11 “For a stone from the wall cries out, and a beam
from the timbers answers it.
12 “Woe to him who builds a town by blood, and
establishes a city by unrighteousness!
13 “See, it is not from HWHY of hosts that peoples
labour only for fire, and nations weary themselves for
naught,
14 for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
the esteem of HWHY, as the waters cover the sea!
15 “Woe to him who gives drink to his neighbour,
pouring out your wineskin, and also making him drunk
- in order to look on their nakedness!
16 “You shall be filled with shame instead of esteem.
Drink, you too, and be exposed as uncircumcised!
The cup of the right hand of HWHY shall come around
to you, and great shame upon your esteem.
17 “For the violence done to Leḇanon is to overwhelm
you - and the ravaging of beasts by which you made
them afraid - because of men’s blood and the
6

1499

ḤAḆAQQUQ

violence to the land, to the city and of all who dwell in
it.
18 “Of what use shall a carved image be? For its
maker has carved it: a moulded image and teacher of
falsehood! For the maker trusts what he has made: to
make dumb idols!
19 “Woe to him who says to wood, ‘Awake!’ to silent
stone, ‘Arise!’ Is it a teacher? See, it is overlaid with
gold and silver, and there is no spirit at all inside it.
20 “But HWHY is in His qodesh Hĕyḵal. Let all the earth
be silent before Him.”

3 A prayer of Ḥaḇaqquq the naḇi, on melodious
instruments.
2 O HWHY, I have heard your report,
I was afraid.
O HWHY, renew Your work in the midst of the years!
Make it known in the midst of the years.
In wrath remember compassion.
3 Eloah comes from Tĕman,
And the Qadosh One from Mount Paran. Selah.
His splendour shall cover the shamayim,
And His praise shall fill the earth.
4 And the brightness is as the light,
He has rays from His hand,
And there His power is hidden.
5 Before Him goes pestilence,
And a burning flame goes forth at His feet.
6 He shall stand and measure the earth.
He shall look and shake the nations.
And the ancient mountains are shattered,
The age-old hills shall bow.
His Ways are everlasting.
7 I saw the tents of Kushan under sorrow,
The curtains of the land of Miḏyan tremble.
1500

HABAKKUK

Shall HWHY burn against the rivers?
Is Your displeasure against the rivers,
Is Your wrath against the sea,
That You ride on Your horses,
Your chariots of deliverance?
9 You uncover Your bow,
The oaths of the rod of the Word. Selah.
You cut through the earth with rivers.
10 The mountains shall see You, they tremble.
The storm of water shall pass over.
The deep shall give forth its voice,
It shall lift up its hands.
11 Sun, moon shall stand still in their places.
Like light Your arrows fly,
Like lightning is Your glittering spear.
12 You step through the earth in rage,
You thresh the gentiles in wrath.
13 You shall go forth to save Your people,
To save Your Anointed.
You shall smite the head from the house of the
wicked,
By laying bare from foundation to neck. Selah.
14 You shall pierce with his own arrows
The head of his leaders.
They stormed along to scatter me,
Rejoicing as if to devour the poor in secret.
15 You shall tread the sea with Your horses,
The foaming of many waters.
16 I heard, and my body trembled,
My lips quivered at the sound,
Rottenness came into my bones.
And I trembled within myself,
That I might rest for the day of distress,
To come upon the people who would attack us.
8

1501

ḤAḆAQQUQ

Though the fig tree does not blossom,
And there is no fruit on the vine,
The yield of the olive has failed,
And the fields brought forth no food,
The flock has been cut off from the fold,
And there is no herd in the stalls,
18 Yet I exult in HWHY,
I rejoice in the Elohim of my deliverance.
19 HWHY the Aḏon is my strength.
And He makes my feet like those of deer,
And makes me walk on my high places.
To the chief singer with my stringed instruments.
17

1502

ZEPHANIAH

TSEPHANYAH
‫ צפניה‬hY!pC

1 The word of HWHY which came to Tsephanyah son
of Kushi, son of Geḏalyahu, son of Amaryah, son of
Ḥizqiyah, in the days of Yoshiyahu son of Amon,
sovereign of Yahuḏah.
2 “I shall snatch away all from the face of the earth,”
declares HWHY 3 “I snatch away man and beast, I snatch away the
birds of the shamayim, and the fish of the sea, and
the stumbling-blocks, with the wicked, when I shall cut
off man from the face of the earth,” declares HWHY.
4 “And I shall stretch out My hand against Yahuḏah,
and against all the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, and
cut off every trace of Ba’al from this place, the names
of the idolatrous priests, with the kohenim,
5 and those bowing down to the host of the
shamayim on the house-tops, and those bowing
themselves, swearing by HWHY and swearing by
Malkam;
6 and those who turn away from following HWHY, and
who have not sought HWHY or inquired of Him.”
7 Hush in the presence of the Aḏon HWHY. For the
day of HWHY is near, for HWHY has prepared a
slaughter, He has qadosh His invited ones.
8 “And it shall be, in the day of the slaughter of HWHY,
that I shall punish the rulers and the sons of the
sovereign, and all such as are clad in foreign
garments.
9 “And I shall punish on that day all who leap over
the threshold, who fill their masters’ houses with
violence and deceit.
1503

TSEPHANYAH

“And on that day there shall be,” declares HWHY,
“the sound of a cry from the Fish Gate, and of a
howling from the Second Quarter, and of a great
crashing from the hills.
11 “Howl, you inhabitants of Maḵtĕsh, for all the
merchant people shall be silenced, all those weighing
out silver shall be cut off.
12 “And at that time it shall be, that I search
Yerushalayim with lamps and punish the men who
are settled on their dregs, who say in their heart,
‘HWHY does no good, nor does He evil.’
13 “And their wealth shall become plunder, and their
houses laid waste. And they shall build houses but
not inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards but
not drink their wine.”
14 Near is the great day of HWHY, near and hurrying
greatly, the noise of the day of HWHY. Let the mighty
man then bitterly cry out!
15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of distress and
trouble, a day of waste and ruin, a day of darkness
and gloominess, a day of clouds, dense clouds,
16 a day of ram’s horn and alarm - against the walled
cities and against the corner towers.
17 “And I shall bring distress on men, and they shall
walk like blind men - because they have sinned
against HWHY, and their blood shall be poured out like
dust and their flesh like dung.”
18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to
deliver them in the day of the wrath of HWHY. And by
the fire of His jealousy all the earth shall be
consumed, for He makes a sudden end of all those
who dwell in the earth.
10

2 Gather together, gather together, O nation without
shame,
1504

ZEPHANIAH

before the decree is born - the day shall pass on
like chaff - before the burning wrath of HWHY comes
upon you, before the day of wrath of HWHY comes
upon you!
3 Seek HWHY, all you meek ones of the earth, who
have done His Right-Ruling. Seek righteousness,
seek meekness, if so be that you are hidden in the
day of wrath of HWHY.
4 For Azzah is abandoned and Ashqelon laid waste,
Ashdoḏ is driven out at noonday and Eqron is
uprooted.
5 Woe to the inhabitants of the seacoast, the nation
of the Kerĕthites! The word of HWHY is against you, O
Kena’an, land of the Pelishtites, “And I shall destroy
you, so that there is no inhabitant.”
6 And the seacoast shall be pastures, shepherds’
meadows and enclosures for flocks.
7 And the coast shall be for the remnant of the
house of Yahuḏah. They shall feed their flocks on it,
at evening they lie down in the houses of Ashqelon.
For HWHY their Elohim shall visit them and turn back
their captivity.
8 “I have heard the reproach of Mo’aḇ, and the
revilings of the children of Ammon, with which they
have reproached My people, and exalted themselves
against their borders.
9 “Therefore, as I live,” declares HWHY of hosts, the
Elohim of Yisra’el, “Mo’aḇ shall be like Seḏom, and
the children of Ammon like Amorah - a possession for
weeds and a pit of salt, and a waste forever, the
remnant of My people plunder them, and the rest of
My nation possess them.”
10 This is what they get for their pride, because they
have reproached and exalted themselves against the
people of HWHY of hosts.
2

1505

TSEPHANYAH

HWHY shall be awesome to them, for He shall make
all the mighty ones of the earth to shrivel, while all the
coastlands of the nations bow down to Him, each one
from his place.
12 “You too, O Kushites, are to be slain by My sword.”
13 And He shall stretch out His hand against the
north, and destroy Ashshur, and make Ninewĕh a
waste, as dry as a wilderness.
14 And droves shall lie down in her midst, every beast
of the nation, both pelican and bittern lodge in the
tops of her columns, a voice singing at the window,
ruin be at the threshold, for the cedar work is
exposed.
15 This is the exultant city that is dwelling in safety,
that said in her heart, “I am it, and there is none but
me.” How she has become a waste, a place for
beasts to lie down! Everyone who passes by her
whistles and shakes his fist.
11

3 Woe to her who is rebellious and defiled, the
oppressing city!
2 She did not obey the voice, she did not accept
instruction, she did not trust in HWHY, she did not draw
near to her Elohim.
3 Her rulers in her midst are roaring lions, her judges
are evening wolves, they shall leave no bone until
morning.
4 Her neḇi’im are reckless, treacherous men. Her
kohenim have profaned the Mishkan, they have done
violence to the Torah.
5 HWHY is righteous in her midst, He does no
unrighteousness. Morning by morning He brings His
Right-Ruling to light, it has not been lacking, yet the
unrighteous one knows no shame.
1506

ZEPHANIAH

“I have cut off nations, their corner towers are in
ruins. I have made their streets deserted, with no one
passing by. Their cities are destroyed, without man,
without inhabitant.
7 “I have said, ‘Only revere Me, accept instruction.’
And her dwelling would not be cut off, all that I have
appointed for her. But they rose up early, they
corrupted all their deeds.
8 “Therefore wait for Me,” declares HWHY, “until the
day I rise up for plunder. For My judgment is to gather
nations, to assemble reigns, to pour out on them My
rage, all my burning wrath. For by the fire of My
jealousy all the earth shall be consumed.
9 “For then I shall turn unto the peoples a clean lip,
so that they all call on the Name of HWHY, to serve
Him with one shoulder.
10 “From beyond the rivers of Kush my worshippers,
the daughter of My dispersed ones, shall bring My
offering.
11 “In that day you shall not be put to shame for any
of your deeds in which you have transgressed against
Me, for then I shall remove from your midst your
proud exulting ones, and you shall no more be
haughty in My qodesh mountain.
12 “But I shall leave in your midst an oppressed and
poor people, and they shall trust in the Name of HWHY.
13 “The
remnant of Yisra’ĕl shall do no
unrighteousness and speak no falsehood, nor is a
tongue of deceit found in their mouth. For they shall
feed their flocks and lie down, with none to frighten
them.”
14 Shout for joy, O daughter of Tsiyon! Shout, O
Yisra’ĕl! Be glad and rejoice with all your heart, O
daughter of Yerushalayim!
6

1507

TSEPHANYAH

HWHY has turned aside your judgments. He has
faced your enemy. The Sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, HWHY,
is in your midst. No longer need you fear evil.
16 In that day it shall be said to Yerushalayim, “Do
not fear, Tsiyon, do not let your hands be weak.
17 “HWHY your Elohim in your midst, is mighty to save.
He rejoices over you with joy, He is silent in His love,
He rejoices over you with singing.”
18 “I shall gather those who grieve about the
appointed place, who are among you, to whom its
reproach is a burden.
19 “See, I am dealing with all those afflicting you at
that time. And I shall save the lame, and gather those
who were cast out. And I shall give them for a praise
and for a name in all the earth where they were put to
shame.
20 “At that time I shall bring you in, even at the time I
gather you, for I shall give you for a name, and for a
praise, among all the peoples of the earth, when I turn
back your captivity before your eyes,” said HWHY.
15

1508

HAGGAI

ḤAGGAI
‫ חגי‬YgX

1 In the second year Dareyawesh the sovereign, in
the sixth month, on the first day of the month, the word
of HWHY came by Ḥaggai the naḇi to Zerubbaḇel son of
She’alti’ĕl, governor of Yahuḏah, and to Yahoshua son
of Yahotsaḏaq, the kohĕn ha’gadol, saying,
2 “Thus spoke HWHY of hosts, saying, ‘This people
have said, “The time has not come, the time the
House of HWHY is to be built.” ’ ”
3 Then the word of HWHY came by Ḥaggai the naḇi,
saying,
4 “Is it time for you yourselves to dwell in your
panelled houses, and this House be in ruins?”
5 And now, thus said HWHY of hosts, “Consider your
ways!
6 “You have sown much, but brought in little; eat, but
do not have enough; drink, but you are not filled with
drink; clothe yourselves, but no one is warm; and he
who earns wages, earns wages to put into a bag with
holes.”
7 Thus said HWHY of hosts, “Consider your ways!
8 “Go up to the mountain, and you shall bring wood
and build the House. And I will be pleased with it, and
let Me be esteemed,” said HWHY.
9 “When you looked for much, then see, it came to
little. And when you brought it home, I would blow on
it. Why?” declares HWHY of hosts. “Because of My
House which lies in ruins, while each of you runs to
his own house.
10 “Therefore the shamayim above you have
withheld the dew, and the earth has withheld its fruit.
11 “And I called for a drought on the land, and on the
mountains, and on the grain, and on the new wine,
and on the oil, and on whatever the ground brings
1509

ḤAGGAI

forth, and on man, and on livestock, and on all the
labour of the hands.”
12 Then Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl, and Yahoshua
son of Yahotsaḏaq, the kohĕn ha’gadol, with all the
remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of HWHY their
Elohim, and the words of Ḥaggai the naḇi, as HWHY
their Elohim had sent him. And the people revered the
presence of HWHY.
13 And Ḥaggai, the messenger of HWHY, spoke the
message of HWHY to the people, saying, “I am with
you, declares HWHY.”
14 And HWHY stirred up the spirit of Zerubbaḇel son of
She’alti’ĕl, governor of Yahuḏah, and the spirit of
Yahoshua son of Yahotsaḏaq, the kohĕn ha’gadol,
and the spirit of all the remnant of the people. And
they came and worked on the House of HWHY of
hosts, their Elohim,
15 on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month, in the
second year of Dareyawesh the sovereign.

2 In the seventh month, on the twenty-first of the
month, the word of HWHY came by Ḥaggai the naḇi,
saying,
2 “Speak, please, to Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl,
governor of Yahuḏah, and to Yahoshua son of
Yahotsaḏaq, the kohĕn ha’gadol, and to the remnant
of the people, saying,
3 ‘Who is there left among you who saw this House
in its former esteem? And how do you see it now? Is
it not in your eyes as naught when compared to it?
4 ‘And now, be strong, Zerubbaḇel,’ declares HWHY.
‘And be strong, Yahoshua, son of Yahotsaḏaq, the
kohĕn ha’gadol. And be strong, all you people of the
land,’ declares HWHY, ‘and work. For I am with you,’
declares HWHY of hosts 5 the Word that I Covenanted with you when you
came out of Mitsrayim, and My Ruaḥ is remaining in
your midst, do not fear!’
1510

HAGGAI

“For thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘Once more, in a little
while, and I am shaking the shamayim and earth, the
sea and dry land.
7 ‘And I shall shake all the nations, and they shall
come to the delight of all the nations, and I shall fill
this House with esteem,’ said HWHY of hosts.
8 ‘The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine,’ declares
HWHY of hosts.
9 ‘Let the esteem of this latter House be greater than
the former,’ said HWHY of hosts. ‘And in this place I
give peace,’ declares HWHY of hosts.
10 “On the twenty-fourth of the ninth month, in the
second year of Dareyawesh, the word of HWHY came
unto Ḥaggai the naḇi, saying,
11 “Thus said HWHY hosts, ‘Now, ask the kohenim
concerning the Torah, saying,
12 “If one bears qodesh meat in the fold of his
garment, and with the edge he touches bread or stew,
or wine or oil, or any food, is it qodesh?” ’ ” And the
kohenim answered and said, “No.”
13 And Ḥaggai said, “If someone defiled by a dead
body touches any of these, is it defiled?” And the
kohenim answered and said, “It is defiled.”
14 And Ḥaggai answered and said, “ ‘So is this
people, and so is this nation before Me,’ declares
HWHY, ‘and so is every work of their hands. And
whatever they bring near there is defiled.
15 ‘But now, please consider, from this day onward:
Before a stone was laid on a stone in the Hĕyḵal of
HWHY,
16 since those days - one came to a heap of twenty,
and there were ten; one came to the winepress to
draw out fifty from the press, and there were twenty 17 ‘I smote you with blight and mildew and hail in all
the labours of your hands, and there was none of you
with Me,’ declares HWHY.
18 ‘Consider now from this day forward, from the
twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day
6

1511

ḤAGGAI

that the foundation of the Hĕyḵal of HWHY was laid,
consider it:
19 ‘Is the seed yet in the storehouse? And until now
the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and
the olive tree have not yielded fruit! From this day on
I shall baraḵ you!’ ”
20 And a second time the word of HWHY came to
Ḥaggai on the twenty-fourth day of the month, saying,
21 “Speak to Zerubbaḇel, the governor of Yahuḏah,
saying, ‘I am shaking the shamayim and earth.
22 ‘And I shall overturn the throne of reigns. And I
shall destroy the might of the gentile reigns, and
overturn the chariots and their riders. And the horses
and their riders shall come down, each by the sword
of his brother.
23 ‘In that day,’ declares HWHY of hosts, ‘I shall take
you, Zerubbaḇel My servant, son of She’alti’ĕl,’
declares HWHY, ‘and shall make you as a signet, for I
have chosen you,’ declares HWHY of hosts.”

1512

ZECHARIAH

ZEḴARYAH
‫ זכריה‬hYRKz

1 In the eighth month of the second year of
Dareyawesh, the word of HWHY came to Zeḵaryah son
of Bereḵyah, son of Iddo the naḇi, saying,
2 “HWHY was very wroth with your fathers.
3 “And you shall say to them, ‘Thus said HWHY of
hosts, “Turn back to Me,” declares HWHY of hosts,
“and I shall turn back to you,” declares HWHY of hosts.
4 “Do not be like your fathers, to whom the former
neḇi’im proclaimed, saying, ‘Thus said HWHY of hosts,
“Turn back now from your evil ways and your evil
deeds.” ’ But they did not obey or give heed to Me,”
declares HWHY.
5 “Your fathers, where are they? And the neḇi’im, do
they live forever?
6 “But My Words and My Laws, which I commanded
My servants the neḇi’im, did they not overtake your
fathers?” “Then they turned back and said, ‘As HWHY
of hosts planned to do to us, according to our ways
and according to our deeds, so He has done with us.’
”’”
7 On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month,
which is the month Sheḇat, in the second year of
Dareyawesh, the word HWHY of came to Zeḵaryah son
of Bereḵyahu, son of Iddo the naḇi, saying,
8 “I looked at night and saw a man riding on a red
horse, and he was standing among the myrtle trees
in the shade. And behind him were horses: red,
sorrel, and white.”
9 And I said, “My master, what are these?” And the
messenger who was speaking to me said to me, “Let
me show you what they are.”
10 And the man who stood among the myrtle trees
answered and said, “They are the ones HWHY has
1513

ZEḴARYAH

sent to go throughout the earth.”
11 And they answered the messenger of HWHY, who
stood among the myrtle trees, and said, “We have
gone throughout the earth, and see, all the earth is at
peace and rest.”
12 And the messenger of HWHY answered and said,
“O HWHY of hosts, how long would You have no
compassion on Yerushalayim and on the cities of
Yahuḏah, against which You were enraged these
seventy years?”
13 And HWHY answered the messenger who talked to
me, good words, comforting words.
14 And the messenger who spoke with me said to
me, “Proclaim, saying, ‘Thus said HWHY of hosts, “I
have been jealous for Yerushalayim and for Tsiyon
with great jealousy.
15 “And I am very wroth with the nations who are at
ease, for when I was a little wroth, they furthered the
evil!”
16 ‘Therefore thus said HWHY, “I shall return to
Yerushalayim with compassion. My house shall be
built in it,” declares HWHY of hosts, “and a surveyor’s
line be stretched out over Yerushalayim.” ’
17 “Again proclaim, saying, ‘Thus said HWHY of hosts,
“Again My cities shall overflow with goodness. And
HWHY shall again comfort Tsiyon, and shall again
choose Yerushalayim.” ’ ”
18 And I lifted up my eyes and looked, and saw four
horns.
19 And I said to the messenger who was speaking to
me, “What are these?” And he said to me, “These are
the horns that have scattered Yahuḏah, Yisra’ĕl, and
Yerushalayim.”
20 And HWHY showed me four craftsmen.
21 And I said, “What are these coming to do?” And
he spoke saying, “These are the horns that scattered
Yahuḏah, so that no one lifted up his head. But these
come to trouble them, to throw down the horns of the
1514

ZECHARIAH

gentiles that lifted up their horn against the land of
Yahuḏah to scatter it.”

2 And I lifted up my eyes and looked, and saw a man
with a measuring line in his hand.
2 And I said, “Where are you going?” And he said to
me, “To measure Yerushalayim, to see what is its
width and what is its length.”
3 And see, the messenger who was speaking to me
was going out. And another messenger was coming
out to meet him,
4 and he said to him, “Run, speak to this young man,
saying, ‘Yerushalayim is to remain unwalled, because
of the many men and livestock in it.
5 ‘For I Myself am to her,’ declares HWHY, ‘a wall of
fire all around, and for esteem I am in her midst.’ ”
6 “Oh, Oh! And flee from the land of the north,”
declares HWHY,“for I have scattered you like the four
winds of the shamayim,” declares HWHY.
7 “Oh, Tsiyon! Escape, you who dwell with the
daughter of Baḇel.”
8 For thus said HWHY of hosts - for the sake of
esteem He sent me to the gentiles which plunder you:
“For he who touches you touches the apple of My
eye.
9 “For look, I am waving My hand against them, and
they shall become spoil for their servants. And you
shall know that HWHY of hosts has sent Me.
10 “Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Tsiyon! For look,
I am coming, and shall dwell in your midst,” declares
HWHY.
11 “And many gentiles shall be joined to HWHY in that
day, and they shall become My people. And I shall
dwell in your midst. And you shall know that HWHY of
hosts has sent Me to you.
12 “And HWHY shall inherit Yahuḏah, His portion in the
Qodesh Land. And He shall again choose
Yerushalayim.
1515

ZEḴARYAH

“Hush, all flesh, before HWHY, for He has roused
Himself out of His qodesh dwelling!”

13

3 And he showed me Yahoshua the kohĕn ha’gadol
standing before the messenger of HWHY, and ha’Satan
standing at his right hand to be an adversary to him.
2 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “HWHY rebuke you,
ha’Satan! HWHY who has chosen Yerushalayim
rebuke you! Is this not a brand plucked from the fire?”
3 And Yahoshua was dressed in filthy garments,
and was standing before the messenger.
4 And He answered and spoke to those who stood
before Him, saying, “Remove the filthy garments from
him.” And to him He said, “See, I have removed your
guilt from you, and shall put costly robes on you.”
5 And I said, “Let them put a clean turban on his
head.” Then they put a clean turban on his head, and
they put garments on him. And the messenger of
HWHY stood by.
6 And the messenger of HWHY witnessed to
Yahoshua, saying,
7 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘If you walk in My Ways,
and if you guard My duty, then you shall also rule My
house, and also guard My courts. And I shall give you
access among these standing here.
8 ‘Now listen, Yahoshua the kohĕn ha’gadol, you
and your companions who sit before you, for they are
men of symbol. For look, I am bringing forth My
Servant - the Branch.
9 ‘See the stone which I have put before Yahoshua:
on one stone are seven eyes. See, I am engraving its
inscription,’ declares HWHY of hosts, ‘and I shall
remove the guilt of that land in one day.
10 ‘In that day,’ declares HWHY of hosts, ‘you shall
invite one another, under the vine and under the fig
tree.’ ”

1516

ZECHARIAH

4 And the messenger who was speaking to me came
back and woke me up as a man is awakened from
sleep.
2 And he said to me, “What do you see?” So I said,
“I have looked, and see: a lampstand all of gold with
a bowl on top of it, and on the stand seven lamps with
seven spouts to the seven lamps.
3 “And two olive trees are by it, one at the right of
the bowl and the other at its left.”
4 Then I responded and spoke to the messenger
who was speaking to me, saying, “What are these,
my master?”
5 And the messenger who was speaking to me
answered and said to me, “Do you not know what
these are?” And I said, “No, my master.”
6 And he answered and said to me, “This is the word
of HWHY to Zerubbaḇel, ‘Not by might nor by power,
but by My Ruaḥ,’ said HWHY of hosts.
7 ‘Who
are you, great mountain, before
Zerubbaḇel? A plain! And he shall bring forth the
capstone with shouts of “Favour, favour to it!” ’ ”
8 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
9 “The hands of Zerubbaḇel have laid the foundation
of this House, and his hands shall complete it. And
you shall know that HWHY of hosts has sent Me to you.
10 “For who has despised the day of small
beginnings? They shall rejoice when they see the
plumb-line in the hand of Zerubbaḇel. These seven
are the eyes of HWHY, which diligently search
throughout all the earth.”
11 Then I responded and said to him, “What are these
two olive trees, one at the right of the lampstand and
the other at its left?”
12 And I responded a second time and said to him,
“What are these two olive branches which empty
golden oil from themselves by means of the two gold
pipes?”
1517

ZEḴARYAH

And he answered me and said, “Do you not know
what these are?” And I said, “No, my master.”
14 And he said, “These are the two anointed ones,
who stand beside the Aḏon of all the earth.”
13

5 And I lifted up my eyes again, and looked and saw
a flying scroll.
2 And he said to me, “What do you see?” And I
answered, “I see a flying scroll, twenty ammah long
and ten ammah wide.”
3 And he said to me, “This is the curse that goes
forth over the face of all the earth: ‘everyone who is
stealing shall be cut off,’ on the one side, according
to it, and, ‘everyone who has sworn falsely shall be
cut off,’ on the other side, according to it.”
4 “I shall send it out,” declares HWHY of hosts, “and
it shall come into the house of the thief and the house
of the one who shall swear falsely by My Name. And
it shall remain in the midst of his house and shall
consume it, both its timber and stones.”
5 And the messenger who was speaking with me
came out and said to me, “Lift up your eyes now, and
see what this is that is going forth.”
6 And I said, “What is it?” And he said, “It is an
ĕphah-measure that is going forth.” Again he said,
“This is their appearance throughout the earth:
7 “And see, a lead cover lifted up, and this: a woman
sitting inside the ĕphah-measure!”
8 And he said, “This is wickedness!” And he threw
her down into the ĕphah-measure, and threw the lead
weight over its mouth.
9 And I lifted up my eyes, and looked and saw two
women, coming with the wind in their wings. And they
had wings like the wings of a stork, and they lifted up
the ĕphah-measure between earth and the
shamayim.
10 Then I said to the messenger who was speaking
to me, “Where are they taking the ĕphah-measure?”
1518

ZECHARIAH

And he said to me, “To build a house for it in the
land of Shin’ar. And it shall be established and rest
there on its own base.”

11

6 And I lifted up my eyes again, and looked and saw
four chariots coming from between two mountains, and
the mountains were mountains of bronze.
2 With the first chariot were red horses, and with the
second chariot black horses,
3 and with the third chariot white horses, and with
the fourth chariot strong speckled horses.
4 So I responded and said to the messenger who
was speaking to me, “What are these, my master?”
5 And the messenger answered and said to me,
“These are four spirits of the shamayim, coming forth
from presenting themselves before the Aḏon of all the
earth.
6 “The one with the black horses is going out to the
land of the north, and the white ones have gone out
after them, and the speckled ones have gone out to
the land of the south.”
7 And the strong ones went out, eager to go, to walk
to and fro in the earth. And He said, “Go, walk to and
fro in the earth.” So they walked to and fro in the earth.
8 And He called to me, and spoke to me, saying,
“See, those who go toward the land of the north have
given rest to My Ruaḥ in the land of the north.”
9 And the word of HWHY came to me, saying,
10 “Receive the gift from the exiles, from Ḥeldai,
Toḇiyah, and Yeḏayah, who have come from Baḇel.
Then you shall go the same day and enter the house
of Yoshiyah son of Tsephanyah.
11 “And you shall take the silver and gold, make a
crown, and place it on the head of Yahoshua the son
of Yahotsaḏaq, the kohĕn ha’gadol,
12 and shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus said HWHY of
hosts, saying, “See, the Man whose name is the
Branch! And from His place He shall branch out, and
1519

ZEḴARYAH

He shall build the Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
13 “It is He who is going to build the Hĕyḵal of HWHY.
It is He who is going to bear the splendour. And He
shall sit and rule on His throne, and shall be a Kohĕn
on His throne, and the counsel of peace shall be
between Them both,’ ”
14 while the crown is for a remembrance in the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY to Ḥĕlem, and to Toḇiyah, and to
Yeḏayah, and to Ḥĕn son of Tsephanyah.
15 “And those who are far away shall come and build
the Hĕyḵal of HWHY. And you shall know that HWHY of
hosts has sent Me to you. And this shall be, if you
diligently obey the voice of HWHY your Elohim.”

7 And in the fourth year of Sovereign Dareyawesh it
came to be that the word of HWHY came to Zeḵaryah,
on the fourth of the ninth month, Kislĕw.
2 Now Bĕyth Ĕl had sent Sar-Etser, with ReḡemMeleḵ and his men, to pray before HWHY,
3 speaking to the kohenim who belonged to the
House of HWHY of hosts, and to the neḇi’im, saying,
“Should I weep in the fifth month and fast as I have
done for so many years?”
4 Then the word of HWHY of hosts came to me,
saying,
5 “Speak to all the people of the land, and to the
kohenim, saying, ‘When you fasted and lamented in
the fifth and seventh months all these seventy years,
did you truly fast for Me - for Me?
6 ‘And when you ate and when you drank, was it not
for those eating and for those drinking?
7 ‘Are these not the words which HWHY proclaimed
through the former neḇi’im when Yerushalayim and
the cities around it were inhabited and in safety, and
the South and the low country were inhabited?’ ”
8 And the word of HWHY came to Zeḵaryah, saying,
9 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘Judge true right-ruling,
show kindness and compassion everyone to his
1520

ZECHARIAH

brother.
10 “Do not oppress the widow or the fatherless, the
stranger or the poor. And do not plot evil in your
hearts against one another.’
11 “But they refused to listen, and they shrugged their
shoulders, and stopped their ears from hearing.
12 “And they made their hearts like flint against
hearing the Torah, and the words, which HWHY of
hosts had sent by His Ruaḥ through the former
neḇi’im. Therefore great wrath came from HWHY of
hosts.
13 “And it came to be: as He called and they did not
hear, so let them call, but I shall not hear,” said HWHY
of hosts.
14 “And I scattered them with a storm wind among all
the gentiles which they had not known. And the land
was laid waste behind them, no one passing through
or returning, for they made the pleasant land a
waste.”

8 And the word of HWHY of hosts came, saying,
“Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘I shall be jealous for
Tsiyon with great jealousy, with great wrath I shall be
jealous for her.’
3 “Thus said HWHY, ‘I shall return to Tsiyon, and I
shall dwell in the midst of Yerushalayim. And
Yerushalayim shall be called: City of the Truth, and
the Mountain of HWHY of hosts, the Qodesh Mountain.’
4 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘Again old men and old
women shall dwell in the streets of Yerushalayim,
each one with his staff in his hand because of great
age,
5 and the streets of the city shall be filled with boys
and girls playing in its streets.’
6 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘If it is marvellous in the
eyes of the remnant of this people in these days,
should it also be marvellous in My eyes?’ declares
HWHY of hosts.
2

1521

ZEḴARYAH

“Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘See, l am saving My
people from the land of the sunrise and from the land
of the sunset.
8 ‘And I shall bring them back, and they shall dwell
in the midst of Yerushalayim. And they shall be My
people, and I shall be their Elohim, in truth and in
righteousness.’
9 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘Let your hands be
strong, you who are listening in these days to these
words, from the mouth of the neḇi’im, of the day the
foundation was laid for the House of HWHY of hosts,
the Hĕyḵal that was to be rebuilt.
10 ‘For before these days there was not a wage for a
man, nor a hire for beast, and there was no peace for
him who went out or came in, because of his
enemies, and I turn all men one against another.
11 ‘But now I am not as in the former days to the
remnant of this people,’ declares HWHY of hosts.
12 ‘Because of the sowing of peace the vine gives its
fruit, the ground gives her increase, and the
shamayim give their dew. And I shall cause the
remnant of this people to inherit all these.
13 ‘And it shall be, as you were a curse among the
gentiles, O house of Yahuḏah and house of Yisra’ĕl,
so I shall save you, and you shall be a beraḵah. Do
not fear, let your hands be strong.’
14 “For thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘As I purposed to do
evil to you when your fathers provoked Me,’ declares
HWHY of hosts, ‘and I did not relent,
15 so again in these days I have purposed to do good
to Yerushalayim and to the house of Yahuḏah. Do not
fear!
16 ‘These are the words you should do: speak the
truth to one another, judge with truth and Right-Ruling
for peace in your gates.
17 ‘And do not plot evil in your heart against another,
and do not love a false oath. For all these I hate,’
declares HWHY.”
7

1522

ZECHARIAH

And the word of HWHY of hosts came to me, saying,
19 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘The fast of the fourth,
and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh,
and the fast of the tenth, are to be joy and gladness,
and pleasant Appointed Times for the house of
Yahuḏah - and they shall love the truth and the
peace.’
20 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘Peoples shall yet come,
inhabitants of many cities,
21 and the inhabitants of the one go to another,
saying, “Let us earnestly go and pray before HWHY,
and seek HWHY of hosts. I myself am going.”
22 ‘And many peoples and strong nations shall come
to seek HWHY of hosts in Yerushalayim, and to pray
before HWHY.’
23 “Thus said HWHY of hosts, ‘In those days ten men
from all languages of the nations take hold, they shall
take hold of the edge of the garment of a man, a
Yahuḏi, saying, “Let us go with you, for we have
heard that Elohim is with you.” ’ ”
18

9 The message of the word of HWHY against the land
of Ḥaḏraḵ, and Dammeseq its resting place - when the
eye of man and all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl are on HWHY 2 and Ḥamath also borders on it, Tsor and Tsiḏon,
though they are very wise.
3 For Tsor built herself a tower, heaped up silver like
the dust, and gold like the mud of the streets.
4 See, HWHY shall dispossess her, and He shall
destroy her power in the sea, and she shall be
consumed by fire.
5 Ashqelon sees it and fears, Azzah too, writhing in
anguish, and Eqron, for her expectation has dried up.
And the sovereign shall perish from Azzah, and
Ashqelon shall not be inhabited.
6 “And a half-breed shall settle in Ashdoḏ. So I shall
cut off the pride of the Pelishtites,
7 and shall take away his blood from his mouth, and
1523

ZEḴARYAH

the abominations from between his teeth. And he
shall remain, even he, to our Elohim, and he shall be
like a leader in Yahuḏah, and Eqron like a Yeḇusite.
8 “And I shall encamp around My house, against an
army, against him who passes by and him who
returns, so that no oppressor passes through them
again, for now I have seen with My eyes.
9 “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Tsiyon! Shout, O
daughter of Yerushalayim! See, your Sovereign is
coming to you, He is righteous and endowed with
deliverance, humble and riding on a donkey, a colt,
the foal of a donkey.
10 “And I shall cut off the chariot from Ephrayim and
the horse from Yerushalayim. And the battle bow
shall be cut off. And He shall speak peace to the
nations, and His rule is from sea to sea, and from the
River to the ends of the earth.
11 “Also you, because of the blood of your covenant,
I shall send your prisoners out of the pit.
12 “Return to the stronghold, you prisoners of the
expectation. Even today I declare that I return double
to you.
13 “For I shall bend Yahuḏah for Me, I shall fill the
bow with Ephrayim, and I shall stir up your sons, O
Tsiyon, against your sons, O Yawan, and I shall make
you like the sword of a mighty man.”
14 And HWHY shall appear for them, and His arrow go
forth like lightning, and the Aḏon HWHY sound the
ram’s horn. And He shall go with whirlwinds from the
south,
15 HWHY of hosts shall shield them. And they shall
devour and trample on sling stones. And they shall
drink, roar as if with wine, and they shall be filled like
basins, like the corners of the altar.
16 And HWHY their Elohim shall save them in that day,
as the flock of His people, for the stones of a diadem,
sparkling over His land.
17 For what goodness is His, and what comeliness is
1524

ZECHARIAH

His. Grain make the young men thrive, and new wine
the maidens!

10 Ask HWHY for rain in the time of the latter rain,
HWHY who makes storm clouds. And He gives them
showers of rain, the plants in the field to everyone.
2 For the household idols spoke emptiness, the
diviners saw falsehood, and relate dreams of deceit,
they comfort in vain. Therefore they have wandered
about like sheep. They are afflicted, for there is no
shepherd.
3 “My wrath burns against the shepherds, and I lay
a charge against the leaders. For HWHY of hosts shall
visit His flock, the house of Yahuḏah, and make them
like His splendid horse in battle.
4 “From him comes the corner-stone, from him the
tent peg, from him the battle bow, from him every
ruler, together.
5 “And they shall be like mighty men, who trample
down the mud of the streets in the battle. And they
shall fight because HWHY is with them, and the riders
on horses shall be put to shame.
6 “And I shall make the house of Yahuḏah mighty,
and save the house of Yosĕph. And I shall bring them
back, because I have compassion on them. And they
shall be as though I had not pushed them aside. For
I am HWHY their Elohim, and I answer them.
7 “And Ephrayim shall be as a mighty man, and their
heart shall rejoice as if with wine. And their children
shall see and rejoice, their heart exulting in HWHY.
8 “I shall whistle for them and gather them, for I shall
ransom them. And they shall increase as they once
increased.
9 “Though I sow them among peoples, they shall
remember Me in places far away. And they shall live,
together with their children, and they shall return.
10 “And I shall bring them back from the land of
Mitsrayim, and gather them from Ashshur, and bring
1525

ZEḴARYAH

them into the land of Gil’aḏ and Leḇanon, until no
more room is found for them.
11 “And He shall pass through the sea of distress,
and strike the waves of the sea, and all the depths of
the River shall dry up. And the pride of Ashshur shall
be brought down, and the sceptre of Mitsrayim be
taken away.
12 “And I shall make them mighty in HWHY, so that
they walk up and down in His Name,” declares HWHY.

11 Open your doors, O Leḇanon, and let fire devour
your cedars.
2 Howl, O cypress, for the cedar has fallen, because
the mighty are ravaged. Howl, O oaks of Bashan, for
the dense forest has come down.
3 Listen! The howling of shepherds, for their
splendour is ravaged. Listen! The roaring of lions, for
the pride of the Yardĕn is ravaged.
4 Thus said HWHY my Elohim, “Feed the flock for
slaughter,
5 whose owners slaughter them and feel no guilt,
and their sellers say, ‘Baruḵ be HWHY, for I have
become rich.’ And their own shepherds do not spare
them.
6 “For I shall no longer spare the inhabitants of the
land,” declares HWHY. “But see, I am delivering up
mankind, each one into his neighbour’s hand and into
the hand of his sovereign. And they shall crush the
earth, but I do not deliver from their hand.”
7 So I shepherded the flock meant for slaughter, the
truly poor of the flock. And I took for myself two staffs,
the one I called Pleasantness, and the other I called
Unity, and I shepherded the flock.
8 Then I sent off the three shepherds in one month,
for my being despised them, and their being also
loathed me.
9 So I said, “I am not shepherding you. Let the dying
die, and the straying stray, and let those who are left
1526

ZECHARIAH

eat each other’s flesh.”
10 And I took my staff, Pleasantness, and cut it in two,
to break the covenant which I had made with all the
peoples.
11 So it was broken on that day. And the poor of the
flock, who were watching me, knew that it was the
word of HWHY.
12 And I said to them, “If it is good in your eyes, give
me my wages. And if not, refrain.” So they weighed
out for my wages thirty pieces of silver.
13 And HWHY said to me, “Throw it to the potter,” the
splendid price at which I was valued by them. And I
took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them into the
House of HWHY for the potter.
14 Then I cut in two my other staff, Unity, to break the
brotherhood between Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl.
15 And HWHY said to me, “Take again the implements
of a foolish shepherd.
16 “For look, I am raising up a shepherd in the land
who does not visit those straying, nor seek the young,
nor heal those that are broken, nor feed those that still
stand. But he eats the flesh of the fat and tears off
their hooves.
17 “Woe to the worthless shepherd forsaking the
flock! Let a sword be upon his arm and upon his right
eye! His arm shall wither and his right eye shall be
dimmed.”

12 The message of the word of HWHY against
Yisra’ĕl. HWHY, stretching out the shamayim, and
laying the foundation of the earth, and forming the
spirit of man within him, declares,
2 “See, I am making Yerushalayim a cup of reeling
to all the people all around, and also against Yahuḏah
it is in the siege against Yerushalayim.
3 “And in that day it shall be that I make
Yerushalayim a very heavy stone for all peoples - all
lifting it are severely injured. And all the nations of the
1527

ZEḴARYAH

earth shall be gathered against it.
4 “In that day,” declares HWHY, “I smite every horse
with bewilderment and its rider with madness. And on
the house of Yahuḏah I open My eyes, but every
horse of the peoples I smite with blindness.
5 “And the leaders of Yahuḏah shall say in their
heart, ‘The inhabitants of Yerushalayim are a strength
to me, through HWHY of hosts, their Elohim.’
6 “In that day I make the leaders of Yahuḏah like a
fire pot among trees, and like a torch of fire in the
sheaves. And they shall consume all the peoples all
around, on the right and on the left. And Yerushalayim
shall dwell again in her own place, in Yerushalayim.
7 “And HWHY shall save the tents of Yahuḏah first,
so that the comeliness of the house of Dawiḏ and the
comeliness of the inhabitants of Yerushalayim would
not become greater than that of Yahuḏah.
8 “In that day HWHY shall shield the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim. And the feeble among them in that day
shall be like Dawiḏ, and the house of Dawiḏ like
Elohim, like the Messenger of HWHY before them!
9 “And it shall be in that day that I seek to destroy all
the gentiles that come against Yerushalayim.
10 “And I shall pour on the house of Dawiḏ and on the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim a spirit of favour and
prayers. And they shall look upon Me whom they
pierced, and they shall mourn for Him as one mourns
for his only son. And they shall be in bitterness over
Him as a bitterness over the first-born.
11 “In that day the mourning in Yerushalayim is going
to be great, like the mourning at Haḏaḏ Rimmon in
the valley of Meḡiddon.
12 “And the land shall mourn, every clan by itself: the
clan of the house of Dawiḏ by itself, and their women
by themselves; the clan of the house of Nathan by
itself, and their women by themselves;
13 the clan of the house of Lĕwi by itself, and their
women by themselves; the clan of Shim’i by itself, and
1528

ZECHARIAH

their women by themselves;
14 all the rest of the clans, every clan by itself, and
their women by themselves.

13 “In that day a fountain shall be opened for the
house of Dawiḏ and for the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim, for sin and for uncleanness.
2 “And it shall be in that day,” declares HWHY of
hosts, “that I cut off the names of the idols from the
earth, and they shall be remembered no more, and I
shall also remove the prophets and the unclean spirit
from the earth.
3 “And it shall be, when one naḇa again, then his
father and mother who brought him forth shall say to
him, ‘You shall not live, because you have spoken
falsehood in the Name of HWHY.’ And his father and
mother who brought him forth shall pierce him
through when he naḇa.
4 “And it shall be in that day that the neḇi’im shall be
ashamed, everyone of his vision when he naḇa, and
not put a hairy robe on in order to deceive,
5 but shall say, ‘I am no naḇi, I am a farmer, for a
man sold me as a slave in my youth.
6 “And one shall say to him, ‘What are these wounds
in your hands?’ And he shall say, ‘Because I was
wounded at home by those who love me.’
7 “O sword, awake against My Shepherd, against
the Man who is My Companion,” declares HWHY of
hosts. “Smite the Shepherd, and let the sheep be
scattered. But I shall turn My hand upon the little
ones.
8 And it shall be throughout all the land,” declares
HWHY, “that two thirds therein are cut off and die, and
one third is left therein.
9 “And I shall bring the third into fire, and refine them
as silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried. They
shall call on My Name, and I shall answer them. I shall
say, ‘This is My people,’ while they say, ‘HWHY is my
1529

ZEḴARYAH

Elohim.’ ”

14 See, a day shall come for HWHY, and your spoil
shall be divided in your midst.
2 And I shall gather all the gentiles to battle against
Yerushalayim. And the city shall be taken, the houses
plundered, and the women ravished. Half of the city
shall go into exile, but the remnant of the people shall
not be cut off from the city.
3 And HWHY shall go forth, and He shall fight against
those gentiles, as He fights in the day of battle.
4 And in that day His feet shall stand upon the Mount
of Olives, which faces Yerushalayim on the east. And
the Mount of Olives shall be split in two, from east to
west, a very great valley, and half of the mountain
shall move toward the north and half of it toward the
south.
5 And you shall flee to the valley of My mountain for the valley of the mountains reaches to Atsal. And
you shall flee as you fled from the earthquake in the
days of Uzziyah sovereign of Yahuḏah. And HWHY my
Elohim shall come - all the qodeshim with You.
6 And in that day it shall be: there is no light, it is
dark.
7 And it shall be one day which is known to HWHY,
neither day nor night, but at evening time there shall
be light.
8 And in that day it shall be that living waters flow
from Yerushalayim, half of them toward the eastern
sea and half of them toward the western sea, in
summer as well as in winter.
9 And HWHY shall be Sovereign over all the earth. In
that day there shall be one HWHY, and His Name one.
10 All the land shall be changed into a desert plain
from Geḇa to Rimmon south of Yerushalayim, and
she shall be raised up and inhabited in her place from
Binyamin’s Gate to the place of the First Gate and the
Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Ḥanane’ĕl to the
1530

ZECHARIAH

winepresses of the sovereign.
11 And they shall dwell in her, and there shall be no
more utter destruction, but Yerushalayim shall be
safely inhabited.
12 And this is the plague with which HWHY plagues all
the people who fought against Yerushalayim: their
flesh shall decay while they stand on their feet, and
their eyes decay in their sockets, and their tongues
decay in their mouths.
13 And it shall be in that day that a great confusion
from HWHY is among them, and everyone of them
shall seize the hand of his neighbour, and his hand
rise up against his neighbour’s hand.
14 And Yahuḏah shall fight at Yerushalayim as well.
And the wealth of all the gentiles round about shall be
gathered together: gold, and silver, and garments in
great quantities.
15 So also is the plague on the horse and the mule,
on the camel and the donkey, and on all the cattle that
are in those camps - as this plague.
16 And it shall be that all who are left from all the
gentiles which came up against Yerushalayim, shall
go up from year to year to bow themselves to the
Sovereign, HWHY of hosts, and to celebrate the
Festival of Sukkoth.
17 And it shall be, that if anyone of the clans of the
earth does not come up to Yerushalayim to bow
himself to the Sovereign, HWHY of hosts, on them
there is to be no rain.
18 And if the clan of Mitsrayim does not come up and
enter in, then there is none. On them is the plague
with which HWHY plagues the gentiles who do not
come up to celebrate the Festival of Sukkoth.
19 This is the punishment of Mitsrayim and the
punishment of all the gentiles that do not come up to
observe the Festival of Sukkoth.
20 In that day “QODESH TO HWHY” shall be engraved
on the bells of the horses. And the pots in the House
1531

ZEḴARYAH

of HWHY shall be like the bowls before the altar.
21 And every pot in Yerushalayim and Yahuḏah shall
be qodesh to HWHY of hosts. And all those who
slaughter shall come and take them and cook in them.
And there shall no longer be a merchant in the House
of HWHY of hosts, in that day.

1532

MALACHI

MAL’AḴI
‫ מלאכי‬YKALm

1The message of the word of HWHY to Yisra’ĕl by
Mal’aḵi.
2 “I have loved you,” said HWHY. “But you asked, ‘In
what way have You loved us?’ “Was not Ĕsaw
Ya’aqoḇ’s brother?” declares HWHY. “And I love
Ya’aqoḇ,
3 but I have hated Ĕsaw, and have laid waste his
mountains and his inheritance for the dragons of the
wilderness.”
4 If Eḏom says, “We have been beaten down, let us
return and build the ruins,” HWHY of hosts said thus:
“Let them build, but I tear down. And they shall be
called ‘Border of wickedness’, and the people against
whom HWHY is enraged forever.
5 And your eyes shall see, and you shall say, ‘Great
is HWHY beyond the border of Yisra’ĕl!’
6 “A son esteems his father, and a servant his
master. And if I am the Father, where is My esteem?
And if I am an Aḏon, where is My reverence? said
HWHY of hosts to you kohenim who despise My Name.
But you asked, ‘In what way have we despised Your
Name?’
7 “You are presenting defiled food on My altar. But
you asked, ‘In what way have we defiled You?’
Because you say, ‘The table of HWHY is despicable.’
8 “And when you present the blind as a
slaughtering, is it not evil? And when you present the
lame and sick, is it not evil? Bring it then to your
governor! Would he be pleased with you? Would he
accept you favorably?” said HWHY of hosts.
9 “And now, entreat the face of Ĕl to show favour to
us. This has been done by your hands. Would He
show favour to you?” said of HWHY of hosts.
1533

MAL’AḴ

“Who among you who would shut the doors, so
that you would not kindle fire on My altar for naught?
I have no pleasure in you,” said HWHY of hosts, “Nor
do I accept an offering from your hands.
11 “For from the rising of the sun, even to its going
down, My Name is great among nations. And in every
place incense is presented to My Name, and a clean
offering. For My Name is great among nations,” said
HWHY of hosts.
12 “But you are profaning Me, in that you say, ‘The
table of HWHY is defiled, and its fruit, its food, is
despicable.’
13 “And you said, ‘Oh, what weariness!’ and you
sneered at it,” said HWHY of hosts. “And you brought
in plunder, and the lame, and the sick - thus you have
brought in the offering! Should I accept this from your
hand?” said HWHY.
14 “But cursed be the deceiver who has a male in his
flock, and makes a vow, but is slaughtering to HWHY
what is blemished. For I am a great Sovereign,” said
HWHY of hosts,” and My Name is revered among
nations.
10

2 “And now, O kohenim, this command is for you.
“If you do not hear, and if you do not take it to
heart, to give esteem to My Name,” said HWHY of
hosts, “I shall send a curse upon you, and I shall curse
your bireḵoth. And indeed, I have cursed them,
because you do not take it to heart.
3 “See, I shall rebuke your seed, and scatter dung
before your faces, the dung of your festivals. And you
shall be taken away with it.
4 “And you shall know that I have sent this command
to you, as being My Covenant with Lĕwi,” said HWHY
of hosts.
5 “My Covenant with him was ḥai and peace, and I
gave them to him, to revere. And he revered Me, and
stood in awe of My Name.
2

1534

MALACHI

“The Torah of truth was in his mouth, and
unrighteousness was not found on his lips. He walked
with Me in peace and straightness, and turned many
away from wickedness.
7 “For the lips of a kohĕn should guard knowledge,
and they seek the Torah from his mouth, for he is the
messenger of HWHY of hosts.
8 “But you, you have turned from the Way, you have
caused many to stumble in the Torah. You have
corrupted the covenant of Lĕwi,” said HWHY of hosts.
9 “And I also, I shall make you despised and low
before all the people, because you are not guarding
My Ways, and are showing partiality in the Torah.”
10 Have we not all one Father? Did not one Ĕl create
us? Why do we act treacherously against one
another, to profane the Covenant of the fathers?
11 Yahuḏah has acted treacherously, and an
abomination has been done in Yisra’ĕl and in
Yerushalayim, for Yahuḏah has profaned what is
qodesh to HWHY - which He had loved - and has
married the daughter of a foreign mighty one.
12 Let HWHY cut off from the tents of Ya’aqoḇ the man
who does this - stirring up or answering and bringing
an offering to HWHY of hosts!
13 And this you have done a second time: you cover
the altar of HWHY with tears, with weeping and crying,
because He no longer regards the offering, nor
receives it with pleasure from your hands.
14 And you said, “Why?” Because HWHY has been
witness between you and the wife of your youth,
against whom you have acted treacherously, though
she is your companion and the wife of your covenant.
15 And did He not make one? And He had the
remnant of the Ruaḥ? And what is the one? He seeks
a seed of Elohim. So you shall guard your spirit, and
let none act treacherously against the wife of his
youth.
16 “For I hate divorce,” said HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
6

1535

MAL’AḴ

“and the one who covers his garment with cruelty,”
said HWHY of hosts. “So you shall guard your spirit,
and do not act treacherously.”
17 You have wearied HWHY with your words, and you
have said, “In what way have we wearied Him?” In
that you say, “Everyone who does evil is good in the
eyes of HWHY, and He is delighting in them,” or,
“Where is the Elohim of Right-Ruling?”

3 “See, I am sending My messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before Me. Then suddenly the Aḏon
you are seeking comes to His Hĕyḵal, even the
Messenger of the Covenant, in whom you delight. See,
He is coming,” said HWHY o f hosts.
2 “And who is able to bear the day of His coming,
and who is able to stand when He appears? For He
is like the fire of a refiner, and like the soap of a
launderer.
3 “And He shall sit as a refiner and a cleanser of
silver. And He shall cleanse the sons of Lĕwi, and
refine them as gold and silver, and they shall belong
to HWHY, bringing near an offering in righteousness.
4 “Then shall the offering of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim be pleasant to HWHY, as in the days of
old, as in former years.
5 “And I shall draw near to you for right-ruling. And I
shall be a swift witness against the practisers of
witchcraft, and against adulterers, and against them
that swear to falsehood, and against those who
oppress the wage earner in his wages and widows
and the fatherless, and those who turn away a
sojourner and do not revere Me,” said HWHY of hosts.
6 “For I am HWHY, I shall not change, and you, O
sons of Ya’aqoḇ, shall not come to an end.
7 “From the days of your fathers you have turned
aside from My Laws and did not guard them. Turn
back to Me, and I shall turn back to you,” said HWHY
1536

MALACHI

of hosts. “But you said, ‘In what shall we turn back?’
8 “Would a man rob Elohim? Yet you are robbing
Me! But you said, ‘In what have we robbed You?’ In
the tithe and the offering!
9 “You have cursed Me with a curse, for you are
robbing Me, this nation, all of it!
10 “Bring all the tithes into the store-house, and let
there be food in My house. And please prove Me in
this,” said HWHY of hosts, “whether I do not open for
you the windows of the shamayim, and shall pour out
for you boundless beraḵah!
11 “And I shall rebuke the devourer for you, so that it
does not destroy the fruit of your ground, nor does the
vine fail to bear fruit for you in the field,” said HWHY of
hosts.
12 “And all nations shall call you baruḵ, for you shall
be a land of delight,” said HWHY of hosts.
13 “Your words have been harsh against Me,” said
HWHY, “but you have said, ‘What have we spoken
against You?’
14 “You have said, ‘It is worthless to serve Elohim.
And what did we gain when we guarded His Charge,
and when we walked as mourners before HWHY of
hosts?
15 And now we are calling the proud baruḵ - not only
are the doers of wickedness built up, but they also try
Elohim and escape.’ ”
16 Then shall those who revere HWHY speak to one
another, and HWHY listen and hear, and a book of
remembrance be written before Him, of those who
revere HWHY, and those who think upon His Name.
17 “And they shall be Mine,” said HWHY of hosts, “on
the day that I prepare a treasured possession. And I
shall spare them as a man spares his own son who
serves him.
18 “Then you shall again see between the righteous
and the wicked, between one who serves Elohim and
one who does not serve Him.
1537

MAL’AḴ

4 “For look, the day shall come, burning like a
furnace, and all the proud, and every wicked one shall
be stubble. And the day that shall come shall burn
them up,” said HWHY of hosts, “which leaves to them
neither root nor branch.
2 “But to you who revere My Name the Brilliance of
Righteousness shall arise with healing in His wings.
And you shall go out and leap for joy like calves from
the stall.
3 “And you shall trample the wicked, for they shall
be ashes under the soles of your feet on the day that
I do this,” said HWHY of hosts.
4 “Remember the Torah of Mosheh, My servant,
which I commanded him in Ḥorĕḇ for all Yisra’ĕl Laws and Right-Rulings.
5 “See, I am sending you Ĕliyahu the naḇi before the
coming of the great and awesome day of HWHY.
6 “And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers,
lest I come and smite the earth with utter destruction.”

1538

PSALMS

TEHILLIM
‫ תהלים‬mYLht

1 Baruḵ is the man who shall not walk in the counsel
of the wicked,
And shall not stand in the path of sinners,
And shall not sit in the seat of scoffers,
2 But his delight is in the Torah of HWHY,
And he meditates in His Torah day and night.
3 For he shall be as a tree
Planted by the rivers of water,
That yields its fruit in its season,
And whose leaf does not wither,
And whatever he does prospers.
4 The wicked are not so,
But are like the chaff which the wind blows away.
5 Therefore the wicked shall not rise in the
judgment,
Nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
6 For hWhY knows the way of the righteous,
But the way of the wicked comes to naught.

2 Why do the gentiles rage,
And the peoples meditate emptiness?
2 The sovereigns of the earth take their stand,
And the rulers take counsel together,
Against HWHY and against His Mashiaḥ,
3 “Let us tear apart Their bonds,
And throw away Their ropes from us.”
4 He who is sitting in the shamayim laughs,
HWHY mocks at them.
5 Then He speaks to them in His wrath,
And troubles them in His rage,
1539

TEHILLIM

“But I, I have put My Sovereign
On Tsiyon, My qodesh mountain.”
7 “I inscribe for a law:
HWHY has said to Me,
‘You are My Bĕn,
Today I have brought You forth.
8 ‘Ask of Me,
And I make the gentiles Your inheritance,
And the ends of the earth Your possession.
9 ‘Break them with a rod of iron,
Dash them to pieces like a potter’s vessel.’ ”
10 And now, be wise, O sovereigns;
Be instructed, you rulers of the earth.
11 Serve HWHY with reverence,
And rejoice with trembling.
12 Kiss the Bĕn, lest He be enraged,
And you perish in the way,
For soon His wrath is to be kindled.
Baruḵ are all those taking refuge in Him.
6

3 A psalm of Dawiḏ, when he fled from Aḇshalom
his son.
1 O HWHY, how my adversaries have increased!
Many rising up against me.
2 Many are saying of me,
“There is no deliverance for him in Elohim.” Selah.
3 But You, O HWHY, are a shield for me,
My esteem, and the One lifting up my head.
4 I cried to HWHY with my voice,
And He heard me from His qodesh mountain. Selah.
5 I, I lay down and slept;
I awoke, for HWHY sustained me.
6 I am not afraid of ten thousands of people
Who have turned themselves against me all around.
1540

PSALMS

Arise, O HWHY;
Save me, O my Elohim!
Because You have smitten all my enemies on the
cheek;
You have broken the teeth of the wicked.
8 Deliverance belongs to HWHY.
Your beraḵah is on Your people. Selah.
7

4 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. A
psalm of Dawiḏ.
1 Answer me when I call, O Elohim of my
righteousness!
You gave relief to me when I was in distress;
Show favour to me, and hear my prayer.
2 Till when, O you sons of men,
Would you turn my esteem to shame,
Would you love emptiness, seek falsehood? Selah.
3 But know that HWHY has separated a kind one for
Himself;
HWHY hears when I call to Him.
4 Tremble, and do not sin.
Speak within your heart on your bed, and be still.
Selah.
5 Offer slaughterings of righteousness,
And trust in HWHY.
6 Many are saying, “Who would show us good?”
HWHY, lift up the light of Your face upon us.
7 You have put more gladness in my heart,
Than in the season that their grain and wine
increased.
8 I lie down in peace altogether, and sleep;
For You alone, O HWHY, make me dwell in safety.

5 To the chief singer, on flute. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
1541

TEHILLIM

Give ear to my words, O HWHY,
Consider my meditation.
2 Attend to the voice of my cry,
My Sovereign and my Elohim,
For unto You I pray.
3 O HWHY, in the morning You hear my voice;
I present myself to You in the morning, and I look
up.
4 For You are not an Ĕl taking delight in
wickedness,
Nor does evil dwell with You.
5 The boasters do not stand before Your eyes;
You hate all workers of wickedness.
6 You destroy those speaking falsehood;
HWHY loathes a man of blood and deceit.
7 But I, I enter Your house
In the greatness of Your kindness;
I bow myself toward Your qodesh Hĕyḵal in Your
reverence.
8 O HWHY, lead me in Your righteousness because
of those watching me;
Make Your way straight before my face.
9 For there is no stability in their mouth;
Their inward part is destruction;
Their throat is an open grave;
They flatter with their tongue.
10 Declare them guilty, O Elohim!
Let them fall by their own counsels;
Thrust them away for their many transgressions,
Because they have rebelled against You.
11 But let all who take refuge in You rejoice;
Let them ever shout for joy, because You shelter
them;
And let those who love Your Name exult in You.
1

1542

PSALMS

For You baraḵ the righteous, O HWHY;
You surround him with favour as with a shield.

12

6 To the chief singer, with stringed instruments on
lyre. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
1 O HWHY, do not rebuke me in Your displeasure,
Nor discipline me in Your wrath.
2 Show favour to me, O HWHY, for I am fading
away;
O HWHY, heal me, for my bones have been troubled.
3 And my being has been greatly troubled;
And You, O HWHY - till when?
4 Return, O HWHY, rescue my life!
Oh, save me for Your kindness’ sake!
5 For in death there is no remembrance of You;
Who gives You thanks in the grave?
6 I have grown weary with my groaning;
Every night I flood my bed;
I drench my couch with my tears.
7 My eye has grown dim because of grief;
It grows old because of all my adversaries.
8 Depart from me, all you workers of wickedness;
For HWHY has heard the voice of my weeping.
9 HWHY has heard my pleading;
HWHY receives my prayer.
10 Let all my enemies be ashamed and greatly
troubled;
They turn back suddenly, ashamed.

7 A melodious poem of Dawiḏ, which he sang to
HWHY, concerning the words of Kush the Binyamite.
1 O HWHY, my Elohim, in You I have taken refuge;
Save me from all my pursuers; and deliver me,
2 Lest they tear at my throat like a lion,
Rending in pieces, with no one to deliver.
1543

TEHILLIM

O HWHY my Elohim, if I have done this:
If there is unrighteousness in my hands,
4 If I have done evil to him who was at peace with
me,
Or have plundered my enemy without cause,
5 Let the enemy pursue me and overtake my
being,
And trample my life to the ground,
And lay my esteem in the dust. Selah.
6 Arise, O HWHY, in Your displeasure;
Lift Yourself up against the rage of my adversaries,
And awake for me!
You shall command judgment!
7 And let the congregation of the peoples gather
about You;
And over them return on high.
8 HWHY judges the peoples;
Judge me, O HWHY, according to my righteousness,
And according to my integrity within me.
9 Please let the evil of the wicked be ended,
And establish the righteous;
For the righteous Elohim is a trier of hearts and
kidneys.
10 My shield is upon Elohim,
Who saves the upright in heart.
11 Elohim is a righteous judge.
And Ĕl is enraged every day,
12 If one does not repent!
He sharpens His sword,
He bends His bow and makes it ready,
13 And He has prepared for Himself instruments of
death,
He makes His arrows hot for pursuers.
3

1544

PSALMS

See, he who is bound with wickedness,
And has conceived trouble and brought forth
falsehood,
15 He has made a pit and dug it out,
And falls into the ditch he made!
16 His trouble turns back upon his own head,
And his wickedness comes down on the top of his
head.
17 I give thanks to HWHY according to His
righteousness,
And praise the Name of HWHY Most High.
14

8 To the chief singer, on harp. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
O HWHY, our Aḏon, how excellent is Your Name
in all the earth,
You who made Your splendour above the
shamayim!
2 Out of the mouth of children and infants
You have founded strength,
Because of Your adversaries,
To put an end to enemy and avenger.
3 For I see Your shamayim, the work of Your
fingers,
The moon and the stars, which You have
established.
4 What is man that You remember him?
And the son of man that You visit him?
5 Yet You have made him a little less than Elohim,
And have crowned him with esteem and splendour.
6 You made him rule over the works of Your hands;
You have put all under his feet,
7 All sheep and oxen,
And also the beasts of the field,
1

1545

TEHILLIM

The birds of the shamayim, and the fish of the
sea,
Passing through the paths of the seas.
9 O HWHY, our Aḏon,
How excellent is Your Name in all the earth!
8

9 To the chief singer, on ‘Death of the son.’ A psalm
of Dawiḏ.
1 I praise You, O HWHY, with all my heart;
I declare all Your wonders.
2 I rejoice and exult in You;
I sing praise to Your Name, O Most High.
3 When my enemies turn back,
They stumble and perish before You.
4 For You executed my right and my cause,
You sat on the throne judging in righteousness.
5 You have rebuked the gentiles,
You have destroyed the wicked,
You have wiped out their name forever and ever.
6 The enemy is no more – ruins everlasting!
And You have uprooted the cities;
Even their remembrance has perished.
7 But HWHY abides forever,
He is preparing His throne for judgment.
8 And He judges the world in righteousness,
He judges the peoples in straightness.
9 And HWHY is a refuge for the crushed one,
A refuge in times of distress.
10 And those who know Your Name trust in You,
For You have not forsaken those who seek You, O
HWHY.
11 Sing praises to HWHY, who dwells in Tsiyon!
Declare His deeds among the peoples.
12 For He remembers the seekers of bloodshed,
He does not forget the cry of the afflicted.
1546

PSALMS

Show favour to me, O HWHY!
See my affliction by those who hate me,
You who lift me up from the gates of death,
14 So that I declare all Your praise
In the gates of the daughter of Tsiyon.
I rejoice in Your deliverance.
15 The gentiles have sunk down in the pit which
they made;
In the net which they hid, their own foot is caught.
16 HWHY has made Himself known,
He has done right-ruling;
The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands.
Meditation. Selah.
17 The wicked return to the grave,
All the gentiles that forget Elohim.
18 For the needy is not always forgotten;
Neither the expectancy of the poor lost forever.
19 Arise, O HWHY,
Do not let man prevail;
Let the gentiles be judged before Your face.
20 Put them in fear, O HWHY,
Let the gentiles know they are mortal. Selah.
13

10 Why do You stand afar off, O HWHY,
Hiding in times of distress?
2 In arrogance the wicked hotly pursues the poor;
They are caught by the schemes which they
devised.
3 For the wicked boasted of his cravings;
And the greedy one cursed and despised HWHY.
4 In the pride of his face
The wicked does not seek,
In all his thoughts there is no Elohim!

1547

TEHILLIM

His ways are always prosperous!
Your Right-Rulings are on high, out of is sight!
He snorts at all his adversaries!
6 He has said in his heart, “I shall not be moved;
From generation to generation, never be in evil!”
7 His mouth is filled with cursing and deceit and
oppression;
Under his tongue is trouble and wickedness.
8 He sits in the hiding places of the villages;
In the secret places he murders the innocent;
His eyes are on the lookout for the helpless.
9 He lies in wait in a secret place, as a lion in his
den;
He lies in wait to catch the poor;
He catches the poor, drawing him into his net.
10 And he crouches, he lies low,
And the helpless fall under his strength.
11 He has said in his heart, “Ĕl has forgotten,
He has hidden His face,
He shall never see.”
12 Arise, O HWHY!
O Ĕl, lift up Your hand!
Do not forget the lowly ones.
13 Why do the wicked scorn Elohim?
He has said in his heart, “It is not required.”
14 You have seen it, for You observe trouble and
grief,
To repay with Your hand.
The poor commits himself to You;
You are the helper of the fatherless.
15 Break the arm of the wicked and the evil one;
Search out his wickedness that would not be found
out.
16 HWHY is Sovereign forever and ever;
The gentiles shall perish from His land.
5

1548

PSALMS

HWHY, You have heard the desire of the lowly
ones;
You prepare their heart; You incline Your ear,
18 To defend the fatherless and the down-rodden;
So that man who is of the earth no longer
oppresses!
17

11 To the chief singer. Of Dawiḏ.
In HWHY I have taken refuge;
Why do you say to me,
“Flee to your mountain like a bird”?
2 For look! The wicked bend a bow,
They ready their arrow on the string,
To shoot in darkness at the upright in heart.
3 When the foundations are destroyed,
What shall the righteous do?
4 HWHY is in His qodesh Hĕyḵal,
The throne of HWHY is in the shamayim.
His eyes see, His eyelids examine the sons of men.
5 HWHY tries the righteous,
But His being shall hate the wicked and the one who
loves violence.
6 Upon the wicked He rains snares, fire and
sulphur
And a scorching wind
Are the portion of their cup.
7 For HWHY is righteous,
He has loved righteousness;
The upright shall see His face.
1

12 To the chief singer, on lyre. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
Save, HWHY, for the kind one is no more!
For the trustworthy have ceased from among the
sons of men.

1

1549

TEHILLIM

They speak falsehood with each other;
Flattering lips, and a double heart they speak.
3 HWHY cuts off all flattering lips,
A tongue that speaks swelling words,
4 Who said, “With our tongue we do mightily;
Our lips are our own;
Who is master over us?”
5 “Because of the oppression of the poor, because
of the sighing of the needy,
I now arise,” says HWHY,
“I place in safety - he pants for it.”
6 The Words of HWHY are clean words,
Silver tried in a furnace of earth,
Refined seven times.
7 You guard them, O HWHY,
You preserve them, from this generation forever.
8 The wicked walk around on every side,
When worthlessness is exalted among the sons of
men.
2

13 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
How long would You forget me, O HWHY?
Forever?
How long would You hide Your face from me?
2 How long would I take counsel in my being,
Grief in my heart day by day?
How long would my enemy be exalted over me?
3 Look! Answer me, O HWHY my Elohim;
Enlighten my eyes, Lest I sleep in death;
4 Lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed against
him,”
My adversaries rejoice when I am moved.
5 But I have trusted in Your kindness;
My heart rejoices in Your deliverance.
1

1550

PSALMS

I sing to HWHY,
Because He has been good to me.

6

14 To the chief singer. Of Dawiḏ.
The fool has said in his heart,
“There is no HWHY.”
They have done corruptly, they have done an
abominable deed,
There is no one who does good.
2 HWHY looked down from the shamayim on the
sons of mankind,
To see if there is a wise one, seeking HWHY.
3 They have all turned aside, they have together
become filthy;
No one is doing good,
Not even one.
4 Have all the workers of wickedness no
knowledge,
Who eat up my people as they eat bread,
And do not call on HWHY?
5 There they are in great fear,
For HWHY is with the generation of the righteous.
6 You would put to shame the counsel of the poor,
But HWHY is his refuge.
7 O that the deliverance of Yisra’ĕl would be given
out of Tsiyon!
When HWHY turns back the captivity of His people,
Let Ya’aqoḇ rejoice, let Yisra’ĕl be glad.
1

15 A psalm of Dawiḏ.
HWHY, who sojourns in Your Tent?
Who dwells in Your qodesh mountain?
2 He who walks blamelessly,
And does righteousness,
And speaks the truth in his heart.
1

1551

TEHILLIM

He has not slandered with his tongue,
He has not done evil to his neighbour,
Nor lifted up a reproach against his friend;
4 In whose eyes a reprobate one is despised,
But he esteems those who revere HWHY;
He who swears to his own hurt and does not
change;
5 He has not put out his silver at interest,
And has not taken a bribe against the innocent.
He who does these is never moved.
3

16 A poem of Dawiḏ.
Guard me, O Ĕl, for I have taken refuge in You.
2 I have said to HWHY,
“You are HWHY,
I have no good beside You.”
3 As for the qodeshim who are on the earth,
They are the excellent ones, in whom is all my
delight.
4 The sorrows of those who run after another one
are increased;
I would not pour out their drink offerings of blood,
Nor take up their names on my lips.
5 HWHY is the portion of my inheritance and my
cup;
You uphold my lot.
6 Lines have fallen to me in pleasant places;
Indeed, a good inheritance is mine.
7 I baraḵ HWHY who has given me counsel;
My kidneys also instruct me in the nights.
8 I have put HWHY always before me;
Because He is at my right hand I am not shaken.
9 Therefore my heart was glad, and my esteem
rejoices;
My flesh also dwells in safety.
1

1552

PSALMS

For You do not leave my being in the grave,
Neither let Your Kind One see corruption.
11 You show me the path of ḥai;
In Your presence is joy to satisfaction;
At Your right hand are pleasures forever.
10

17 A prayer of Dawiḏ.
Hear righteousness, O HWHY,
Listen to my cry;
Give ear to my prayer,
From lips without deceit.
2 Let my right-ruling go out from Your presence;
Let Your eyes see what is straight.
3 You have examined my heart;
You have visited me in the night;
You have tried me - You find I have not schemed;
My mouth would not transgress.
4 As for the deeds of men By the word of Your lips,
I have kept myself from the paths of the destroyer.
5 My steps have held fast to Your paths,
My feet have not slipped.
6 I have called upon You,
For You answer me, O Ĕl;
Incline Your ear to me,
Hear my speech.
7 Let Your kindness be distinguished,
You who save by Your right hand
Those who take refuge from those who rise up.
8 Guard me as the apple of Your eye.
Hide me under the shadow of Your wings,
9 From the face of the wicked who ravage me,
From my deadly enemies who surround me.
10 They are enclosed in their own fat,
They speak proudly with their mouths,
1

1553

TEHILLIM

They have now surrounded us in our steps,
They turn their eyes to stretch over the land,
12 Like a lion who is eager to tear his prey,
And as a young lion crouching in cover.
13 Arise, O HWHY,
Confront him,
Cause him to bend;
Deliver my being from the wicked by Your sword,
14 From men by Your hand, O HWHY,
From men of the world whose portion is in life,
And You fill their bodies with Your treasure,
They are satisfied with children,
And shall leave their riches to their children.
15 As for me, let Me see Your face in righteousness;
I am satisfied - Your appearance when I awake.
11

18 To the chief singer. Of Dawiḏ, the servant of
HWHY, who spoke to HWHY the words of this song in
the day HWHY delivered him from the hand of all his
enemies, and from the hand of Sha’ul. He said:
1 I love You, O HWHY, my strength.
2 HWHY is my rock and my stronghold and my
deliverer;
My Ĕl is my rock, I take refuge in Him;
My shield and the horn of my deliverance, my high
tower.
3 I call upon HWHY, the One to be praised,
And I am saved from my enemies.
4 The cords of death surrounded me,
And the floods of Beliya’al made me afraid.
5 The cords of the grave were all around me;
The snares of death were before me.
6 In my distress I called upon HWHY,
And to my Elohim I cried;
1554

PSALMS

He heard my voice from His Hĕyḵal,
And my cry went before Him, into His ears.
7 And the earth shook and trembled;
Even the foundations of the mountains were
troubled
And they shook, because He was wroth.
8 Smoke went up from His nostrils,
And consuming fire from His mouth;
Coals were kindled by it.
9 And He bowed the shamayim and came down,
And dense cloud was under His feet,
10 And He rode upon a keruḇ, and flew;
He flew upon the wings of the wind.
11 He made darkness His covering;
Around Him His booth,
Darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
12 From the brightness before Him,
His thick clouds passed, hail and coals of fire.
13 And HWHY thundered in the shamayim,
And the Most High sent forth His voice,
Hail and coals of fire.
14 And He sent out His arrows and scattered them,
And much lightning, and confused them.
15 And the channels of waters were seen,
And the foundations of the world were uncovered
At Your rebuke, O HWHY,
At the blast of the breath of Your nostrils.
16 He sent from above, He took me;
He drew me out of many waters.
17 He delivered me from my strong enemy,
And from those hating me, for they were stronger
than I.
18 They confronted me in the day of my calamity,
But HWHY was my support.
1555

TEHILLIM

And He brought me out into a large place;
He delivered me for He delighted in my
righteousness;
20 HWHY rewarded me according to my
righteousness
According to the cleanness of my hands He repaid
me.
21 For I have guarded the ways of HWHY,
And have not acted wickedly against my Elohim.
22 For all His Right-Rulings are before me,
And I did not turn from His Laws.
23 And I am perfect before Him,
And I guard myself from my wickedness.
24 And HWHY repays me according to my
righteousness,
According to the cleanness of my hands before His
eyes.
25 With the kind You show Yourself kind;
With the perfect one You show Yourself perfect;
26 With the clean You show Yourself clean;
And with the wicked You show Yourself twisted.
27 For You save the afflicted people,
But bring down those whose eyes are haughty.
28 For You Yourself light my lamp;
HWHY my Elohim makes my darkness light.
29 For with You I run against a band,
And with my Elohim I leap over a wall.
30 The Ĕl - His Way is perfect;
The Word of HWHY is proven;
He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him.
31 For who is Eloah, besides HWHY?
And who is a rock, except our Elohim?
32 It is Ĕl who girds me with strength,
And makes my way perfect,
19

1556

PSALMS

Making my feet like the feet of deer,
And puts me on my high places,
34 Teaching my hands for battle,
So that my arms shall bend a bow of bronze.
35 And You give me the shield of Your deliverance;
And Your right hand supports me,
And Your lowliness makes me great.
36 You enlarge my step under me;
And my feet shall not slip.
37 I pursue my enemies and overtake them;
And do not turn back till they are destroyed.
38 I crush them, and they are unable to rise;
They fall under my feet.
39 And You gird me with strength for battle;
Cause my adversaries to bow under me.
40 And You have made my enemies turn their
backs,
As for those hating me, I cut them off.
41 They cry - but no one is there save,
To HWHY - but He answers them not.
42 And I beat them as dust before the wind;
I empty them out like dirt in the streets.
43 You deliver me from the strivings of the people,
You put me at the head of the nations;
A people I have not known serve me.
44 As soon as they hear of me they obey me;
The foreigners submit to me.
45 The foreigners fade away,
And come frightened from their strongholds.
46 HWHY lives! And baruḵ is my Rock!
And exalted is the Elohim of my deliverance,
47 The Ĕl who avenges me,
And He humbles the peoples under me;
33

1557

TEHILLIM

My deliverer from my enemies.
You lift me up above those who rise against me;
You deliver me from a man of violence.
49 Therefore I give thanks to
You, O HWHY, among nations,
And I sing praise to Your Name,
50 Making great the deliverance of His sovereign,
And showing kindness to His anointed,
To Dawiḏ and his seed, forever.
48

19 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
The shamayim are proclaiming the esteem of Ĕl;
And the expanse is declaring the work of His hand.
2 Day to day pours forth speech,
And night to night reveals knowledge.
3 There is no speech, and there are no words,
Their voice is not heard.
4 Their line has gone out through all the earth,
And their words to the end of the world.
In them He put up a tent for the sun,
5 And it is like a bridegroom coming out of his
room,
It rejoices like a strong man to run the path.
6 Its rising is from one end of the shamayim,
And its circuit to the other end;
And naught is hidden from its heat.
7 The Torah of HWHY is perfect, bringing back the
being;
The Witness of HWHY is trustworthy, making wise the
simple;
8 The Orders of HWHY are straight, rejoicing the
heart;
The Command of HWHY is clear, enlightening the
eyes;
1

1558

PSALMS

The reverence of HWHY is clean, standing forever;
The Right-Rulings of HWHY are true,
They are righteous altogether,
10 More desirable than gold,
Than much fine gold;
And sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.
11 Also, Your servant is warned by them,
In guarding them there is great reward.
12 Who discerns mistakes?
Declare me innocent from those that are secret,
13 Also keep Your servant back from presumptuous
ones,
Do not let them rule over me.
Then shall I be perfect, and innocent of great
transgression.
14 Let the words of my mouth
And the meditation of my heart
Be pleasing before You,
O HWHY, my rock and my redeemer.
9

20 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
HWHY answers you in the day of distress!
The Name of the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ exalts you!
2 He sends you help from the qodesh place,
And upholds you from Tsiyon!
3 He remembers all your offerings,
And accepts your burnt offering! Selah.
4 He gives you according to your heart,
And fills all your plans!
5 We sing of Your deliverance,
And in the Name of our Elohim we raise up a
banner!
HWHY fills all your requests!
1

1559

TEHILLIM

Now I know that HWHY shall save His anointed;
He answers him from His qodesh shamayim
With the saving might of His right hand.
7 Some trust in chariots, and some in horses,
But we remember the Name of HWHY our Elohim.
8 They, they have bowed down and fallen;
But we have risen and are established.
9 Save, HWHY!
Let the Sovereign answer us in the day we call.
6

21 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
The sovereign rejoices in Your strength, O HWHY;
And how greatly he exults in Your deliverance!
2 You have given him the desire of his heart,
And You have not withheld the request of his lips.
Selah.
3 For You put before him the bireḵoth of goodness;
You put a crown of fine gold on his head.
4 He asked life from You and You gave it to him Length of days forever and ever.
5 Through Your deliverance his esteem is great;
You have laid excellency and splendour on him.
6 For You have made him most baruḵ forever;
You have made him glad with the joy of Your
presence.
7 For the sovereign is trusting in HWHY,
And through the kindness of the Most High he is not
moved.
8 Your hand reaches all Your enemies;
Your right hand reaches those who hate You.
9 You make them as a furnace of fire in the time of
Your presence;
HWHY swallows them up in His wrath,
And fire consumes them.
1

1560

PSALMS

You destroy their fruit from the earth,
And their seed from among the sons of men.
11 For they held out evil against You;
They devised a plot; they do not prevail.
12 For You make them turn their back,
When You aim with Your bowstring toward their
faces.
13 Be exalted, O HWHY, in Your strength!
We sing and we praise Your might.
10

22 To the chief singer, on ‘Doe of the morning.’
A psalm of Dawiḏ.
1 My Ĕl, My Ĕl, why have You forsaken me Far from saving me, and the words of my groaning?
2 O my Elohim, I call by day, but You do not
answer;
And by night, but I find no rest.
3 Yet You are qodesh,
Enthroned on the praises of Yisra’ĕl.
4 Our fathers trusted in You;
They trusted, and You delivered them.
5 They cried to You, and were delivered;
They trusted in You, and were not ashamed.
6 But I am a worm, and no man;
A reproach of men, and despised by the people.
7 All those who see Me mock Me;
They shoot out the lip, they shake the head,
8 “He trusted in HWHY, let Him rescue Him;
Let Him deliver Him, seeing He has delighted in
Him!”
9 For You are the One who took Me out of the
womb;
Made me secure on My mother’s breasts.
10 I was cast upon You from birth.
From My mother’s womb You have been My Ĕl.
1561

TEHILLIM

Do not be far from Me,
For distress is near;
For there is none to help.
12 Many bulls have surrounded Me;
Strong ones of Bashan have encircled Me.
13 They have opened their mouths against Me,
As a raging and roaring lion.
14 I have been poured out like water,
And all My bones have been spread apart;
My heart has become like wax;
It has melted in the midst of My inward parts.
15 My strength is dried like a potsherd,
And My tongue is cleaving to My jaws;
And to the dust of death You are appointing Me.
16 For dogs have surrounded Me;
A crowd of evil ones have encircled Me,
Piercing My hands and My feet;
17 I count all My bones.
They look, they stare at Me.
18 They divide My garments among them,
And for My raiment they cast lots.
19 But You, O HWHY, do not be far off;
O My Strength, hasten to help Me!
20 Deliver My life from the sword,
My only one from the power of the dog.
21 Save Me from the mouth of the lion,
And from the horns of the wild beasts!
You have answered Me.
22 I make known Your Name to My brothers;
In the midst of the assembly I praise You.
23 You who revere HWHY, praise Him!
All you seed of Ya’aqoḇ, esteem Him,
And revere Him, all you seed of Yisra’ĕl!
24 For He has not despised
Nor hated the affliction of the afflicted;
11

1562

PSALMS

Nor has He hidden His face from Him;
But when He cried to Him, He heard.
25 From You is My praise in the great assembly;
I pay My vows before those who revere Him.
26 The meek ones eat and are satisfied;
Let those who seek Him halleluHWHY.
Let your heart live forever!
27 Let all the ends of the earth
Remember and turn to HWHY,
And all clans of the nations
Bow themselves before You.
28 For the reign belongs to HWHY
And He is ruling over the nations.
29 All the fat ones of the earth
Shall eat and bow themselves;
All who go down to the dust bow before Him,
Even he who did not keep alive his own life.
30 A seed shall serve Him.
It is declared of HWHY to a generation.
31 They shall come and declare His righteousness
To a people to be born,
For He shall do it!

23 A psalm of Dawiḏ.
HWHY is my shepherd; I do not lack.
2 He makes me to lie down in green pastures;
He leads me beside still waters.
3 He turns back my being;
He leads me in paths of righteousness
For His Name’s sake.
4 When I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death,
I fear no evil.
For You are with me;
Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me.
1

1563

TEHILLIM

You spread before me a table in the face of my
enemies;
You have anointed my head with oil;
My cup runs over.
6 Only goodness and kindness follow me
All the days of my life;
And I shall dwell in the House of HWHY,
To the length of days!
5

24 A psalm of Dawiḏ.
The earth belongs to HWHY,
And all that fills it The world and those who dwell in it.
2 For He has founded it upon the seas,
And upon the waters He establishes it.
3 Who goes up into the mountain of HWHY?
And who stands in His qodesh place?
4 He who has innocent hands and a clean heart,
Who did not bring his life to naught,
And did not swear deceivingly.
5 He receives a beraḵah from HWHY,
And righteousness from the Elohim of his
deliverance.
6 This is the generation of those who seek Him;
Ya’aqoḇ, who seeks Your face. Selah.
7 Lift up your heads, O you gates!
And be lifted up, you everlasting doors!
And let the Sovereign of esteem come in.
8 Who is this Sovereign of esteem?
HWHY strong and mighty,
HWHY mighty in battle.
9 Lift up your heads, O you gates!
Even lift up, you everlasting doors!
And let the Sovereign of esteem come in.
1

1564

PSALMS

Who is this Sovereign of esteem?
HWHY of hosts,
He is the Sovereign of esteem! Selah.

10

25 Of Dawiḏ.
‫א‬,� To You, O HWHY, I lift up my being.
2 ‫ ב‬, B O my Elohim, in You I have put my trust;
Let me not be ashamed;
Let not my enemies exult over me.
3 ‫ ג‬,� Indeed, let no one who waits on You be
ashamed;
Let those who are treacherous without cause be
ashamed.
4 ‫ד‬,𐤃 Show me Your Ways, O HWHY;
Teach me Your paths.
5 ‫ ה‬, h Lead me in Your truth,
‫ ו‬, W And teach me,
For You are the Elohim of my deliverance;
On You I wait all the day.
6 ‫ ז‬, z Remember, O HWHY,
Your compassion and Your kindnesses,
For they are from everlasting.
7 ‫ ח‬, X Do not remember the sins my youth, and my
transgressions;
According to Your kindness remember me,
For Your goodness’ sake, O HWHY.
8 ‫ ט‬, j Good and straight is HWHY;
Therefore He teaches sinners in the Way.
9 ‫ י‬, Y He guides the meek ones in Right-Ruling,
And He teaches the meek ones His Way.
10 ‫כ‬, K All the paths of HWHY are kindness and truth,
To those who guard His Covenant and His
Witnesses.
11 ‫ל‬, L For Your Name’s sake, O HWHY,
You shall pardon my wickedness, though it is great.
1

1565

TEHILLIM

‫ מ‬, m Who, then, is the man that reveres HWHY?
He teaches him in the Way he should choose.
13 ‫ נ‬, ! His life dwells in good,
And his seed inherits the earth.
14 ‫ ס‬, s The secret of HWHY is those who revere Him,
And He makes His Covenant known to them.
15 ‫ ע‬, [ My eyes are ever toward HWHY,
For He brings my feet out of the net.
16 ‫ פ‬, p Turn Your face to me, and show me favour,
For I am lonely and afflicted.
17 ‫ צ‬, C The distresses of my heart have enlarged;
Oh, bring me out of my distresses!
18 ‫ ר‬,R Look on my affliction and my toil,
And lift all my sins.
19 See how many my enemies have become;
And they hate me with a violent hatred.
20 ‫ש‬, v Oh, guard my life, and deliver me;
Let me not be ashamed, for I have taken refuge in
You.
21 ‫ת‬, t Let integrity and straightness guard me,
For I have waited for You.
22 Redeem Yisra’ĕl, O Elohim,
Out of all his distresses!
12

26 Of Dawiḏ.
Rule me rightly, O HWHY,
For I have walked in my integrity.
And I have trusted in HWHY, without wavering.
2 Examine me, O HWHY, and prove me;
Try my kidneys and my heart.
3 For Your kindness is before my eyes,
And I have walked in Your truth.
4 I have not sat with men of falsehood,
Nor do I enter with pretenders.
1

1566

PSALMS

I have hated the assembly of evil-doers,
And I do not sit with the wicked.
6 I wash my hands in innocence;
And I walk around Your altar, O HWHY,
7 To raise a voice of thanksgiving,
And to declare all Your wonders.
8 HWHY, I have loved the abode of Your House,
And the place where Your esteem dwells.
9 Do not gather my being together with sinners,
Nor my life with bloodthirsty men,
10 In whose hands is a plot,
And their right hand is filled with bribes.
11 But as for me, I walk in my integrity;
Redeem me and show me favour.
12 My foot shall stand on a level place;
In the assemblies I baraḵ HWHY.
5

27 Of Dawiḏ.
HWHY is my light and my deliverance;
Whom should I fear?
HWHY is the refuge of my life;
Whom should I dread?
2 When evil-doers come against me
To eat up my flesh,
My adversaries and my enemies,
They shall stumble and fall.
3 Though an army encamps against me,
My heart does not fear;
Though battle comes up against me,
Even then I would be trusting.
4 One I asked of HWHY - this I seek:
To dwell in the House of HWHY
All the days of my life,
To see the pleasantness of HWHY,
And to inquire in His Hĕyḵal.
1

1567

TEHILLIM

For in the day of evil He hides me in His booth;
In the covering of His Tent He hides me;
On a rock He raises me up.
6 And now my head is lifted up above my enemies
all around me;
And I offer in His Tent with offerings of shouts;
I sing, I sing praises to HWHY.
7 Hear, O HWHY, when I cry with my voice!
And show me favour, and answer me.
8 To my heart You have said,
“Seek My face.”
Your face, HWHY, I seek.
9 Do not hide Your face from me;
Do not turn Your servant away in displeasure;
You have been my help;
Do not leave me nor forsake me,
O Elohim of my deliverance.
10 When my father and my mother have forsaken
me,
Then HWHY takes me in.
11 Teach me Your Way, O HWHY,
And lead me in a smooth path, because of my
enemies.
12 Do not give me over
To the desire of my adversaries;
For false witnesses have risen against me,
And they breathe out violence to me.
13 What if I had not believed
To see the goodness of HWHY
In the land of the living!
14 Wait on HWHY, be strong,
And let Him strengthen your heart!
Wait, I say, on HWHY!
5

28 Of Dawiḏ.
1568

PSALMS

I cry to You, O HWHY my Rock:
Do not be deaf to me!
For if You are silent to me,
I shall be like those who go down to the pit.
2 Hear the voice of my prayers when I cry to You,
When I lift up my hands
Toward Your Qodesh Speaking Place.
3 Do not draw me away with the wicked
And with the workers of wickedness,
Who speak peace to their neighbours,
But evil is in their hearts.
4 Give to them according to their deeds,
And according to the evil of their practices;
Give to them according to the work of their hands;
Bring back to them what they deserve.
5 Because they do not heed the works of HWHY,
Nor the works of His hands,
He throws them down,
And does not build them up.
6 Baruḵ be HWHY,
Because He has heard the voice of my prayers!
7 HWHY is my strength, and my shield;
My heart has trusted in Him, and I have been
helped;
Therefore my heart exults,
And with my song I thank Him.
8 HWHY is the strength of His people,
And He is the stronghold of deliverance of His
anointed.
9 Save Your people, and baraḵ Your inheritance;
And be their Shepherd, and bear them up forever.
1

29 A psalm of Dawiḏ.
Ascribe to HWHY, O you sons of the mighty,
Ascribe to HWHY esteem and strength.

1

1569

TEHILLIM

Ascribe to HWHY the esteem of His Name;
Bow yourselves to HWHY in the splendour of
qodeshah.
3 The voice of HWHY is over the waters;
The Ĕl of esteem thunders;
HWHY is over many waters.
4 The voice of HWHY is with power,
The voice of HWHY is with greatness.
5 The voice of HWHY is breaking the cedars,
HWHY is breaking the cedars Leḇanon in pieces.
6 And He makes them skip like a calf,
Leḇanon and Siryon like a young wild ox.
7 The voice of HWHY cuts through the flames of fire.
8 The voice of HWHY shakes the wilderness;
HWHY shakes the Wilderness of Qaḏĕsh.
9 The voice of HWHY makes the deer give birth,
And strips the forests bare;
And in His Hĕyḵal everyone says, “Esteem!”
10 HWHY sat enthroned at the Flood,
And HWHY sits as Sovereign forever.
11 HWHY gives strength to His people;
HWHY baraḵ His people with peace.
2

30 A psalm; a song. The dedication of the house of
Dawiḏ.
1 I exalt You, O HWHY, for You have drawn me up,
And have not let my enemies rejoice over me.
2 HWHY My Elohim,
I have cried to You,
And You have healed me.
3 HWHY, You brought me up from the grave;
You have kept me alive, from going down into the
pit.
4 Sing praise to HWHY,
You kind ones of His,
1570

PSALMS

And give thanks at the remembrance of His
Qodeshah.
5 For His displeasure is for a moment,
His delight is for ḥai;
Weeping might last for the night,
But joy comes in the morning.
6 As for me, I have said in my ease,
“Never would I be shaken!”
7 HWHY, in Your good pleasure
You have made my mountain to stand strong;
You hid Your face, and I was troubled.
8 I cried out to You, O HWHY;
And to HWHY I prayed:
9 “What gain is there in my blood,
When I go down to the pit?
Would dust praise You?
Would it declare Your truth?
10 “Hear, O HWHY, and show me favour;
HWHY, be my helper!”
11 You have turned my mourning into dancing for
me;
You have torn off my sackcloth and girded me with
gladness,
12 So that esteem might praise You and not be
silent.
O HWHY my Elohim, I thank You forever.

31 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
In You, O HWHY, I have taken refuge;
Let me never be ashamed;
Deliver me in Your righteousness.
2 Incline Your ear to me,
Deliver me speedily;
Be a rock of refuge to me,
A house of defence to save me.
1

1571

TEHILLIM

For You are my rock and my stronghold;
For Your Name’s sake lead me and guide me.
4 Bring me out of the net which they have hidden
for me,
For You are my stronghold.
5 Into Your hand I commit my spirit;
You have redeemed me, O HWHY Ĕl of truth.
6 I have hated those who observe lying vanities;
But I trust in HWHY.
7 I exult and rejoice in Your kindness,
For You have seen my affliction;
You have known the distresses of my life,
8 And You have not shut me up into the hand of
the enemy.
You have stood my feet in a large place.
9 Show me favour, O HWHY, for I am in distress;
My eye, my being and my body have become old
with grief!
10 For my life is consumed in sorrow,
And my years in sighing;
My strength fails because of my wickedness,
And my bones have become old.
11 I am a reproach among all my adversaries,
But most of all among my neighbours,
And a dread to my friends;
Those who see me outside flee from me.
12 I have been forgotten from the heart, like
someone dead;
I have been like a missing vessel.
13 For I hear the evil report of many;
Fear is from all around;
When they take counsel together against me,
They plot to take away my life.
14 But I, I have put my trust in You, O HWHY;
I have said, “You are my Elohim.”
3

1572

PSALMS

My times are in Your hand;
Deliver me from the hand of my enemies,
And from those who pursue me.
16 Make Your face shine upon Your servant;
Save me in Your kindness.
17 Do not let me be ashamed, O HWHY,
For I have called upon You;
Let the wicked be ashamed;
Let them be silenced in the grave.
18 Let lips of falsehood be stilled,
Which speak recklessly against the righteous,
With pride and scorn.
19 How great is Your goodness,
Which You have laid up for those revering You,
Which You have prepared for those taking refuge in
You
In the sight of the sons of men!
20 In the secrecy of Your presence
You shall hide them from the plots of man;
You shelter them in a booth from the strife of
tongues.
21 Baruḵ be HWHY,
For He has made marvelous His kindness to me in a
strong city!
22 And I, I have said in my haste,
“I am cut off from before Your eyes,”
Yet You heard the voice of my prayers
When I cried out to You.
23 Love HWHY, all you His kind ones!
For HWHY guards the trustworthy ones,
And exceedingly repays the doer of pride.
24 Be strong, and let Him strengthen your heart,
All you who are waiting for HWHY.
15

32 A poem of Dawiḏ.
1573

TEHILLIM

Baruḵ is he whose transgression is forgiven,
Whose sin is covered.
2 Baruḵ is the man to whom HWHY imputes no
wickedness,
And in whose spirit there is no deceit.
3 When I kept silent, my bones became old
Through my groaning all the day.
4 For day and night Your hand was heavy upon
me;
My sap was turned into the droughts of summer.
Selah.
5 I acknowledged my sin to You,
And my wickedness I did not hide.
I have said, “I confess my transgressions to HWHY,”
And You forgave the wickedness of my sin. Selah.
6 Therefore, let every kind one pray to You
While You might be found;
Even in a flood of great waters
They would not reach him.
7 You are my hiding place;
You preserve me from distress;
You surround me with songs of deliverance. Selah.
8 “Let Me instruct you and teach you in the Way
you should go;
Let Me counsel,
My eye be on you.
9 Do not be like the horse, like the mule,
With no understanding, with bit and bridle,
Else they do not come near you.”
10 Many are the sorrows of the wicked;
But as for the one trusting in HWHY,
Kindness surrounds him.
11 Be glad in HWHY and exult, you righteous;
And shout for joy, all you upright in heart!
1

1574

PSALMS

33 Shout for joy in HWHY, you righteous!
Praise is fitting for the straight!
2 Praise HWHY with the lyre;
Sing to Him with an instrument of ten strings.
3 Sing to Him a new song;
Play sweetly with a shout of joy.
4 For the Word of HWHY is straight,
And all His works are in truth,
5 Loving righteousness and right-ruling;
The earth is filled with the kindness of HWHY.
6 By the Word of HWHY the shamayim were made,
And all their host by the breath of His mouth,
7 Gathering the waters of the sea together as a
heap;
Laying up the deep in storehouses.
8 Let all the earth revere HWHY;
Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of
Him.
9 For He spoke and it came to be;
He commanded, and it stood fast.
10 HWHY brings the counsel of the nations to naught;
He thwarts the plans of the peoples.
11 The counsel of HWHY stands forever,
The plans of His heart to all generations.
12 Baruḵ is the nation whose Elohim is HWHY,
The people whom He has chosen as His own
inheritance.
13 HWHY has looked from the shamayim;
He has seen all the sons of men.
14 He looked from His dwelling place
On all the inhabitants of the earth 15 He who fashions the hearts of them all,
He who understands all their works.
1575

TEHILLIM

The sovereign is not saved by the multitude of an
army;
A mighty man is not delivered by great strength.
17 A horse is a vain means of safety;
Neither does it rescue any by its great power.
18 See, the eye of HWHY is on those revering Him,
On those waiting for His kindness,
19 To deliver their being from death,
And to keep them alive during scarcity of food.
20 Our being has longed for HWHY;
Our help and our shield is He.
21 For our heart rejoices in Him,
For we have put our trust in His qodesh Name.
22 Let Your kindness, O HWHY, be upon us,
Even as we wait for You.
16

34 Of Dawiḏ, when he changed his behaviour
before Aḇimeleḵ; who drove him away, and he
departed.
1 ‫א‬,� I baraḵ HWHY at all times;
His praise is continually in my mouth.
2 ‫ ב‬, B My being shall boast in HWHY;
Let the humble hear and be glad.
3 ‫ ג‬,� Oh, make HWHY great with me,
And let us exalt His Name together.
4 ‫ד‬,𐤃 I sought HWHY, and He answered me,
And delivered me from all my fears.
5 ‫ ה‬, h They looked to Him and were lightened,
‫ ו‬, W And their faces were not ashamed.
6 ‫ ז‬, z This poor one cried out and HWHY heard him,
And saved him out of all his distresses.
7 ‫ ח‬, X The messenger of HWHY encamps all around
those who revere Him,
And rescues them.
1576

PSALMS

‫ ט‬, j Oh, taste and see that HWHY is good;
Baruḵ is the man that takes refuge in Him!
9 ‫ י‬, Y Revere HWHY, you His qodeshim,
For there is no lack to them who revere Him!
10 ‫כ‬, K Young lions have lacked and been hungry;
But those who seek HWHY lack not any goodness.
11 ‫ ל‬, L Come, you children, listen to me;
Let me teach you the reverence of HWHY.
12 ‫ מ‬, m Who is the man who desires life,
Who loves many days, in order to see good?
13 ‫ נ‬, ! Keep your tongue from evil,
And your lips from speaking deceit.
14 ‫ ס‬, s Turn away from evil and do good;
Seek peace, and pursue it.
15 ‫ ע‬, [ The eyes of HWHY are on the righteous,
And His ears unto their cry.
16 ‫ פ‬, p The face of HWHY is against evil-doers,
To cut off their remembrance from the earth.
17 ‫ צ‬, C Crying out, and HWHY heard,
And delivered them out of all their distresses.
18 ‫ ק‬,q HWHY is near to the broken-hearted,
And saves those whose spirit is crushed.
19 ‫ ר‬,R Many are the evils of the righteous,
But HWHY delivers him out of them all.
20 ‫ש‬, v He is guarding all his bones;
Not one of them is broken.
21 Evil slays the wicked,
‫ת‬, t And those who hate the righteous are guilty.
22 HWHY redeems the lives of His servants,
And none of those taking refuge in Him are guilty.
8

35 Of Dawiḏ.
O OHWHY, strive with those who strive with me;
Fight against those who fight against me.

1

1577

TEHILLIM

Take hold of shield and armour,
And rise for my help.
3 And draw out spear and lance,
To meet those who pursue me.
Say to my life, “I am your deliverance.”
4 Let those be ashamed and blush
Who seek my life;
Let those be turned back and abashed
Who plot evil to me.
5 Let them be as chaff before the wind,
With a messenger of HWHY driving on.
6 Let their way be dark and slippery,
With a messenger of HWHY pursuing them.
7 For without cause they hid their net for me;
Without cause they dug a pit for my life.
8 Let ruin come upon him unawares,
And let his net that he hid catch himself;
Let him fall in it, into ruin.
9 But let my own being exult in HWHY;
Let it rejoice in His deliverance.
10 Let all my bones say, “HWHY, who is like You,
Delivering the poor from one stronger than he,
And the poor and the needy from him who robs
him?”
11 Malicious witnesses rise up;
They ask me that which I knew not.
12 They reward me evil for good, bereaving my life.
13 But I, when they were sick, I put on sackcloth;
I humbled my being with fastings;
And my prayer would return to my own bosom.
14 I walked about as though he were my friend or
brother;
I bowed down mourning, as one mourning for a
mother.
2

1578

PSALMS

But they rejoiced at my stumbling
And gathered together;
The smiters gathered against me,
And I did not know it;
They tore in pieces without ceasing,
16 With unclean ones, mockers at feasts,
Gnashing at me with their teeth.
17 HWHY, how long would You look on?
Rescue my being from their destructions,
My only one from the lions.
18 I give You thanks in the great assembly;
I praise You among a mighty people.
19 Let not my lying enemies rejoice over me;
Or those who hate me without cause wink their
eyes.
20 For they do not speak peace,
But they devise words of deceit
Against the peaceable ones of the land.
21 And they open their mouth wide against me,
They said, “Aha, aha! Our eyes have seen it.”
22 This You have seen, O HWHY;
Do not be silent.
O HWHY, do not be far from me.
23 Stir up Yourself and awake to my right-ruling To my cause, my Elohim and Aḏonai.
24 Rule me rightly, O HWHY my Elohim,
According to Your righteousness;
And let them not rejoice over me.
25 Let them not say in their hearts,
“Aha, our desire!”
Let them not say, “We have swallowed him up.”
26 Let those who are rejoicing at my evil
Be ashamed and abashed altogether;
Let those who are exalting themselves over me
Be clad in shame and humiliation.
15

1579

TEHILLIM

Let those who delight in my righteous cause
Shout for joy and be glad,
And let them always say, “Let HWHY be made great,
Who is desiring the peace of His servant.”
28 And my tongue shall speak of Your
righteousness,
Your praise,
All day long.
27

36 To the chief singer. Of Dawiḏ, servant of HWHY.
Transgression speaks to the wicked within his
heart;
Reverence of Elohim is not before his eyes.
2 For he flatters himself in his own eyes,
To find his wickedness to be hated.
3 The words of his mouth are wickedness and
deceit;
He has ceased to be wise, to do good.
4 He plots wickedness on his bed;
He places himself in a way that is not good;
He does not despise evil.
5 O HWHY, Your kindness is in the shamayim,
And Your trustworthiness reaches to the clouds.
6 Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains;
Your Right-Rulings are a great deep;
O HWHY, You save man and beast.
7 How precious is Your kindness, O Elohim!
And the sons of men take refuge in the shadow of
Your wings.
8 They are filled from the fatness of Your House,
And You give them drink from the river of Your
pleasures.
9 For with You is the fountain of ḥai;
In Your light we see light.
1

1580

PSALMS

Draw out Your kindness to those who know You,
And Your righteousness to the upright in heart.
11 Let not the foot of pride come against me,
And the hand of the wicked drive me away.
12 There the workers of wickedness have fallen;
They have been overthrown
And have been unable to rise.
10

37 Of Dawiḏ.
‫א‬,� Do not fret because of evil-doers,
Do not be envious of the workers of
unrighteousness.
2 For they soon wither like grass,
And fade like green plants.
3 ‫ ב‬, B Trust in HWHY, and do good;
Dwell in the earth, and feed on steadfastness.
4 And delight yourself in HWHY,
And let Him give you the desires of your heart.
5 ‫ ג‬,� Commit your way to HWHY,
And trust in Him, and He does it.
6 And He shall bring forth your righteousness as
the light,
And your right-ruling as midday.
7 ‫ד‬,𐤃 Rest in HWHY, and wait patiently for Him;
Do not fret because of him who prospers in his way,
Because of the man doing wicked devices.
8 ‫ ה‬, h Abstain from displeasure, and forsake
wrath;
Neither fret only to do evil.
9 For evil-doers are cut off;
But those who wait on HWHY,
They shall inherit the earth.
10 ‫ ו‬, W Yet a little while and the wicked one is no
more;
1

1581

TEHILLIM

And you shall look on his place,
But it is not.
11 But the meek ones shall inherit the earth,
And delight themselves in plenty of peace.
12 ‫ ז‬, z The wicked plots against the righteous,
And gnashes his teeth at him.
13 HWHY laughs at him;
For He sees that his day is coming.
14 ‫ ח‬, X The wicked have drawn the sword
And have bent their bow,
To cause the poor and needy to fall,
To slay those who walk straightly.
15 Their sword enters into their own heart,
And their bows are broken.
16 ‫ ט‬, j Better is the little of the righteous one,
Than the riches of many wicked.
17 For the arms of the wicked are broken,
But HWHY sustains the righteous.
18 ‫ י‬, Y HWHY knows the days of the perfect,
And their inheritance is forever.
19 They are not ashamed in a time of evil,
And in the days of scarcity of food they are satisfied.
20 ‫כ‬, K But the wicked shall perish;
And the enemies of HWHY,
Like the splendour of the meadows they vanish,
Like smoke they vanish away.
21 ‫ ל‬, L The wicked borrows and does not repay,
But the righteous one shows favour and gives.
22 For His baruḵ ones inherit the earth,
But those cursed by Him are cut off.
23 ‫ מ‬, m The steps of a man are ordered by HWHY,
And He delights in his way.
24 Though he falls, he is not cast down,
For HWHY is supporting his hand.
1582

PSALMS

‫ נ‬, ! I have been young, and now I am old;
Yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken,
Or his seed begging bread.
26 All day long he is showing favour and lending;
And his seed is for a beraḵah.
27 ‫ ס‬, s Turn away from evil, and do good;
And dwell forever.
28 For HWHY loves Right-Ruling,
And does not forsake His kind ones;
They shall be guarded forever,
But the seed of the wicked is cut off.
29 The righteous shall inherit the earth,
And dwell in it forever.
30 ‫ פ‬, p The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom,
And his tongue talks of Right-Ruling.
31 The Torah of his Elohim is in his heart;
His steps do not slide.
32 ‫ צ‬, C The wicked is watching for the righteous,
And is seeking to slay him.
33 HWHY does not leave him in his hand,
Or let him be declared wicked when he is judged.
34 ‫ ק‬,q Wait on HWHY and guard His Way,
And He shall exalt you to inherit the earth When the wicked are cut off, you shall see it.
35 ‫ ר‬,R I have seen the wicked in great power,
And spreading himself like a native green tree.
36 Yet he passed away, and see, he was not;
And I sought him, but he was not found.
37 ‫ש‬, v Watch the perfect, and observe the straight;
For the latter end of each is peace.
38 But the transgressors shall be destroyed
together;
The latter end of the wicked shall be cut off.
25

1583

TEHILLIM

‫ת‬, t But the deliverance of the righteous is from
HWHY,
Their strength in time of distress.
40 And HWHY helps them and delivers them;
He delivers them from the wicked and saves them,
Because they took refuge in Him.
39

38 A psalm of Dawiḏ, to bring remembrance.
O O OHWHY, do not rebuke me in Your wrath,
Nor chastise me in Your hot displeasure!
2 For Your arrows have pierced me,
And Your hand comes down on me.
3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of
Your rage,
Nor peace in my bones because of my sin.
4 For my wickednesses have passed over my
head;
Like a heavy burden, too heavy for me.
5 My wounds stink, festering
Because of my folly.
6 I have been bent down;
I have been bowed down very much;
All day long I have gone mourning.
7 For my loins have become filled with burning,
And there is no soundness in my flesh.
8 I have become weak and greatly crushed;
I howled from the groaning of my heart.
9 HWHY, all my desire is before You;
And my sighing has not been hidden from You.
10 My heart is throbbing, my strength has forsaken
me;
And the light of my eyes also is not with me.
11 My loved ones and my friends stand back from
my plague,
And my neighbours stand far away.
1

1584

PSALMS

And those seeking my life lay a snare;
And those seeking my evil have spoken of
destruction,
And utter deceit all day long.
13 But I, as one deaf, do not hear;
And as a dumb one who does not open his mouth.
14 I am like a man who does not hear,
And who has no rebukes in his mouth.
15 For on You, O HWHY, I have waited;
You do answer, O HWHY my Elohim.
16 For I said, “Otherwise they would rejoice over
me,
When my foot slips they would exalt themselves
over me.”
17 For I am ready to fall,
And my pain is always with me.
18 For I confess my wickedness;
I am sorry over my sin.
19 But my enemies are alive;
They have become strong;
And those hating me falsely are many.
20 And those who repay evil for good,
They oppose me, because I follow what is good.
21 Do not forsake me, O HWHY;
O my Elohim be not far from me!
22 Hasten to help me,
O HWHY, my deliverance!
12

39 To the chief singer; to Yeḏuthun,
A psalm of Dawiḏ.
1 I have said, “Let me guard my ways
Against sinning with my tongue;
Let me guard my mouth with a muzzle,
While the wicked is before me.”
1585

TEHILLIM

I became dumb, keeping still;
I was silent, from good;
And my pain was stirred.
3 My heart was hot within me;
While I was meditating, the fire burned.
Then I spoke with my tongue:
4 “HWHY, let me know my end,
And the measure of my days, what it is
Let me know how short-lived I am.
5 “See, You have made my days as handbreadths,
And my lifetime is as naught before You;
Only, all men standing, are all breath. Selah.
6 “As but a shadow each one walks;
They busy themselves, only in vain;
He heaps up,
But knows not who gathers them.
7 “And now, HWHY, what do I wait for?
My expectancy is in You.
8 “Deliver me from all my transgressions;
Do not make me the reproach of the foolish.
9 “I was dumb, I did not open my mouth,
Because it was You who did it.
10 “Turn aside Your stroke from me;
I am overcome by the blow of Your hand.
11 “When You chastise man for wickedness with
reproofs,
You consume what he loves, like a moth;
All men are but a breath. Selah.
12 “Hear my prayer, O HWHY,
And give ear to my cry;
Do not be silent at my tears;
For I am a stranger with You,
A sojourner, as all my fathers were.
2

1586

PSALMS

“Look away from me,
That I might brighten up,
Before I go away and am no more.”

13

40 To chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
I waited for HWHY;
And He inclined to me, and heard my cry.
2 And He drew me
Out of the pit of destruction,
Out of the muddy clay,
And He put my feet upon a rock,
He is establishing my steps.
3 Then He put a new song in my mouth;
Praise to our Elohim;
Many see and revere,
And trust in HWHY.
4 Baruḵ is that man who has made HWHY his trust,
And has not turned to the proud,
And those turning aside to falsehood.
5 O HWHY my Elohim, many are the wonders
Which You have done, and Your purposes toward
us;
There is no one to compare with You;
I declare and speak:
They are too many to be numbered.
6 Slaughtering and meal offering You did not
desire?
But a body You have prepared for Me;
Burnt offering and sin offering You did not ask for?
7 Then I said, “See, I have come;
In the scroll of the Book it is prescribed for me.
8 I have delighted to do Your pleasure, O my
Elohim,
And Your Torah is within my inward parts.”
1

1587

TEHILLIM

I have proclaimed the Good News of
righteousness,
In the great assembly;
See, I do not restrain my lips, O HWHY, You know.
10 I did not conceal Your righteousness within my
heart;
I have declared Your trustworthiness and Your
deliverance;
I did not hide Your kindness and Your truth
From the great assembly.
11 Do not withhold Your compassion from me, O
hWhY;
Let Your kindness and Your truth always watch over
me.
12 For evils without number have surrounded me;
My wickednesses have overtaken me,
And I have been unable to see;
They became more than the hairs of my head;
And my heart has failed me.
13 Be pleased, O hWhY, to deliver me;
O hWhY, hasten to help me!
14 Let those who seek to destroy my life
Be ashamed and abashed altogether;
Let those who are desiring my evil
Be driven back and put to shame.
15 Let those who say to me,
“Aha, aha!”
Be appalled at their own shame.
16 Let all those who seek You
Rejoice and be glad in You;
Let those who love Your deliverance always say,
“hWhY be exalted!”
17 But I am poor and needy;
Let hWhY think upon me.
9

1588

PSALMS

You are my help and my deliverer;
O my Elohim, do not delay!

41 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
Baruḵ is he who considers the poor;
hWhY delivers him in a day of evil.
2 hWhY guards him and keeps him alive;
He is baruḵ on the earth,
And You do not hand him over
To the desire of his enemies.
3 hWhY sustains him on his sickbed;
In his weakness on his bed You bring a change.
4 As for me, I said,
“O hWhY, show me favour;
Heal me, for I have sinned against You.”
5 My enemies speak evil of me,
“When he dies, his name shall perish.”
6 And when one comes to visit, he speaks falsely;
His heart gathers wickedness to itself;
He goes out, he speaks of it.
7 All who hate me whisper together against me;
They plot evil to me,
8 “A matter of Beliya’al is poured out on him,
That when he lies down, he would not rise again.”
9 Even my own friend in whom I trusted, who ate
my bread,
Has lifted up his heel against me.
10 But You, hWhY, show me favour and raise me up,
And let me repay them.
11 By this I know that You delight in me,
Because my enemy does not shout for joy over me.
12 And I, You uphold me in my integrity,
And place me before Your face forever.
1

1589

TEHILLIM

Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl From
everlasting to everlasting!
Amĕn and Amĕn.

13

42 To the chief singer. A poem for the sons of
Qoraḥ.
1 As a deer longs for the water streams,
So my being longs for You, O Elohim.
2 My being thirsts for Elohim, for the living Ĕl.
When shall I enter in to appear before Elohim?
3 My tears have been my food day and night,
While they say to me all day,
“Where is your Elohim?”
4 These I remember, and pour out my being within
me.
For I used to pass along with the throng;
I went with them to the House of Elohim,
With the voice of joy and praise,
A multitude celebrating a Festival!
5 Why are you depressed, O my being?
And you restless within me?
Wait for Elohim: for I shall yet thank Him,
The deliverance of His face!
6 O my Elohim, my being is depressed within me;
Therefore I remember You from the land of the
Yardĕn,
And from the heights of Ḥermon,
From Mount Mits’ar.
7 Deep calls to deep at the sound of Your
waterfalls;
All Your waves and breakers passed over me.
8 By day hWhY commands His kindness,
And by night His song is with me;
A prayer to the Ĕl of my ḥai.
1590

PSALMS

I say to Ĕl my Rock, “Why have You forgotten
me?
Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of
the enemy?”
10 My enemies have reproached me,
Like a crushing of my bones,
While they say to me all day long,
“Where is your Elohim?”
11 Why are you depressed, O my being?
And why are you restless within me?
Wait for Elohim: for I shall yet thank Him, the
deliverance of my face,
And my Elohim.
9

43 Rule me rightly, O Elohim,
And plead my cause against a nation without
kindness.
Oh, deliver me from a man of deceit and
unrighteousness!
2
For You are the Elohim of my strength.
Why have You rejected me?
Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of
the enemy?
3
Send forth Your light and Your truth!
Let them lead me,
Let them bring me to Your qodesh mountain
And to Your Mishkanoth.
4
That I might come to the altar of Elohim,
To Ĕl, the joy of my delight,
And praise You with the lyre,
O Elohim, my Elohim.
5
Why are you depressed, O my being?
And why are you restless within me?
Wait for Elohim: for I shall yet thank Him, the
1

1591

TEHILLIM

deliverance of my face,
And my Elohim.

44 To the chief singer, for the sons of Qoraḥ. A
poem.
1 O Elohim, we have heard with our ears,
Our fathers have related to us,
The work You did in their days,
In the days of old.
2 You drove out the nations with Your hand,
But them You planted.
You afflicted peoples, and sent them out.
3 For not by their own sword did they possess the
land,
Neither did their own arm save them;
But it was Your right hand and Your arm,
And the light of Your face,
Because You delighted in them.
4 You Yourself are my Sovereign, O Elohim;
Command deliverances for Ya’aqoḇ.
5 Through You we push our enemies;
Through Your Name we tread down those who rise
up against us.
6 For I do not trust in my bow,
And my sword does not save me.
7 For You have saved us from our enemies,
And have put to shame those who hated us.
8 In Elohim we shall boast all day long,
And praise Your Name forever. Selah.
9 Yet You have rejected us and put us to shame,
And You do not go with our armies.
10 You make us turn back from the adversary,
And those who hate us have plundered us.
11 You give us as sheep to be eaten,
And You have scattered us among the gentiles.
12 You sell Your people for no value,
And have put no high price on them.
1592

PSALMS

You make us a reproach to our neighbours,
A scorn and a mockery to those round about us.
14 You make us a proverb among the nations,
A shaking of the head among the peoples.
15 My reproach is always before me,
And the shame of my face has covered me,
16 Because of the voice of the slanderer and
blasphemer,
Because of the enemy and avenger.
17 All this has come upon us;
But we have not forgotten You,
Neither have we been false to Your Covenant.
18 Our heart has not turned back,
Neither has our step swerved from Your Way,
19 Yet You have crushed us in the place of jackals,
And covered us with the shadow of death.
20 If we have forgotten the Name of our Elohim,
Or stretched out our hands to a foreign mighty one,
21 Would Elohim not search this out?
For He knows the secrets of the heart.
22 But for Your sake we are killed all day long;
Reckoned as sheep for the slaughter.
23 Awake! Why do You sleep, O hWhY?
Arise! Do not reject us forever.
24 Why do You hide Your face,
Ignoring our affliction and our oppression?
25 For our being is bowed down to the dust;
Our body clings to the earth.
26 Arise, be our help,
And redeem us for Your kindness’ sake.
13

45 To the chief singer, on trumpets, for the sons of
Qoraḥ. A poetic love song.
1 My heart is overflowing with a good word;
I address my works to the Sovereign;
My tongue is the pen of a speedy writer.

1593

TEHILLIM

You are more handsome than the sons of men;
Favour has been poured upon Your lips;
Therefore Elohim has baraḵ You forever.
3 Gird Your sword upon thigh, O Mighty One,
Your excellency and Your splendour.
4 And ride prosperously in Your splendour,
On the matter of truth and humility, righteousness;
And let Your right hand make known reverence.
5 Your arrows are sharp
In the heart of the Sovereign’s enemies Peoples fall under You.
6 Your throne, O Elohim, is forever and ever;
The sceptre of Your reign
Is a sceptre of straightness.
7 You have loved righteousness and hated
wickedness;
Therefore Elohim, Your Elohim, has anointed You
With the oil of gladness more than Your
companions.
8 All Your garments are myrrh and aloes, cassia;
Out of the palaces of ivory,
Stringed instruments have made You glad.
9 Daughters of sovereigns are among Your
precious ones;
At Your right hand stands the sovereigness in gold
from Ophir.
10 Listen, O daughter, and see,
And incline your ear,
And forget your own people and your father’s house;
11 And let the Sovereign delight in your loveliness;
Because He is your Aḏon - bow yourself to Him.
12 And the daughter of Tsor with a gift,
The rich among the people seek Your favour.
2

1594

PSALMS

The daughter of the Sovereign
Is all esteemed within;
Her dress is embroidered with gold.
14 She is brought to the Sovereign in embroidered
work;
Maidens, her companions following her,
Are brought to You.
15 They are brought with gladness and rejoicing;
They enter the Sovereign’s palace.
16 Instead of Your fathers are Your sons,
Whom You appoint princes in all the earth.
17 I cause Your Name to be remembered in all
generations;
Therefore the people praise You forever and ever.
13

46 To the chief singer, for the sons of Qoraḥ. A
song with sopranos.
1 Elohim is our refuge and strength,
A help in distress, soon found.
2 Therefore we do not fear,
Though the earth reels
And mountains topple into the heart of the seas.
3 Let its waters rage, foam;
Let mountains shake with its swelling. Selah.
4 A river whose streams
Make glad the city of Elohim,
The qodesh dwelling of the Most High.
5 Elohim is in her midst, she does not topple;
Elohim helps her when morning turns.
6 The gentiles shall rage,
Reigns shall topple;
He shall give forth His voice,
The earth melts.
7 hWhY of hosts is with us;
The Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ is our refuge. Selah.
1595

TEHILLIM

Come, see the works of hWhY,
The ruins He has wrought on the earth,
9 Causing fighting to cease,
Unto the end of the earth.
He breaks the bow and shatters the spear;
He burns the chariot with fire.
10 Be still, and know that I am Elohim;
I am exalted among nations,
I am exalted in the earth!
11 hWhY of hosts is with us;
The Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ is our refuge. Selah.
8

47 To the chief singer. A psalm for the sons of
Qoraḥ.
1 Oh, clap your hands, all you peoples!
Shout to Elohim with a voice of singing!
2 For hWhY Most High is awesome;
A great Sovereign over all the earth.
3 He subdues peoples under us,
And nations under our feet.
4 He chooses our inheritance for us,
The excellence of Ya’aqoḇ whom He loves. Selah.
5 Elohim shall go up with a shout,
hWhY with the sound of a ram’s horn.
6 Sing praises to Elohim, sing praises!
Sing praises to our Sovereign, sing praises!
7 For Elohim is Sovereign of all the earth;
Sing praises with understanding.
8 Elohim shall reign over the nations;
Elohim shall sit on His qodesh throne.
9 Nobles of peoples shall be gathered together,
The people of the Elohim of Aḇraham.
For the shields of the earth belong to Elohim;
He shall be greatly exalted.
1596

PSALMS

48 A song, a poem, for the sons of Qoraḥ.
Great is hWhY, and greatly to be praised
In the city of our Elohim,
His qodesh mountain.
2 Pretty on high,
The joy of all the earth,
Is Mount Tsiyon on the sides of the north,
The city of the great Sovereign.
3 Elohim is in her citadels;
He is known as her refuge.
4 For look, the sovereigns met,
They passed by together.
5 They saw, so they marvelled;
They were alarmed, they hastened away.
6 Trembling took hold of them there,
Pain, as of a woman in labour,
7 With an east wind You break the ships of
Tarshish.
8 As we have heard, so we have seen
In the city of hWhY of hosts,
In the city of our Elohim,
Elohim establishes her forever. Selah.
9 We have thought, O Elohim, of Your kindness,
In the midst of Your Hĕyḵal.
10 According to Your Name, O Elohim,
So is Your praise to the ends of the earth;
Your right hand is filled with righteousness.
11 Let Mount Tsiyon rejoice,
Let the daughters of Yahuḏah exult,
Because of Your Right-Rulings.
12 Walk about Tsiyon,
And go all around her.
Count her towers;
1

1597

TEHILLIM

Apply your heart to her rampart;
Go through her citadels;
So that you report it to the coming generation.
14 For this Elohim is our Elohim,
Forever and ever;
He Himself leads us,
Even to death.
13

49 To the chief singer. A psalm, for the sons of
Qoraḥ.
1 Hear this, all you peoples;
Give ear, all you inhabitants of the world,
2 Both sons of Aḏam and sons of man,
Rich and poor together.
3 My mouth speaks wisdom,
And the meditation of my heart brings
understanding.
4 I incline my ear to a parable;
I expound my riddle on the lyre.
5 Why should I fear in the days of evil,
When the wickedness of my supplanters surrounds
me?
6 Those who are trusting in their riches
And who are boasting in their great wealth?
7 A brother does not redeem anyone at all;
Neither give to Elohim a ransom for him;
8 For the redemption of their lives is costly,
And it shall cease forever;
9 That he should still live forever,
Not see the pit.
10 For he sees wise men die,
The foolish and the ignorant both perish,
And shall leave their wealth to others.

1598

PSALMS

Their graves are their houses, forever;
Their dwelling places, to all generations;
They call lands after their own names.
12 But man does not remain in esteem;
He is like the beasts that perish.
13 This way of theirs is folly to them,
Yet their followers are pleased with their words.
Selah.
14 Like sheep they shall be laid in the grave;
Death shall shepherd them;
And the upright rule over them in the morning;
And their form is consumed in the grave,
Far from their dwelling.
15 But Elohim redeems my being
From the power of the grave,
For He receives me. Selah.
16 Do not be afraid when a man becomes rich,
When the wealth of his house increases;
17 For when he dies he takes none of it;
His wealth does not go down after him.
18 Though while he lived he baraḵ himself,
And though they praise you when you do well for
yourself,
19 He has to go to the generation of his fathers;
They never see the light.
20 Man, who is rich,
Yet does not understand,
Shall be like the beasts,
They shall perish.
11

50 A psalm of Asaph.
Ĕl Elohim hWhY shall speak,
And He shall call the earth
From the rising of the sun to its going down.

1

1599

TEHILLIM

From Tsiyon, the perfection of loveliness,
Elohim shall shine forth.
3 Our Elohim comes, and is not silent A fire consumes before Him,
And it shall be very stormy all around Him.
4 He calls to the shamayim from above,
And to the earth, to rightly rule His people:
5 “Gather My kind ones together to Me,
Those who have made a Covenant with Me by
slaughtering.”
6 Then the shamayim declared His righteousness,
For Elohim Himself is Judge. Selah.
7 “Hear, O My people, and I speak,
O Yisra’ĕl, and I witness against you:
I am Elohim, your Elohim!
8 “I do not reprove you for your slaughterings,
And your burnt offerings are continually before Me.
9 “I do not take a bull from your house,
Nor goats out of your pens.
10 “For every beast of the forest is Mine,
The cattle on a thousand hills.
11 “I know all the birds of the mountains,
And all moving in My field are Mine.
12 “If I were hungry, I would not speak to you;
For the world is Mine, and all that fills it.
13 “Do I eat the flesh of bulls,
Or drink the blood of goats?
14 “Offer thanksgiving to Elohim,
And pay your vows to the Most High.
15 “And call upon Me in the day of distress Let Me rescue you, and you esteem Me.”
16 But to the wicked, Elohim said,
“What right have you to recite My Laws,
Or take My Covenant in your mouth,
2

1600

PSALMS

“While you hated instruction
And cast My Words behind you?
18 “When you saw a thief, you were pleased with
him,
And you take part with adulterers.
19 “You let your mouth loose to evil,
And your tongue frames deceit.
20 “You sit, speak against your brother;
You slander your own mother’s son.
21 “You have done this, and I kept silent;
You have thought that I was altogether like you I rebuke you, and put it in order before your eyes.
22 “Understand this please, you who forget Eloah,
Lest I tear you in pieces,
With no one to deliver:
23 “Whoever offers praise esteems Me;
And to him who prepares a way,
I show the deliverance of Elohim.”
17

51 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ; when
Nathan the naḇi came to him, when he brought near
Bathsheḇa.
1 Show me favour, O Elohim,
According to Your kindness;
According to the greatness of Your compassion,
Blot out my transgressions.
2 Wash me completely from my guilt,
And cleanse me from my sin.
3 For I know my transgressions,
And my sin is ever before me.
4 Against You, You alone, have I sinned,
And done evil in Your eyes;
That You might be proven right in Your words;
Be clear when You judge.
1601

TEHILLIM

See, I was brought forth in wickedness,
And in sin my mother conceived me.
6 See, You have desired truth in the inward parts,
And in the hidden part You make me know wisdom.
7 Cleanse me with hyssop, and I am clean;
Wash me, and I am whiter than snow.
8 Let me hear joy and gladness,
Let the bones You have crushed rejoice.
9 Hide Your face from my sins,
And blot out all my wickednesses.
10 Create in me a clean heart, O Elohim,
And renew a steadfast spirit within me.
11 Do not cast me away from Your presence,
And do not take Your Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh from me.
12 Restore to me the joy of Your deliverance,
And uphold me, Noble Ruaḥ!
13 Let me teach transgressors Your Ways,
So that sinners turn back to You.
14 Deliver me from blood-guilt, O Elohim,
Elohim of my deliverance,
Let my tongue sing aloud of Your righteousness.
15 O hWhY, open my lips,
And that my mouth declare Your praise.
16 For You do not desire slaughtering, or I would
give it;
You do not delight in burnt offering.
17 The slaughterings of Elohim are a broken spirit,
A heart broken and crushed, O Elohim,
These You do not despise.
18 Do good in Your good pleasure to Tsiyon;
Build the walls of Yerushalayim.
19 Then You would delight in slaughterings of
righteousness,
In burnt offering and complete burnt offering;
Then young bulls would be offered on Your altar.
5

1602

PSALMS

52 To the chief singer, A poem of Dawiḏ; when
Do’ĕḡ the Eḏomite came and told Sha’ul, and said,
“Dawiḏ went to the house of Aḥimeleḵ.”
1 Why do you boast in evil, O mighty man?
The kindness of Ĕl is all day long!
2 Your tongue devises destruction,
Like a sharp razor, working deceit.
3 You loved evil more than good,
Lying more than speaking righteousness. Selah.
4 You loved all devouring words,
O tongue of deceit.
5 Let Ĕl also break you down forever,
Take you and pluck you out of your tent.
And He shall uproot you
From the land of the living. Selah.
6 And let the righteous see and revere,
And laugh at him,
7 “See the man who did not make Elohim his
strength,
But trusted in his many riches,
Being strong in his destruction.”
8 But I am like a green olive tree
In the House of Elohim,
I have trusted in the kindness of Elohim
Forever and ever.
9 I thank You forever,
Because You have done it;
And in the presence of Your kind ones
I wait on Your Name, for it is good.

53 To the chief singer, on ‘Sickness.’ A psalm of
Dawiḏ.
1 The fool has said in his heart, “There is no
hWhY.”
1603

TEHILLIM

They have done corruptly,
And they have done abominable unrighteousness;
No one does good.
2 hWhY looked down from the shamayim on the
children of men,
To see if there is a wise one, seeking Elohim.
3 They have all turned aside;
They have together become filthy;
No one is doing good, not even one.
4 Have the workers of wickedness no knowledge,
Who eat up my people as they eat bread,
And do not call on hWhY?
5 There they are in great fear,
Where no fear was,
For hWhY shall scatter the bones
Of him who encamps against you.
You shall put them to shame,
For hWhY has rejected them.
6 O that the deliverance of Yisra’ĕl
Would be given out of Tsiyon!
When Elohim turns back the captivity of His people,
Let Ya’aqoḇ rejoice, let Yisra’ĕl be glad.

54 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. A
poem of Dawiḏ; when the Ziphites came and said to
Sha’ul, “Does Dawiḏ not hide himself with us?”
1 O Elohim, save me by Your Name,
And rightly rule me by Your might.
2 Hear my prayer, O Elohim;
Give ear to the words of my mouth.
3 For strangers have risen up against me,
And cruel men have sought after my life;
They have not put Elohim before them. Selah.
4 See Elohim is my helper;
hWhY is with those who sustain my life.
1604

PSALMS

He repays evil to my enemies.
Cut them off in Your truth.
6 Voluntarily I slaughter to You;
I praise Your Name, O hWhY, for it is good.
7 For He has delivered me out of all distress;
And my eye has looked upon my enemies.
5

55 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. A
poem of Dawiḏ.
1 Give ear to my prayer, O Elohim,
And do not hide Yourself from my plea.
2 Give heed to me, and answer me;
I wander and moan in my complaint,
3 Because of the noise of the enemy,
Because of the outcry of the wicked;
For they bring down wickedness upon me,
And in wrath they hate me.
4 My heart is pained within me,
And the fears of death have fallen upon me.
5 Fear and trembling have come upon me,
And shuddering covers me.
6 And I said, “Who would give me wings like a
dove?
I would fly away and be at rest.
7 “See, I would wander far off,
I would lodge in the wilderness. Selah.
8 “I would hasten my escape
From the raging wind and storm.”
9 Confuse, O hWhY, divide their tongues,
For I saw violence and strife in the city.
10 Day and night they go around it on its walls;
Wickedness and trouble are also in the midst of it.
11 Covetings are in its midst;
Oppression and deceit do not vanish from its streets.
1605

TEHILLIM

It is not an enemy who reproaches me
That I could bear;
Nor one who hates me who is making himself great
against me.
Then I could hide from him.
13 But it was you, a man my equal,
My companion and my friend.
14 We took sweet counsel together,
We walked to the House of Elohim in the throng.
15 Let death come upon them;
Let them go down into the grave alive,
For evil is in their dwellings, in their midst.
16 I, I call upon Elohim,
And hWhY saves me.
17 Evening and morning and at noon
I complain and moan,
And He hears my voice.
18 He has redeemed my life in peace
From the battle against me,
For there were many against me.
19 Ĕl, even He who dwells from of old,
Hears and afflicts them. Selah
Those with whom there are no changes,
Those who do not revere Elohim.
20 He has put forth his hands against those
Who were at peace with him;
He has broken his Covenant.
21 His mouth was smoother than curds,
Yet in his heart is fighting;
His words were softer than oil,
But they are drawn swords.
22 Cast your burden on hWhY,
And let Him sustain you;
He never allows the righteous to be shaken.
12

1606

PSALMS

For You, O Elohim, bring them down
To the pit of destruction;
Men of blood and deceit do not reach half their days;
But I, I trust in You.

23

56 To the chief singer, on ‘Silent dove from afar’. A
poem of Dawiḏ; when the Pelishtites took him in
Gath.
1 Show me favour, O Elohim,
For man would swallow me up;
Fighting all day long, he oppresses me.
2 My enemies would swallow me up all day long,
For many are fighting against me, O Most High.
3 In the day I am afraid, I trust in You.
4 In Elohim, whose Word I praise,
In Elohim I have trusted;
I do not fear;
What could flesh do to me?
5 All day long they twist my words;
All their thoughts are against me for evil.
6 They stir up strife, they hide,
They watch my steps,
As they lie in wait for my life.
7 Because of wickedness cast them out.
Put down the peoples in displeasure, O Elohim!
8 You have counted my wanderings;
You put my tears into Your pitcher;
Are they not in Your Book?
9 My enemies turn back in the day I call;
This I know, because Elohim is for me.
10 In Elohim, whose Word I praise,
In hWhY, whose Word I praise,
11 In Elohim I have trusted;
I do not fear;
What could man do to me?
1607

TEHILLIM

On me, O Elohim, are Your vows;
I render praises to You,
13 For You have delivered my life from death,
My feet from stumbling,
That I might walk before Elohim,
In the light of the living!
12

57 To the chief singer. ‘Do not destroy.’ A poem of
Dawiḏ; when he fled from Sha’ul in the cave.
1 Show me favour, O Elohim, show me favour!
For in You my being is taking refuge;
And in the shadow of Your wings I take refuge,
Until destruction passes by.
2 I cry out to the Most High Elohim,
To Ĕl who does perfectly for me.
3 He sends from the shamayim and saves me;
He reproaches the one who would swallow me up.
Selah.
Elohim sends forth His kindness and His truth.
4 My being is in the midst of lions;
I lie burning,
Sons of men whose teeth are spears and arrows,
And their tongue is a sharp sword.
5 Be exalted, O Elohim, above the shamayim;
Let Your esteem be above all the earth.
6 They have prepared a net for my footsteps;
My being was bowed down;
They have dug a pit before me;
They fell into the midst of it! Selah.
7 My heart is firm, O Elohim,
My heart is firm;
I sing and praise.
8 Awake, my esteem!
Awake, harp and lyre!
I awake the dawn.
1608

PSALMS

I praise You among the peoples, O hWhY;
I sing to You among the nations.
10 For Your kindness is great up to the shamayim,
And Your truth unto the clouds.
11 Be exalted above the shamayim, O Elohim;
Let Your esteem be above all the earth.
9

58 To the chief singer. ‘Do not destroy.’ A poem of
Dawiḏ.
1 Would you indeed speak righteousness, in
silence?
Do you judge straightly, you sons of men?
2 No, in heart you work unrighteousness;
On earth you weigh out the violence of your hands.
3 The wicked have been estranged from the womb;
These who speak lies go astray from birth.
4 Their poison is like the poison of a snake;
Like a deaf cobra that stops its ear,
5 So as not to hear the voice of whisperers,
Or a skilled caster of spells.
6 O Elohim, break their teeth in their mouth!
Break out the fangs of the young lions, O HWHY!
7 Let them melt, let them vanish as water;
Let Him aim His arrows that they be cut down;
8 Like a snail which melts away as it moves,
Like a woman’s stillbirth,
Let them not see the sun!
9 Before you feel your thorns or bramble,
He sweeps them away alive in wrath.
10 The righteous rejoices when he has seen the
vengeance,
He washes his feet in the blood of the wicked,
11 And man says, “Truly, the righteous are
rewarded;
Truly, there is an Elohim judging in the earth.”
1609

TEHILLIM

59 To the chief singer. ‘Do not destroy.’ A poem of
Dawiḏ; when Sha’ul sent, and they watched the
house to kill him.
1 Deliver me from my enemies, O my Elohim;
Place me on high from those who rise up against
me.
2 Deliver me from the workers of wickedness,
And save me from men of blood.
3 For look, they have lain in wait for my life;
Mighty men assemble against me,
For no transgression or sin of mine, O HWHY,
4 For no wickedness!
They run and prepare themselves.
Awake to help me, and see!
5 And You, hWhY Elohim of hosts,
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
Awake to punish all the gentiles;
Show no favour to any wicked traitors. Selah.
6 They return at evening,
They howl like a dog,
And go around the city.
7 See, they belch out with their mouth,
Swords are in their lips,
For who is listening?
8 But You, hWhY, laugh at them,
You mock all the gentiles.
9 O my Strength, I wait for You;
For Elohim is my strong tower,
My Elohim of kindness.
10 Elohim goes before me,
He lets me look upon my enemies.
11 Do not slay them, lest my people forget;
Scatter them by Your power,
And bring them down, O hWhY our shield.
1610

PSALMS

The sin of their mouth is the words of their lips,
And they are captured in their pride,
And for the cursing and lying they utter.
13 Bring to an end in wrath,
Bring to an end,
That they be no more;
And let them know
That Elohim is ruling in Ya’aqoḇ
To the ends of the earth. Selah.
14 And at evening they return,
They howl like a dog,
And go around the city.
15 They wander up and down for food,
And whine if they are not satisfied.
16 And I, I sing of Your power;
And in the morning I sing aloud of Your kindness;
For You have been my strong tower
And a refuge in the day of my distress.
17 O my Strength, to You I sing praises;
For Elohim is my strong tower,
My Elohim of kindness.
12

60 To the chief singer on ‘Lilies of witness.’ A poem
of Dawiḏ, to teach; when he fought with AramNaharayim and with Aram-Tsoḇah, when Yo’aḇ
returned, and smote Eḏom in the Valley of Salt,
twelve thousand.
1 O Elohim, You have rejected us;
You have broken us;
You have been displeased;
Turn back to us!
2 You have made the earth tremble;
You have broken it;
Heal its breaches, for it is shaken.
1611

TEHILLIM

You have let Your people see hardship;
You have made us drink the wine of reeling.
4 You have given a banner to those who revere
You,
That it might be lifted up
Because of the truth. Selah.
5 That those You love might be rescued,
Save with Your right hand and answer me.
6 Elohim has spoken in His qodeshah,
“I exult, I portion out Sheḵem
And measure out the Valley of Sukkoth.
7 “Gil’aḏ is Mine and Menashsheh is Mine,
And Ephrayim is the defence of My head,
Yahuḏah is My lawgiver.
8 “Mo’aḇ is My wash-pot,
Over Eḏom I cast My shoe,
Shout loud, O Pelesheth, because of Me.”
9 Who would bring me to the strong city?
Who shall lead me to Eḏom?
10 Have not You, O Elohim, rejected us?
And You do not go out, O Elohim,
With our armies!
11 Give us help from distress,
For the help of man is naught.
12 In Elohim we do mightily,
And He treads down our adversaries!
3

61 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. Of
Dawiḏ.
1 Hear my cry, O Elohim,
Listen to my prayer.
2 From the end of the earth I call unto You,
When my heart is faint;
Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
1612

PSALMS

For You have been my refuge,
A strong tower in the face of the enemy.
4 Let me dwell in Your Tent forever;
Let me take refuge in the shelter of Your wings.
Selah.
5 For You, O Elohim, have heard my vows;
You have given me the inheritance
Of those who revere Your Name.
6 You add days to the days of the sovereign,
His years as many generations.
7 Let him dwell forever before Elohim.
Prepare kindness and truth to preserve him!
8 So I sing praise to Your Name forever,
When I pay my vows day by day.
3

62 To the chief singer, to Yeḏuthun. A psalm of
Dawiḏ.
1 My being finds rest in Elohim alone;
From Him is my deliverance.
2 He alone is my rock and my deliverance, my
strong tower;
I am not greatly shaken.
3 How long would you assail a man?
You crush him, all of you,
Like a leaning wall, a tottering fence.
4 They plotted to topple him from his high position;
They delight in lies;
They baraḵ with their mouth,
But in their heart they curse. Selah.
5 My being, finds rest in Elohim alone,
Because my expectation is from Him.
6 He alone is my rock and my deliverance, my
strong tower;
I am not shaken.
1613

TEHILLIM

In Elohim is my deliverance and my esteem;
The rock of my strength, my refuge is in Elohim.
8 Trust in Him at all times, you people;
Pour out your heart before Him;
Elohim is a refuge for us. Selah.
9 Sons of Aḏam are but a breath,
Sons of men are a lie;
If weighed in the scales,
They are altogether lighter than breath.
10 Do not trust in oppression.
And do not become vain in robbery;
If riches increase,
Do not apply your heart to them.
11 Elohim has spoken once,
Twice I have heard this:
That strength belongs to Elohim.
12 And kindness is Yours, O hWhY;
For You reward each one according to his work.
7

63 A psalm of Dawiḏ; when he was in the
wilderness of Yahuḏah.
1 O Elohim, You are my Ĕl;
I earnestly seek You;
My being has thirsted for You;
My flesh has longed for You
In a dry and thirsty land without water.
2 Therefore I have had a vision of You
In the qodesh place,
To see Your power and Your esteem.
3 Because Your kindness is better than life,
My lips praise You.
4 Therefore I baraḵ You while I live;
In Your Name I lift up my hands.
5 My being is satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
And my mouth praises You with singing lips.
1614

PSALMS

When I remember You on my bed,
I meditate on You in the night watches.
7 For You have been my help,
And in the shadow of Your wings I sing.
8 My being has closely followed You;
Your right hand upholds me.
9 But those who seek to destroy my life,
Go into the lower parts of the earth.
10 They are handed over
To the power of the sword;
They become a portion for jackals.
11 But let the sovereign rejoice in Elohim;
Let everyone who swears by Him exult;
For the mouth of those speaking lies are stopped.
6

64 To the chief singer. A psalm of Dawiḏ.
Hear my voice, O Elohim, in my meditation;
Guard my life from the threats of the enemy.
2 Hide me from the secret plans of the evil-doers,
From the tumult of the workers of wickedness,
3 Who sharpen their tongue like a sword,
And aim their arrows, a bitter word,
4 To shoot in ambush at someone blameless,
They shoot at him suddenly and do not fear.
5 They arm themselves with an evil word;
They talk of hiding snares;
They have said, “Who sees them?”
6 They search out unrighteousnesses,
“We have perfected a well searched out plan.”
For the inward part of man, and heart, are deep.
7 But Elohim shoots at them with an arrow;
Their wounds shall be sudden.
8 And they cause one to stumble,
Their own tongue is against them;
All who see them flee away.
1

1615

TEHILLIM

And all men revere,
And declare the work of Elohim.
And they shall wisely consider
What He has done.
10 The righteous rejoice in hWhY,
And shall take refuge in Him,
And all the upright in heart do praise.
9

65 To the chief singer. A psalm, a song of Dawiḏ.
To You, stillness, praise, in Tsiyon, O Elohim;
And to You a vow is paid.
2 To You who hears all prayer, all flesh comes.
3 Wicked matters were mightier than I;
As for our transgressions,
You cover them.
4 Baruḵ is the one You choose,
And bring near to dwell in Your courts.
We are satisfied with the goodness of Your House,
Your qodesh Hĕyḵal.
5 By awesome deeds in righteousness You answer
us,
O Elohim of our deliverance,
The Trust of all the ends of the earth,
And the distant seas;
6 Who established the mountains by His strength,
Being girded with might;
7 Who stills the roaring of the seas,
The roaring of their waves,
And the uproar of the peoples.
8 And they who dwell in the farthest parts,
Are afraid of Your signs;
You make the outgoings of the morning and evening
rejoice.
9 You have visited the earth and watered it,
You greatly enrich it;
1

1616

PSALMS

The river of Elohim is filled with water;
You provide their grain,
For so You have prepared it.
10 Its ridges have been filled,
Its furrows have been deepened,
You make it soft with showers,
You baraḵ its growth.
11 You have crowned the year with Your goodness,
And Your paths drip with fatness.
12 The pastures of the wilderness drip,
And the hills are girded with rejoicing.
13 The meadows are dressed in flocks,
And valleys are covered with grain;
They shout for joy and sing.

66 To the chief singer. A psalm, a song.
Shout with joy to Elohim,
All the earth!
2 Sing out the splendour of His Name;
Make His praise esteemed.
3 Say to Elohim, “How awesome are Your works!
Through the greatness of Your power
Your enemies pretend obedience to You.
4 “All the earth bow to You,
They sing praises to You,
They praise Your Name.” Selah.
5 Come and see the works of Elohim,
Awesome acts toward the sons of men.
6 He has turned the sea into dry land,
They went through the river on foot.
There we rejoiced in Him,
7 Who rules by His power forever;
His eyes keeping watch on the gentiles;
Let the rebellious not exalt themselves. Selah.
1

1617

TEHILLIM

Baraḵ our Elohim, you peoples!
And sound His praise abroad,
9 Who keeps us in life,
And does not allow our feet to be moved.
10 For You, O Elohim, have proved us;
You have refined us as silver is refined.
11 You brought us into the net;
You laid affliction on our loins.
12 You have let men ride at our head;
We went through fire and through water;
But You brought us out to plenty.
13 I enter Your house with burnt offerings;
I complete my vows to You,
14 That which my lips have uttered
And my mouth spoke in my distress.
15 Burnt offerings of fatlings I offer to You,
With the incense of rams;
I offer bulls with goats. Selah.
16 Come, hear, all you who revere Elohim,
And I relate what He has done for my being.
17 I called to Him with my mouth,
And praise was in my tongue.
18 If I have seen wickedness in my heart,
hWhY would not hear.
19 Truly, Elohim has heard me;
He has given heed to the voice of my prayer.
20 Baruḵ be Elohim,
Who has not turned away my prayer,
Nor His kindness from me!
8

67 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. A
psalm, a song.
1 Elohim favours us and baraḵ us,
Cause His face to shine upon us. Selah.
1618

PSALMS

For Your Way to be known on earth,
Your deliverance among all nations.
3 Let the peoples praise You, O Elohim,
Let all the peoples praise You.
4 Let the nations be glad and sing for joy!
For You judge the peoples uprightly,
And lead the nations on earth. Selah.
5 Let the peoples praise You, O Elohim;
Let all the peoples praise You.
6 The earth shall give her increase;
Elohim, our own Elohim, baraḵ us!
7 Elohim baraḵ us!
And all the ends of the earth revere Him!
2

68 To the chief singer. A psalm, a song of Dawiḏ.
Elohim arises, His enemies are scattered.
And those who hate Him flee before Him!
2 As smoke is driven away,
You drive away;
As wax melts before the fire,
The wicked perish before Elohim.
3 But the righteous are glad,
They exult before Elohim.
And they rejoice with gladness.
4 Sing to Elohim, sing praises to His Name.
Raise up a highway for Him
Who rides through the deserts,
By His Name Yah,
And exult before Him.
5 Father of the fatherless,
And Right-Ruler of widows,
Is Elohim in His qodesh dwelling.
6 Elohim makes a home for the lonely;
He brings out into prosperity
1

1619

TEHILLIM

Those who are bound with chains;
Only the rebellious shall dwell in a dry land.
7 O Elohim, when You went out before Your
people,
When You stepped through the wilderness, Selah.
8 The earth shook and the shamayim dropped
before Elohim,
This Sinai, shook before Elohim, the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
9 You, O Elohim, sent a shower of plenty,
You confirmed Your inheritance,
When it was weary.
10 Your flock dwelt in it;
You provided from Your goodness for the poor, O
Elohim.
11 hWhY gave the Word;
The women who proclaimed it was a great company:
12 “Sovereigns of armies flee in haste!
And she who remains at home divides the spoil.”
13 If you lie down among the sheepfolds,
The wings of a dove are covered with silver,
And her feathers with yellow gold.
14 When Ĕl Shaddai scattered sovereigns in it,
It snowed in Tsalmon.
15 A mountain of Elohim is the mountain of Bashan;
A mountain of peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
16 O mountain of peaks, why do you gaze in envy
At the mountain which Elohim desired to dwell in?
hWhY even dwells forever.
17 The chariots of Elohim are twenty thousand,
Thousands of thousands;
hWhY came from Sinai
Into the qodesh place.
18 You have ascended on high,
You have led captivity captive,
1620

PSALMS

You have received gifts among men,
And even the rebellious,
That Yah Elohim might dwell.
19 Baruḵ be hWhY,
Day by day He bears our burden,
The Ĕl of our deliverance! Selah.
20 Our Ĕl is the Ĕl of deliverance;
And hWhY, the Aḏon, belong escapes from death.
21 Indeed, Elohim smites the head of His enemies,
The hairy scalp of him who walks about in His guilt.
22 hWhY said, “I bring back from Bashan,
I bring back from the depths of the sea,
23 “So that you plunge your foot in blood;
That the tongues of your dogs
Have their portion from the enemies.”
24 They have seen Your goings, O Elohim,
The goings of my Ĕl, my Sovereign,
Into the qodesh place.
25 The singers went in front,
The players on instruments after them;
Among them were the maidens playing tambourines.
26 Baraḵ Elohim in the assemblies,
hWhY, from the fountain of Yisra’ĕl.
27 There is Binyamin, the smallest, their ruler,
The leaders of Yahuḏah, their company,
The leader of Zeḇulun, the leader of Naphtali.
28 Your Elohim has commanded your strength, be
strong!
O Elohim, this You have worked out for us!
29 Because of Your Hĕyḵal at Yerushalayim,
Sovereigns bring presents to You.
30 Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds,
The herd of bulls, with the calves of the peoples,
Each one humbling himself with pieces of silver.
Scatter the peoples who delight in conflicts!
1621

TEHILLIM

Ambassadors come out of Mitsrayim;
Kush stretches out her hands to Elohim.
32 Sing to Elohim, you reigns of the earth,
Praises to hWhY, Selah.
33 To Him who rides on the ancient highest
shamayim!
See, He sends out His voice, a mighty voice.
34 Ascribe strength to Elohim;
His excellence is over Yisra’ĕl,
And His strength is in the clouds.
35 O Elohim, awesome from Your Miqdashim,
The Ĕl of Yisra’ĕl is He
Who gives strength and power to His people.
Baruḵ be Elohim!
31

69 To the chief singer, on trumpets. Of Dawiḏ.
Save me, O Elohim!
For waters have come up to my neck.
2 I have sunk in deep mud,
And there is no place to stand;
I have come into deep waters,
And the floods overflow me.
3 I am worn out from my crying;
My throat is dry;
My eyes grow dim
As I wait for my Elohim.
4 Those who hate me without a cause
Are more than the hairs of my head;
They are mighty who would destroy me,
My lying enemies;
What I did not steal, I restored.
5 O Elohim, You Yourself know my foolishness;
And my guilt has not been hidden from You.
6 Let not those who wait for You,
O Aḏonai hWhY of hosts,
1

1622

PSALMS

Be ashamed because of me;
Let not those who seek You
Be humbled because of me,
O Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
7 Because I have borne reproach for Your sake;
Shame has covered my face.
8 I have become a stranger to my brothers,
And a foreigner to my mother’s children;
9 Because ardour for Your house has eaten me up,
And the reproaches of those who reproach You
have fallen on me.
10 And I wept in my being with fasting,
And it became my reproach.
11 And when I put on sackcloth,
I became a proverb to them.
12 They who sit in the gate talk about me,
And I am the song of the drunkards.
13 But as for me, my prayer is to You, O hWhY,
At an acceptable time, O Elohim.
In the greatness of Your kindness,
Answer me in the truth of Your deliverance.
14 Rescue me out of the mire,
And let me not sink.
Let me be rescued from those who hate me,
And out of the deep waters.
15 Let not a flood of waters overflow me,
Nor let the deep swallow me up,
Nor let the pit shut its mouth on me.
16 Answer me, O hWhY, for Your kindness is good.
According to the greatness of Your compassion, turn
to me.
17 And do not hide Your face from Your servant,
For I am in distress;
Answer me speedily.
1623

TEHILLIM

Draw near to my being, redeem it;
Ransom me because of my enemies.
19 You Yourself know my reproach,
And my shame and my confusion;
My adversaries are all before You.
20 Reproach has broken my heart and I am sick;
I looked for sympathy, but there was none;
And for comforters, but I found none.
21 And they gave me gall for my food,
And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
22 Let their table before them become a snare,
And a trap to those at ease.
23 Let their eyes be darkened, so as not to see;
And make their loins shake continually.
24 Pour out Your wrath upon them,
And let Your burning displeasure overtake them.
25 Let their encampments be deserted;
Let no one dwell in their tents.
26 For they persecute him whom You have smitten,
And talk about the pain of those You have wounded.
27 Add wickedness to their wickedness,
And let them not enter into Your righteousness.
28 Let them be blotted out of the Book of the living,
And not be written with the righteous.
29 But I am poor and in pain;
Let Your deliverance,
O Elohim, place me up on high.
30 I praise the Name of Elohim with a song,
And I make Him great with thanksgiving.
31 And this pleases hWhY more than an ox,
A bull with horns, hooves.
32 The humble shall see, they rejoice,
You who seek Elohim, and your hearts live.
33 For hWhY hears the poor;
And He shall not despise His captives.
18

1624

PSALMS

Let the shamayim and earth praise Him,
The seas and all that moves in them.
35 For Elohim shall save Tsiyon
And build the cities of Yahuḏah.
And they shall dwell there and possess it,
36 And the seed of His servants inherit it,
And those who love His Name dwell in it.
34

70 To the chief singer. Of Dawiḏ; to bring
remembrance.
1 O Elohim, deliver me!
Hasten to my help, O HWHY!
2 Let those who seek my life
Be ashamed and abashed,
Let those who are desiring my evil
Be turned back and humiliated.
3 Let those who say, “Aha, aha!”
Be turned back because of their shame.
4 Let all those who seek You Rejoice and be glad
in You;
And let those who love Your deliverance always say,
“Let Elohim be made great!”
5 But I am poor and needy;
Hasten to me, O Elohim!
You are my help and my deliverer;
O hWhY, do not delay.

71 In You, O hWhY, I have taken refuge;
Let me never be ashamed.
2 In Your righteousness deliver and rescue me;
Incline Your ear to me, and save me.
3 Be to me a rock to dwell in,
To go into continually.
You have given the command to save me,
For You are my rock and my stronghold.
1625

TEHILLIM

Rescue me, O my Elohim,
Out of the hand of the wicked,
Out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel.
5 For You are my expectation,
Aḏonai hWhY, my trust from my youth.
6 Upon You I have leaned from my birth;
You took me out of my mother’s womb.
My praise is continually of You.
7 I have become as a wonder to many,
But You are my strong refuge.
8 My mouth is filled, Your praise, Your splendour,
all the day.
9 Do not cast me off in the time of old age,
When my strength fails, do not forsake me.
10 For my enemies have spoken against me.
And those who watch for my life
Have taken counsel together,
11 Saying, “Elohim has forsaken him;
Pursue and take him, for there is no one to deliver.”
12 O Elohim, do not be far from me;
My Elohim, hasten to my help!
13 Let those who are adversaries of my life
Be ashamed, consumed,
Let those who seek my evil
Be covered with reproach and confusion.
14 But I continually wait,
And shall praise You more and more.
15 My mouth recounts Your righteousness
Your deliverance all the day,
Though I do not know numbers.
16 I come in the might of the Aḏon hWhY;
I make mention of Your righteousness,Yours alone.
17 Elohim, You have taught me from my youth;
And to this day I declare Your wonders.
4

1626

PSALMS

And also when I am old and grey,
O Elohim, do not forsake me,
Until I declare Your strength to a generation,
Your might to all those who are to come.
19 For Your righteousness, O Elohim, is Most High,
You who have done greatness.
O Elohim, who is like You?
20 You who have shown me great and evil
distresses,
Revive me again and bring me up again
From the depths of the earth.
21 You increase my greatness,
And comfort me on every side.
22 Also with the lyre I praise You
For Your trustworthiness, O my Elohim!
I sing to You with the lyre,
O Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
23 My lips shout for joy when I sing to You,
Even my being, which You have redeemed.
24 My tongue, too, utters Your righteousness all day
long;
For those who have been seeking my evil
Have been put to shame,
Have become abashed.
18

72 To Shelomoh.
O Elohim, give the sovereign Your Right-Rulings,
And Your righteousness to the son of a sovereign.
2 Let Him rule Your people with righteousness,
And Your poor with Right-Ruling.
3 Let the mountains bring peace to the people,
And the hills, by righteousness.
4 Let Him rightly rule the poor of the people,
Save the children of the needy,
And crush the oppressor.
1

1627

TEHILLIM

Let them revere You before the sun,
And before the moon, in all generations.
6 Let Him come down like rain upon the mown
grass,
Like showers, watering the earth.
7 Let the righteous flourish in His days,
With plenty of peace,
Till the moon is no more.
8 And let Him rule from sea to sea,
And from the River to the ends of the earth.
9 Let those dwelling in the desert bow before Him,
And His enemies lick the dust.
10 Let the sovereigns of Tarshish and of the isles
bring presents;
The sovereigns of Sheḇa and Seḇa offer gifts.
11 And let all sovereigns bow down before Him,
All nations serve Him.
12 For He delivers the needy when he cries,
And the poor, who has no helper.
13 He spares the poor and needy,
And He saves the lives of the needy.
14 He redeems their life from oppression and from
violence;
And their blood is precious in His eyes.
15 And He shall live,
And the gold of Sheḇa be given to Him,
And prayer be made for Him continually;
Let Him be baruḵ all day long.
16 Let there be plenty of grain in the earth,
On the top of the mountains,
Let its fruit wave like Leḇanon,
And those of the city flourish like grass of the earth.
17 Let His Name be forever,
His Name continue before the sun;
5

1628

PSALMS

And let them baraḵ themselves in Him;
Let all nations call Him baruḵ.
18 Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim,
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
He alone is doing wonders!
19 And baruḵ be His esteemed Name forever!
And let all the earth
Be filled with His esteem.
Amĕn and Amĕn.
20 The prayers of Dawiḏ the son of Yishai are
ended.

73 A psalm of Asaph.
Elohim is truly good to Yisra’ĕl,
To those whose heart is clean.
2 But as for me, my feet had almost stumbled,
My steps had nearly slipped.
3 For I was envious of the boasters,
When I saw the peace of the wicked.
4 For death has no pangs for them,
And their strength is firm.
5 They are not in trouble as other men,
And they are not plagued like other men.
6 So pride is their necklace,
The garment of violence covers them.
7 Their eyes bulge from fatness;
Their heart overflows with imaginations.
8 They mock and speak in the evil of oppression;
They speak loftily.
9 They have put their mouth against the shamayim,
And their tongue walks through the earth,
10 “Therefore His people return here,
And waters filled are drained by them!”
11 And they have said, “How could Ĕl know?
And is there knowledge in the Most High?”
1

1629

TEHILLIM

See, these are the wicked,
And always at ease,
They have amassed wealth!
13 Indeed, in vain have I cleansed my heart,
And washed my hands in innocence.
14 For I am plagued all day long,
And my reproof is every morning.
15 If I had said, “Let me speak thus,”
See, I would have deceived
A generation of Your children.
16 Yet, when I tried to understand this,
It was labour to my eyes 17 Until I went into the Miqdash of Ĕl;
I perceived their end.
18 Indeed, You put them in slippery places;
You make them fall to ruins.
19 How suddenly they are ruined!
Completely swept away through destructions.
20 hWhY, when You awake
You despise their image,
As one does a dream after waking.
21 For my heart was in a ferment,
And I was pierced in my kidneys.
22 I was stupid and ignorant,
I was like a beast toward You.
23 Yet I am always with You,
You took hold of my right hand.
24 You lead me by Your counsel,
And afterward receive me unto esteem.
25 Whom do I have in the shamayim?
And I have desired no one besides You on earth.
26 My flesh and my heart shall waste away,
Elohim is the rock of my heart
And my portion forever.
12

1630

PSALMS

For look, those who are far from You perish;
You shall cut off all those
Who go whoring away from You.
28 But as for me, it is good to be near Elohim.
I have made my refuge in the Aḏon hWhY,
To declare all Your works.
27

74 A poem of Asaph.
O Elohim, why do You forever reject us?
Why does Your displeasure smoke
Against the sheep of Your pasture?
2 Remember Your congregation You purchased of
old,
The tribe of Your inheritance You redeemed,
This Mount Tsiyon where You have dwelt.
3 Lift up Your steps to the endless ruins;
The enemy has done all evil in the qodesh place.
4 Your adversaries have roared
In the midst of Your appointments;
They have put up their own signs as signs.
5 It seems as if one had lifted up
Axes among the thick trees.
6 And now all its carved work,
They have broken down with axe and hammer.
7 They have cast fire into Your Miqdash,
They have profaned the Mishkan of Your Name to
the ground.
8 They said in their hearts, “Let us suppress them
altogether.”
They burned all the meeting places of Ĕl in the land.
9 We do not see our signs,
There is no longer a naḇi,
Nor any among us who knows how long.
1

1631

TEHILLIM

O Elohim, how long would the adversary
reproach?
Would the enemy despise Your Name forever?
11 Why do You hold back Your hand, even Your
right hand?
From the midst of Your bosom - end it!
12 For Elohim is my Sovereign from of old,
Working deliverance in the midst of the earth.
13 You divided the sea by Your might;
You broke the heads of the sea serpents in the
waters.
14 You broke the heads of Liwiathan in pieces,
You left him meat for people in the desert.
15 You cleaved the fountain and the flood,
You dried up mighty rivers.
16 The day is Yours, the night is Yours too,
You have established the light and the sun.
17 You have appointed all the borders of the earth,
You have made summer and winter.
18 Remember this: the enemy has reproached
hWhY,
And a foolish people has despised Your Name.
19 Do not give the being of Your turtledove to the
wild beast!
Do not forget the life of Your afflicted ones forever.
20 Look to the Covenant,
For the dark places of the earth are filled
With haunts of violence.
21 Let not the crushed one return ashamed!
Let the poor and needy praise Your Name.
22 Arise, O Elohim, plead Your own cause,
Remember how the foolish man reproaches You
daily.
10

1632

PSALMS

Do not forget the voice of Your enemies,
The uproar of those rising up against You increases
continually.

23

75 To the chief singer. ‘Do not destroy.’ A psalm, a
song of Asaph.
1 We shall give thanks to You,
O Elohim, we shall give thanks!
And Your Name is near!
Your wonders shall be declared!
2 “When I seize the appointed time,
It is I who judge in uprightness.
3 “The earth and all its inhabitants are melted;
It is I who balances its columns. Selah.
4 “I said to the boasters, ‘Do not boast,’
And to the wicked, ‘Do not lift up the horn.
5 “Do not lift up your horn on high You speak with a stiff neck.’ ”
6 For exaltations are neither from the east,
Nor from the west nor from the wilderness.
7 But Elohim is the Judge - He puts down one,
And exalts another.
8 For a cup is in the hand of hWhY,
And the wine shall foam;
It is filled with a mixture,
And He pours it out.
All the wicked of the earth drink,
Draining it to the dregs.
9 But I, I declare forever,
I sing praises to the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.
10 “And all the horns of the wicked I cut off;
The horns of the righteous are lifted up.”

76 To the chief singer, on stringed instruments. A
psalm, a song of Asaph.
1633

TEHILLIM

In Yahuḏah Elohim is known;
His Name is great in Yisra’ĕl.
2 And His booth is in Shalĕm,
And His dwelling place in Tsiyon.
3 There He broke the arrows of the bow,
The shield and the sword and the battle-axe. Selah.
4 You are resplendent,
More excellent than mountains of prey.
5 The stout-hearted have been stripped;
They slept their sleep;
And none of the mighty men have found their hands.
6 At Your rebuke, O Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ,
Both the rider and horse lay stunned.
7 You, You are to be revered;
And who would stand in Your presence
When You are displeased?
8 From the shamayim You shall cause judgment to
be heard;
The earth shall fear, and shall be still,
9 When Elohim arises to Right-Ruling,
To save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
10 For the wrath of mankind praises You,
With the remainder of wrath You gird Yourself!
11 Make vows to hWhY your Elohim, and pay them.
Let all who are around Him bring presents
To the One to be revered.
12 He cuts off the spirit of leaders,
He is awesome to the sovereigns of the earth!
1

77 To the chief singer, to Yeḏuthun. A psalm of
Asaph.
1 My voice is to Elohim, and I cry;
My voice is to Elohim, and He listened to me.
2 In the day of my distress I sought hWhY;
My hand was stretched out in the night
1634

PSALMS

And it did not cease,
My being refused to be comforted.
3 I remembered Elohim, and groaned;
I complained, and my spirit grew faint. Selah.
4 You ceased the watches of my eyes,
I was too troubled to speak.
5 I have thought about the days of old,
The years long past.
6 I remember my song in the night,
I meditate within my heart,
And my spirit searches diligently.
7 Would hWhY reject forever,
And never again be pleased?
8 Has His kindness ceased forever,
Has the promise failed for all generations?
9 Has Ĕl forgotten to show favour?
Has He shut up His compassions in displeasure?
Selah.
10 And I said, “This is my grief:
That the right hand of the Most High has changed.”
11 I remember the deeds of Yah,
For I remember Your wonders of old.
12 And I shall meditate on all Your work,
And talk of Your deeds.
13 Your Way, O Elohim, is in Qodeshah
Who is a great Ĕl like Elohim?
14 You are the Ĕl who does wonders;
You have made known Your strength among the
peoples.
15 By Your arm You have redeemed Your people,
The sons of Ya’aqoḇ and Yosĕph. Selah.
16 The waters saw You, O Elohim;
The waters saw You, they were afraid;
The depths also trembled.
1635

TEHILLIM

The clouds poured out water;
The shamayim rumbled;
Also, Your arrows flashed back and forth.
18 The voice of Your thunder rolled along;
Lightnings lit up the world;
The earth trembled and shook.
19 Your way was in the sea,
And Your path in the great waters,
And Your footsteps were not known.
20 You led Your people like a flock
By the hand of Mosheh and Aharon.
17

78 A poem of Asaph.
My people, give ear to my Torah,
Incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
2 I open my mouth in a parable;
I utter riddles of old,
3 Which we have heard and known,
For our fathers have declared to us.
4 We do not hide from their children,
Declaring to the generation to come the praises of
hWhY,
And His strength and His wonders which He has
done.
5 For He raised a witness in Ya’aqoḇ,
And put a Torah in Yisra’ĕl,
Which He commanded our fathers,
To teach them to their children;
6 That it might be known to a generation to come,
To children who would be born,
To rise up and declare to their children,
7 And place their trust in Elohim,
And not forget the works of Ĕl,
But watch over His Commands,
1

1636

PSALMS

And not be like their fathers,
A stubborn and rebellious generation,
A generation which did not prepare its heart,
Whose spirit was not steadfast to Ĕl.
9 The children of Ephrayim, armed bow archers,
Turned back in the day of battle.
10 They did not guard the Covenant of Elohim,
And they refused to walk in His Torah,
11 And they forgot His deeds
And His wonders which He had shown them.
12 He did wonders in the sight of their fathers,
In the land of Mitsrayim, in the field of Tso’an.
13 He split the sea and caused them to pass
through,
And He made the waters stand up like a heap,
14 And led them with the cloud by day,
And all the night with a light of fire.
15 He split the rocks in the wilderness,
And made them drink, as from the great depths,
16 And brought forth streams from the rock,
And caused waters to come down as rivers.
17 Yet they sinned still more against Him
To rebel against the Most High in the desert.
18 And they tried Ĕl in their heart
By asking food according to their desire.
19 And they spoke against Elohim.
They said, “Is Ĕl able to prepare a table in the
wilderness?
20 “Look, He struck the rock,
So that the waters gushed out,
And the streams overflowed.
Is He able to give bread also?
Would He provide meat for His people?”
8

1637

TEHILLIM

Therefore hWhY heard, and He was wroth;
So a fire was kindled against Ya’aqoḇ,
And displeasure also came up against Yisra’ĕl,
22 Because they did not believe in Elohim,
Neither did they trust in His deliverance.
23 Yet He had commanded the clouds above,
And opened the doors of the shamayim,
24 And He rained down manna on them to eat,
And He gave them the grain of the shamayim.
25 Men ate bread of the mighty;
He sent them provisions to satisfaction.
26 He made an east wind blow in the shamayim;
And by His power He brought in the south wind.
27 And He rained meat on them like the dust,
And winged birds like the sand of the seas,
28 And let them fall in the midst of His camp,
All around His Mishkan.
29 So they ate and were completely satisfied,
For He brought them what they desired.
30 They had not turned away from their desire,
Their food was still in their mouths,
31 When the wrath of Elohim came against them,
And He slew among their fat ones,
And He struck down the choice ones of Yisra’ĕl.
32 In spite of all this they still sinned,
And did not believe in His wonders.
33 So He ended their days in a breath,
And their years in trouble.
34 When He slew them, then they sought Him,
And they returned and earnestly sought Ĕl.
35 And they remembered that Elohim was their rock,
And the Most High Ĕl their redeemer.
36 But they flattered Him with their mouth,
And they lied to Him with their tongue,
21

1638

PSALMS

For their heart was not steadfast with Him,
And they were not true to His Covenant.
38 But He, the Compassionate One,
Pardoned wickedness,
And did not destroy them.
And many a time He turned His displeasure away,
And did not stir up all His wrath.
39 For He remembered that they were but flesh,
A passing breath that does not return.
40 How often they rebelled against Him in the
wilderness,
And grieved Him in the desert!
41 And again and again they tried Ĕl,
And provoked the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl.
42 They did not remember His hand,
The day when He redeemed them from the
adversary,
43 How He worked His signs in Mitsrayim,
And His wonders in the field of Tso’an.
44 He turned their rivers into blood,
And they could not drink their streams.
45 He sent among them swarms of flies which
devoured them,
And frogs which destroyed them,
46 And gave their crops to the caterpillar,
And their labour to the locust.
47 He destroyed their vines with hail,
And their sycamore trees with frost,
48 And gave their beasts over to the hail,
And their livestock to bolts of fire.
49 He sent on them the burning of His displeasure,
Wrath, and rage, and distress,
A deputation of messengers of evils.
37

1639

TEHILLIM

He made a path for His displeasure;
He did not spare their being from death,
But gave their life over to the plague.
51 And He smote all the first-born in Mitsrayim,
The first-fruits of strength in the tents of Ḥam,
52 Then made His own people go forth like sheep,
And led them in the wilderness like a flock,
53 And He led them on safely,
And they did not fear,
But the sea covered their enemies.
54 And He brought them to the border of His qodesh
place,
This mountain which His right hand had gained,
55 And drove out nations before them,
And allotted them a measured inheritance,
And made the tribes of Yisra’ĕl dwell in their tents.
56 Yet they tried and rebelled
Against the Most High Elohim,
And did not guard His Witnesses,
57 But they turned back
And acted treacherously like their fathers;
They twisted like a treacherous bow.
58 For they enraged Him with their high places,
And moved Him to jealousy with their carved
images.
59 When Elohim heard this, He was wroth,
And greatly despised Yisra’ĕl,
60 And He left the Mishkan of Shiloh,
The Tent which He had put up among men.
61 And He gave His strength into captivity
And His comeliness into the hand of the adversary.
62 And He gave His people over to the sword,
And He was wroth with His inheritance.
63 His young men were consumed by fire,
And His maidens were not praised.
50

1640

PSALMS

His kohenim fell by the sword,
And their widows could not weep.
65 Then hWhY awoke as one asleep,
As a mighty man who shouts because of wine.
66 And He smote His adversaries backward;
He put them to an everlasting reproach.
67 Then He rejected the tent of Yosĕph,
And did not choose the tribe of Ephrayim,
68 But chose the tribe of Yahuḏah,
Mount Tsiyon, which He loved.
69 And He built His Miqdash like the heights,
Like the earth He founded it forever.
70 And He chose Dawiḏ His servant,
And took him from the sheepfolds;
71 He brought him in from tending the ewes,
To shepherd Ya’aqoḇ His people,
And Yisra’ĕl His inheritance.
72 And he shepherded them
According to the integrity of his heart,
And led them by the skill of his hands.
64

79 A psalm of Asaph.
O Elohim, the gentiles have come into Your
inheritance;
They have defiled Your qodesh Hĕyḵal;
They turned Yerushalayim into ruins.
2 They have given the dead bodies of Your
servants
As food for the birds of the shamayim,
The flesh of Your kind ones to the wild beast of the
earth.
3 They have poured out their blood
Like water all around Yerushalayim,
With no one to bury.
1

1641

TEHILLIM

We have become a reproach to our neighbours,
A scorn and a mockery to those who are around us.
5 How long, O hWhY,
Would You be enraged forever?
Would Your jealousy burn like fire?
6 Pour out Your wrath on the gentiles
Who have not known You,
And on reigns that have not called on Your Name
7 For they have devoured Ya’aqoḇ,
And laid waste his pasture.
8 Do not remember against us
The wickednesses of the fathers!
Let Your compassion speedily meet us,
For we have been greatly weakened.
9 Help us, O Elohim of our deliverance,
For the sake of the esteem of Your Name.
And deliver us, and cover over our sins,
For Your Name’s sake!
10 Why should the gentiles say,
“Where is their Elohim?”
Let the vengeance of the outpoured blood of Your
servants
Be known among the gentiles,
Before our eyes.
11 Let the groaning of the prisoner come before
You.
According to the greatness of Your arm
Preserve those appointed to death.
12 And repay to our neighbours sevenfold
Their reproach, into their bosom,
With which they have reproached You, O hWhY.
13 And we, Your people and the sheep of Your
pasture,
We give thanks to You forever;
4

1642

PSALMS

From generation to generation we show forth Your
praise.

80 To the chief singer on ‘Lilies of witness.’ A
psalm of Asaph.
1 Give ear, O Shepherd of Yisra’ĕl,
Who leads Yosĕph like a flock;
Who dwells between the keruḇim, shine forth!
2 Before Ephrayim, Binyamin, and Menashsheh,
Stir up Your might,
And come and save us!
3 Cause us to turn back, O Elohim,
And cause Your face to shine,
That we might be saved!
4 O hWhY Elohim of hosts,
How long shall You be wroth
Against the prayer of Your people?
5 You have caused them to eat the bread of tears,
And have caused them to drink
With tears, a third time.
6 You have made us a strife to our neighbours,
And our enemies laugh among themselves.
7 Turn us back, O Elohim of hosts,
And cause Your face to shine,
That we might be saved!
8 You brought a vine out of Mitsrayim;
You drove out the nations, and planted it.
9 You cleared a place for it,
And caused it to take deep root,
And it filled the land.
10 Hills were covered with its shadow,
And the mighty cedars with its twigs.
11 She spread her branches to the Sea,
And her shoots to the River.
1643

TEHILLIM

Why have You broken down her hedges,
So that every passer-by plucked her fruit?
13 The boar out of the forest ravages it,
And the wild beast of the field devours it.
14 Return, we beg You, O Elohim of hosts;
Look down from the shamayim, and see,
And visit this vine,
15 And the stock which Your right hand has planted,
And the Bĕn whom You made strong for Yourself.
16 It is burned with fire, it is cut down;
They perish at the rebuke of Your face.
17 Let Your hand be upon the One at Your right
hand,
Upon the Bĕn of Aḏam whom You made strong for
Yourself,
18 And we shall not backslide from You.
Revive us, and let us call upon Your Name.
19 Turn us back, O hWhY Elohim of hosts,
And cause Your face to shine,
That we might be saved!
12

81 To the chief singer, on harp. Of Asaph.
Shout for joy to Elohim our strength;
Raise a shout to the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.
2 Lift up a song and beat the tambourine,
The pleasant lyre and with the harp.
3 Blow the ram’s horn at the time of the New Moon,
At the covering, on our Festival day.
4 For this is a Law for Yisra’ĕl,
And a Right-Ruling of the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ.
5 He appointed it in Yahosĕph for a witness,
When He went throughout the land of Mitsrayim;
I heard a language that I did not know.
6 “I removed his shoulder from the burden;
His hands were freed from the baskets.
1

1644

PSALMS

“You called in distress, and I rescued you;
I answered you in the covering of thunder;
I proved you at the waters of Meriḇah. Selah.
8 “Hear, O My people, and let Me warn you,
O Yisra’ĕl, if you would listen to Me!
9 “Let there be no strange mighty one among you,
And do not bow down to a foreign mighty one.
10 “I am hWhY your Elohim,
Who brought you out of the land of Mitsrayim;
Open your mouth wide, and I fill it.
11 “But My people did not listen to My voice,
And Yisra’ĕl would not submit to Me.
12 “So I gave them over to their own stubborn heart,
To walk in their own counsels.
13 “O, if My people had listened to Me,
Yisra’ĕl would walk in My Ways,
14 “I would subdue their enemies at once,
And turn My hand against their adversaries!
15 “Those who hate hWhY would cringe before Him;
And their time be forever.
16 “He would feed them with the finest of wheat;
And with honey from the rock I would satisfy you.”
7

82 A psalm of Asaph.
Elohim stands in the congregation of the mighty;
He judges in the midst of the mighty ones.
2 How long would you judge perversely,
And show partiality to the wicked? Selah.
3 Give right-ruling to the poor and fatherless,
Do right to the afflicted and needy.
4 Rescue the poor and needy;
Deliver them from the hand of the wicked.
5 They do not know, nor do they understand,
They walk about in darkness.
All the foundations of the earth are shaken.
1

1645

TEHILLIM

I, I said, “You are Elohim,
And all of you are sons of the Most High.
7 “But as men you die,
And fall as one of the heads.”
8 Arise, O Elohim, judge the earth,
For You shall possess all the nations.
6

83 A song, a psalm of Asaph.
O Elohim, do not remain silent!
Do not be speechless,
And do not be still, O Ĕl!
2 For look, Your enemies make an uproar,
And those hating You have lifted up their head.
3 They craftily plot against Your people,
And conspire against Your treasured ones.
4 They have said, “Come,
And let us wipe them out as a nation,
And let the name of Yisra’ĕl be remembered no
more.”
5 For they have conspired together with one heart;
They have made a covenant against You 6 The tents of Eḏom and the Yishma’ĕlites,
Mo’aḇ and the Haḡarites,
7 Geḇel, and Ammon, and Amalĕq,
Pelesheth with the inhabitants of Tsor,
8 Ashshur also has joined with them,
They have helped the children of Lot. Selah.
9 Do to them as to Miḏyan,
As to Sisera,
As to Yaḇin at the wadi Qishon,
10 Who perished at Ĕndor,
Who became as dung for the ground.
11 Make their nobles like Orĕḇ and like Ze’ĕḇ,
And all their princes like Zeḇaḥ and Tsalmunna,
1

1646

PSALMS

Who have said, “Let us take possession of the
pastures of Elohim For ourselves.”
13 O my Elohim, make them as whirling dust,
As stubble before the wind!
14 As a fire consumes a forest,
And as a flame lights mountains on fire,
15 So pursue them with Your whirlwind,
And frighten them with Your storm.
16 Fill their faces with shame,
And let them seek Your Name, O HWHY.
17 Let them be ashamed and alarmed forever;
And let them become abashed and perish,
18 And let them know that You,
Whose Name is hWhY;
You alone are the Most High over all the earth.
12

84 To the chief singer, on harp. A psalm for the
sons of Qoraḥ.
1 How lovely are Your Mishkanoth,
O hWhY of hosts!
2 My being has longed, and even fainted,
For the courts of hWhY;
My heart and my flesh cry out for the living Ĕl.
3 Even the sparrow has found a home,
And the swallow a nest for herself,
Where she has put her young ones Your altars, O hWhY of hosts,
My Sovereign and my Elohim.
4 Baruḵ are those who dwell in Your House,
They are ever praising You. Selah.
5 Baruḵ is the man whose strength is in You,
Highways are in their heart.
6 Passing through the valley of weeping,
They make it a fountain;
The Teacher also covers it with bireḵoth.
1647

TEHILLIM

They go from strength to strength,
Appearing before Elohim in Tsiyon.
8 O hWhY Elohim of hosts, hear my prayer;
Give ear, O Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ! Selah.
9 O Elohim, see our shield,
And look upon the face of Your anointed.
10 For a day in Your courts
Is better than a thousand.
I have chosen rather to be a door-keeper
In the House of my Elohim,
Than to dwell in the tents of the wicked.
11 For hWhY Elohim is a brilliance and a shield;
hWhY gives favour and esteem;
He withholds no goodness
From those who walk blamelessly.
12 O hWhY of hosts,
Baruḵ is the man who trusts in You!
7

85 To the chief singer. A psalm for the sons of
Qoraḥ.
1 hWhY, You shall take pleasure in Your land;
You shall turn back the captivity of Ya’aqoḇ.
2 You shall take away the wickedness of Your
people;
You shall cover all their sin. Selah.
3 You shall withdraw all Your wrath;
You shall turn from Your fierce displeasure.
4 Turn back to us, O Elohim of our deliverance,
And cause Your wrath toward us to cease.
5 Would You be enraged with us forever?
Would You draw out Your displeasure
From generation to generation?
6 Would You not revive us again,
For Your people to rejoice in You?
1648

PSALMS

Show us Your kindness, O hWhY,
And give us Your deliverance.
8 Let me hear what Ĕl hWhY speaks,
For He speaks peace to His people
And to His kind ones;
And let them not turn again to folly.
9 Truly, His deliverance is near to those who revere
Him,
For esteem to dwell in our land.
10 Kindness and truth shall meet,
Righteousness and peace shall touch.
11 Truth sprouts forth from the earth,
And righteousness looks down from the shamayim,
12 Indeed, hWhY gives what is good,
And our land yields its increase.
13 Righteousness goes before Him,
And prepares a way for His footsteps.
7

86 A prayer of Dawiḏ.
Incline Your ear, O hWhY,
Answer me, for I am poor and needy.
2 Guard my being, for I am kindly;
You are my Elohim;
Save Your servant who is trusting in You!
3 Show favour to me, O hWhY,
For I cry to You all day long.
4 Bring joy to the being of Your servant,
For to You, O hWhY, I lift up my being.
5 For You, hWhY, are good, and ready to forgive,
And great in kindness to all those who call upon
You.
6 Give ear, O hWhY, to my prayer;
And listen to the voice of my pleadings.
7 In the day of my distress I call upon You,
For You answer me.
1

1649

TEHILLIM

There is none like You among the mighty ones, O
hWhY;
And like Your works there are none.
9 Let all nations You have made
Come and bow themselves before You, O hWhY,
And give esteem to Your Name.
10 For You are great, and are doing wonders;
You are Elohim, You alone.
11 Teach me Your Way, O hWhY;
Let me walk in Your truth;
Unite my heart to revere Your Name.
12 I praise You, O hWhY my Elohim, with all my
heart,
And I esteem Your Name forever.
13 For Your kindness is great toward me,
And You have delivered my being
From the depths of the grave.
14 O Elohim, the proud have risen against me,
And a band of dreaded men have sought my life,
And have not put You before them.
15 But You, O hWhY,
Are a compassionate Ĕl and showing favour,
Patient and great in kindness and truth.
16 Turn to me, and show favour to me!
Give Your strength to Your servant,
And save the son of Your female servant.
17 Show me a sign for good,
And let those hating me see it and be ashamed,
For You, hWhY, have helped me and comforted me.
8

87 A psalm, a song, for the sons of Qoraḥ.
His foundation is in the qodesh mountains.
2 hWhY loves the gates of Tsiyon
More than all the dwellings of Ya’aqoḇ.
1

1650

PSALMS

Esteem is spoken of you,
O city of Elohim: Selah.
4 “I mention Rahaḇ and Baḇel to those who know
Me;
See, O Pelesheth and Tsor, with Kush,
‘This and that one was born there.’ ”
5 And of Tsiyon it is said,
“Each one was born in her;
For the Most High Himself establishes her.”
6 hWhY writes, In the register of the peoples,
“This one was born there.” Selah.
7 And the singers and the players on instruments All my fountains, are in you.
3

88 A song, a psalm for the sons of Qoraḥ. To the
chief singer, on ‘Answers for sickness.’ A poem of
Hĕman the Ezraḥite.
1 O hWhY, Elohim of my deliverance,
By day I have cried out,
In the night before You,
2 Let my prayer come before You,
Incline Your ear to my cry.
3 For my being is filled with evils,
And my life draws near to the grave.
4 I have been reckoned among those
Who go down to the pit;
I have become like a man
Who has no strength,
5 Released among the dead,
Like slain ones lying in the grave,
Whom You have remembered no more,
And who have been cut off from Your hand.
6 You have put me in the lowest pit,
In dark places, in the depths.
1651

TEHILLIM

Your wrath has rested heavily upon me,
And You have afflicted me with all Your breakers.
Selah.
8 You have put away my friends far from me;
You have made me an abomination to them;
I am shut in and do not go out;
9 My eye grows dim because of affliction.
hWhY, I have called upon You, all day long;
I have stretched out my hands to You.
10 Would You work wonders for the dead?
Would the dead rise to praise You? Selah.
11 Is Your kindness declared in the grave?
Your trustworthiness in the place of destruction?
12 Are Your wonders known in the dark?
And Your righteousness in the land of no
remembrance?
13 But I, unto You I have cried, O hWhY,
And in the morning my prayer comes before You.
14 hWhY, why do You reject me?
Why do You hide Your face from me?
15 I am afflicted and dying from childhood;
I have borne fear from You;
I am in despair.
16 Your fierce wrath has gone over me;
Your onslaughts have cut me off.
17 They surrounded me like water all day long;
They close in upon me altogether.
18 You have put loved one and companion far from
me,
Darkness is my close friend!
7

89 A poem of Ĕythan the Ezraḥite.
I sing of the kindnesses of hWhY forever;
With my mouth I make known Your trustworthiness
To all generations.

1

1652

PSALMS

For I said, “Kindness is built up forever;
You establish Your trustworthiness in the
shamayim.”
3 “I have made a Covenant with My chosen,
I have sworn to My servant Dawiḏ:
4 ‘I establish your seed forever,
And shall build up your throne to all generations.’ ”
Selah.
5 And the shamayim praise Your wonders,
O hWhY, Your trustworthiness, too,
In the assembly of the qodeshim.
6 For who in the shamayim is comparable to
hWhY?
Who among the sons of the mighty is like HWHY?
7 Ĕl is greatly revered
In the company of the qodeshim,
And awesome above all those around Him.
8 O hWhY Elohim of hosts,
Who is mighty like You, O Yah?
And Your trustworthiness is all around You.
9 You rule the swelling of the sea;
When its waves rise,
You still them.
10 You have broken Rahaḇ in pieces, as one who is
slain;
You have scattered Your enemies
With the arm of Your strength.
11 The shamayim are Yours,
The earth also is Yours;
The world and all that fills it.
You have founded them.
12 North and south - You have created them;
Taḇor and Ḥermon rejoice in Your Name.
2

1653

TEHILLIM

You have a mighty arm,
Your hand is strong,
Your right hand exalted.
14 Righteousness and Right-Ruling
Are the foundation of Your throne;
Kindness and truth go before Your face.
15 Baruḵ are the people
Who know the trumpet-call!
They walk, O hWhY, in the light of Your face.
16 In Your Name they rejoice all day long,
And they are exalted in Your righteousness.
17 For You are the comeliness of their strength,
And by Your good pleasure our horn is exalted.
18 For hWhY is our shield,
And the Qadosh One of Yisra’ĕl is our Sovereign.
19 Then You spoke in a vision to Your kind one,
And You said, “I have given help to one who is
mighty,
I have exalted one chosen from the people.
20 “I have found My servant Dawiḏ;
With My qodesh oil I anointed him,
21 “With whom My hand is established;
My arm also strengthens him.
22 “No enemy subjects him to tribute,
And no son of wickedness afflicts him.
23 “And I shall beat down His adversaries before his
face,
And plague those who hate him.
24 “But My trustworthiness
And My kindness are with him,
And in My Name his horn is exalted.
25 “And I shall put his hand on the sea,
And his right hand on the rivers.
26 “He calls out to Me, ‘You are my Father,
My Ĕl, and the rock of my deliverance.’
13

1654

PSALMS

“I also appoint him first-born,
Highest of the sovereigns of the earth.
28 “I guard My kindness for him forever,
And My Covenant is steadfast with him.
29 “And I shall establish his seed forever,
And his throne as the days of the shamayim.
30 “If his sons forsake My Torah
And do not walk in My Right-Rulings,
31 “If they profane My Laws
And do not guard My Commands,
32 “Then I shall visit their transgression with the rod,
And their wickedness with flogging.
33 “But My kindness I do not take away from him,
Nor be false to My trustworthiness.
34 “I shall not profane My Covenant,
Neither would I change what has gone out from My
lips.
35 “Once I have sworn by Qodeshah,
I do not lie to Dawiḏ:
36 “His seed shall be forever,
And his throne as the sun before Me;
37 “Like the moon, it is established forever,
And the witness in the shamayim is steadfast.”
Selah.
38 Yet You have rejected and spurned,
You have been wroth with Your anointed.
39 You have disowned the Covenant of Your
servant,
You have defiled his diadem in the dust.
40 You have broken down all his hedges,
You have brought his strongholds to ruin.
41 All who pass by the way plunder him;
He is a reproach to his neighbours.
27

1655

TEHILLIM

You have exalted the right hand of his
adversaries,
You have made all his enemies rejoice.
43 Moreover You have turned back the edge of his
sword,
And have not made him stand in battle.
44 You have brought an end to his splendour,
And have hurled his throne to the ground.
45 You have shortened the days of his youth,
You have covered him with shame. Selah.
46 How long, O hWhY, would You be hidden?
Would Your wrath burn like fire forever?
47 Please remember how short my time is;
Why should you have created all the sons of men for
naught?
48 What man would live and not see death?
Who rescues his life from the power of the grave?
Selah.
49 hWhY, where are Your former kindnesses,
Which You swore to Dawiḏ in Your trustworthiness?
50 HWHY, remember the reproach of Your servants,
That I have borne in my bosom Of all the many peoples,
51 With which Your enemies have reproached, O
hWhY,
With which they have reproached the footsteps of
Your anointed.
52 Baruḵ be hWhY forever!
Amĕn and Amĕn.
42

90 A prayer of Mosheh, the man of Elohim.
hWhY, You have been our refuge
In all generations.

1

1656

PSALMS

Before the mountains were born,
Or You had brought forth the earth and the world,
Even from everlasting to everlasting You are Ĕl.
3 You turn man back to dust,
And say, “Return, O children of men.”
4 For a thousand years in Your eyes
Are like yesterday that has past,
Or like a watch in the night.
5 You have swept them away as they sleep,
Like grass that springs up in the morning.
6 In the morning it flourishes and springs up,
At evening it is cut down and withered.
7 For we have been consumed by Your
displeasure,
And by Your wrath we are alarmed.
8 You have laid our wickednesses before You,
Our hidden ways in the light of Your face.
9 For all our days have passed away in Your wrath,
We spend our years like a whisper.
10 The days of our lives are seventy years;
Or if due to strength, eighty years,
Yet the best of them is but toil and exertion;
For it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
11 Who knows the power of Your displeasure?
And Your wrath, according to the fear of You?
12 Teach us to number our days,
And let us bring the heart to wisdom.
13 Return, O hWhY! How long?
And be sorry for Your servants.
14 Satisfy us in the morning with Your kindness,
And let us sing for joy all our days!
15 Give us joy according to
The days You have afflicted us,
The years we have seen evil.
2

1657

TEHILLIM

Reveal Your work to Your servants,
And Your splendour to their children.
17 And let the pleasantness
Of hWhY our Elohim be upon us,
And confirm the work of our hands for us;
O confirm the work of our hands!
16

91 He who dwells in the secret place of the Most
High,
Who abides under the shadow of Ĕl Shaddai,
2 He is saying of hWhY,
“My refuge and my stronghold,
My Elohim, in whom I trust!”
3 For He delivers you from the snare of a trapper,
From the destructive pestilence.
4 He covers you with His feathers,
And under His wings you take refuge;
His truth is a shield and armour.
5 You are not afraid of the dread by night,
Of the arrow that flies by day,
6 Of the pestilence that walks in darkness,
Of destruction that ravages at midday.
7 A thousand fall at your side,
And ten thousand at your right hand;
But it does not come near you.
8 Only with your eyes you look on,
And see the reward of the wicked.
9 Because you have made hWhY My refuge, the Most High - your dwelling place,
10 No evil befalls you,
And a plague does not come near your tent;
11 For He commands His messengers concerning
you,
To guard you in all your ways.
1658

PSALMS

They bear you up in their hands,
Lest you dash your foot against a stone.
13 You tread upon lion and cobra,
Young lion and serpent you trample underfoot.
14 “Because he clings to Me in love,
Therefore I deliver him;
I exalt him,
Because he has known My Name.
15 “When he calls on Me, I answer him;
I am with him in distress;
I deliver him and esteem him.
16 “With long life I satisfy him,
And show him My deliverance.”
12

92 A psalm, a song for the Shabbath day.
It is good to give thanks to hWhY,
And to sing praises to Your Name,
O Most High;
2 To declare Your kindness in the morning,
And Your trustworthiness each night,
3 On ten strings, and on the harp,
To the sounding chords of the lyre.
4 For You have made me rejoice with Your work, O
hWhY,
I shout for joy at the works of Your hands.
5 O hWhY, how great are Your works!
Your thoughts are very deep!
6 A senseless man does not know,
And a fool does not understand this.
7 When the wicked spring up like grass,
And all the workers of wickedness blossom,
It is for them to be destroyed forever.
8 But You, hWhY, are on high forever.
1

1659

TEHILLIM

For look, Your enemies, O hWhY,
For look, Your enemies do perish;
All the workers of wickedness are scattered.
10 But You lift up my horn like a wild ox;
I have been anointed with fresh oil.
11 And my eye looks upon my enemies;
My ears hear the evil-doers
Who rise up against me.
12 The righteous one flourishes like a palm tree,
He grows like a cedar in Leḇanon.
13 Those who are planted in the House of hWhY
Flourish in the courts of our Elohim.
14 They still bear fruit in old age;
They are fresh and green,
15 To declare that hWhY is straight,
My rock, and in Him is no unrighteousness.
9

93 HWHY shall reign,
He shall put on excellency;
hWhY shall put on strength;
He shall gird Himself.
Indeed, the world is established, immovable.
2 Your throne is established from of old;
You are from everlasting.
3 Rivers shall lift up, O hWhY,
Rivers shall lift up their voice;
Rivers lift up their breakers.
4 HWHY on high is mightier
Than the noise of many waters,
The mighty breakers of the sea.
5 Your Witnesses have been very trustworthy.
Qodeshah befits Your house, O hWhY, forever.

94 O hWhY, Ĕl of vengeance;
O Ĕl of vengeance, shine forth!
1660

PSALMS

Raise Yourself up, O Judge of the earth;
Render punishment to the proud.
3 hWhY, how long are the wicked,
How long are the wicked going to exult?
4 They pour forth,
They speak arrogantly;
All the workers of wickedness boast in themselves.
5 They crush Your people, O hWhY,
And they afflict Your inheritance.
6 They slay the widow and the stranger,
And murder the fatherless.
7 Yet they say, “Yah does not see,
And the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ pays no heed.”
8 Take heed, you senseless among the people;
And you fools, when would you become wise?
9 He who planted the ear, does He not hear?
He who formed the eye, does He not see?
10 He who disciplines the nations,
Does He not reprove The One teaching man knowledge?
11 hWhY knows the thoughts of man,
That they are a breath.
12 Baruḵ is the man You discipline, O Yah,
And instruct out of Your Torah,
13 To give him rest from the days of evil,
Until the pit is dug for the wicked.
14 For hWhY does not leave His people,
Nor does He forsake His inheritance.
15 For Right-Ruling returns to righteousness,
And all the upright in heart follow it.
16 Who would rise up for me against evil-doers?
Who would stand up for me against workers of
wickedness?
17 If hWhY had not been my help,
My being would soon have settled in silence.
2

1661

TEHILLIM

When I said, “My foot has slipped,”
Your kindness, O hWhY, supported me.
19 When anxiety was great within me,
Your comforts delighted my being.
20 Would a throne of destruction,
Which devises trouble by law,
Be joined with You?
21 They band together against the life of the
righteous,
And declare innocent blood wicked.
22 But hWhY is my defence,
And my Elohim the rock of my refuge,
23 And brings back on them their own wickedness,
And cuts them off in their own wickedness;
HWHY our Elohim cuts them off.
18

95 Come, let us sing to HWHY!
Let us raise a shout to the Rock of our deliverance.
2 Let us come before His face with thanksgiving;
Let us raise a shout to Him in song.
3 For hWhY is a great Ĕl,
And a great Sovereign above all mighty ones.
4 In whose hand are the depths of the earth;
The mountain peaks are His also.
5 His is the sea, for He made it;
And His hands formed the dry land.
6 Come, let us bow down and bend low,
Let us kneel before hWhY our Maker.
7 For He is our Elohim,
And we are the people of His pasture,
And the sheep of His hand.
Today, if you would hear His voice:
8 “Do not harden your hearts as in Meriḇah,
And as in the day of Massah in the wilderness,
1662

PSALMS

“When your fathers tried Me,
Have proved Me, though they saw My work.
10 “For forty years I was loathed with a generation,
And said, ‘They are a people who go astray in their
hearts,
And they do not know My Ways.’
11 “As I swore in My wrath, ‘If they enter into My
rest…’ ”
9

96 Sing to hWhY a new song,
Sing to hWhY, all the earth!
2 Sing to hWhY, baraḵ His Name,
Proclaim His deliverance from day to day.
3 Declare His esteem among the nations,
His wonders among all peoples.
4 For great is hWhY and greatly to be praised,
He is to be revered above all mighty ones.
5 For all the mighty ones of the peoples are
matters of naught,
But hWhY made the shamayim.
6 Excellency and splendour are before Him,
Strength and comeliness are in His Miqdash.
7 Ascribe to hWhY, O clans of the peoples,
Ascribe to hWhY esteem and strength.
8 Ascribe to hWhY the esteem of His Name;
Bring an offering, and come into His courts.
9 Bow yourselves to hWhY,
In the splendour of qodeshah!
Tremble before Him, all the earth.
10 Say among nations, “hWhY shall reign.
The world also is established, immovable.
He judges the peoples in straightness.”
11 Let the shamayim rejoice, and let the earth be
glad;
Let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
1663

TEHILLIM

Let the field exult, and all that is in it.
Let all the trees of the forest then shout for joy,
13 At the presence of hWhY.
For He shall come,
For He shall come to judge the earth.
He judges the world in righteousness,
And the peoples with His truth.
12

97 HWHY shall reign.
The earth rejoices.
Many isles are glad!
2 Clouds and thick cloud all around Him,
Righteousness and Right-Ruling are the foundation
of His throne.
3 Fire goes before Him,
And burns up His adversaries round about.
4 His lightnings shall light the world,
The earth shall see and tremble.
5 The mountains shall melt like wax before the face
of hWhY,
Before the face of the Aḏon of all the earth.
6 The shamayim shall declare His righteousness,
And all the peoples shall see His esteem.
7 All are put to shame who serve carved images,
Those boasting of matters of naught.
Bow yourselves to Him, all you mighty ones.
8 Tsiyon shall hear and be glad,
And the daughters of Yahuḏah rejoice
Because of Your Right-Rulings, O hWhY.
9 For You, hWhY, are the Most High over all the
earth,
You shall be greatly exalted, over all mighty ones.
10 You who love hWhY, hate evil!
He guards the lives of His kind ones,
He delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.
1664

PSALMS

Light is sown for the righteous,
And gladness for the upright in heart.
12 Rejoice in hWhY, you righteous,
And give thanks at the remembrance of His
Qodeshah.
11

98 A psalm.
Sing to hWhY a new song!
For He has done wonders;
His right hand and His qodesh arm
Have brought Him deliverance.
2 hWhY has made known His deliverance;
His righteousness
He has openly shown
Before the eyes of the nations.
3 He has remembered His kindness
And His trustworthiness to the house of Yisra’ĕl;
All the ends of the earth have seen
The deliverance of our Elohim.
4 Raise a shout to hWhY, all the earth;
Break forth in song, rejoice, and sing praises.
5 Sing to hWhY with the lyre,
With the lyre and the voice of a song,
6 With trumpets and the sound of a ram’s horn;
Raise a shout before hWhY, the Sovereign.
7 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it,
The world and those who dwell in it.
8 Let the rivers clap their hands,
Let the mountains sing together for joy before hWhY,
9 For He shall come to judge the earth.
He judges the world in righteousness,
And the people in straightness.
1

1665

TEHILLIM

99 HWHY shall reign; Peoples tremble!
He is enthroned on the keruḇim;
The earth shakes!
2 hWhY is great in Tsiyon,
And He is high above all the peoples.
3 They praise Your Name, great and awesome,
It is qodesh.
4 And the strength of the Sovereign
Shall love Right-Ruling;
You Yourself shall establish straightness;
You shall execute right-ruling
And righteousness in Ya’aqoḇ.
5 Exalt hWhY our Elohim,
And bow yourselves at His footstool,
He is qodesh.
6 Mosheh and Aharon were among His kohenim,
And Shemu’ĕl was among those calling upon His
Name.
They called upon hWhY, and He answered them.
7 He spoke to them in the column of cloud;
They guarded His Witnesses
And the Law He gave them.
8 You answered them, O hWhY our Elohim.
You were a forgiving Ĕl to them,
Though You took vengeance on their deeds.
9 Exalt hWhY our Elohim,
And bow down towards His qodesh mountain;
For hWhY our Elohim is qodesh.

100 A psalm of thanksgiving.
Raise a shout for hWhY,
All the earth!
2 Serve hWhY with gladness;
Come before His presence with singing.
1

1666

PSALMS

Know that hWhY, He is Elohim;
He has made us, and we are His His people and the sheep of His pasture.
4 Enter into His gates with thanksgiving,
And into His courts with praise.
Give thanks to Him; baraḵ His Name.
5 For hWhY is good;
His kindness is everlasting,
And His truth, to all generations.
3

101 A Psalm of Dawiḏ.
I sing of kindness and right-ruling;
To You, O hWhY, I sing praises.
2 I act wisely in a perfect way.
When do You come to me?
I walk in the midst of my house with a perfect heart.
3 I put no matter of Beliya’al before my eyes;
I hate the work of those who fall away;
It does not cling to me.
4 A perverse heart turns away from me;
I do not know evil.
5 Him who secretly slanders his neighbour I cut off;
I do not tolerate one
Who has a haughty look and a proud heart.
6 My eyes are on the trustworthy of the land,
To dwell with me;
He who walks in a perfect way,
He serves me.
7 He who practices deceit
Does not dwell in my house;
He who speaks lies
Does not stand in my presence.
8 Each morning I uproot all the wicked of the land,
To cut off all the workers of wickedness
From the city of hWhY.
1

1667

TEHILLIM

102 A prayer of the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before
HWHY.
1 O HWHY, hear my prayer,
And let my cry come to You.
2 Do not hide Your face from me
In the day of my distress;
Incline Your ear to me;
In the day I call, answer me speedily.
3 For my days are consumed like smoke,
And my bones are burned like a hearth.
4 My heart is stricken and withered like grass,
For I have forgotten to eat my bread.
5 Because of the sound of my sighing
My bones have clung to my flesh.
6 I have been like a pelican of the wilderness,
I have been like an owl of the desert.
7 I have watched, and I am
As a bird alone on the house-top.
8 My enemies reproached me all day long,
Those who rave against me have sworn against me.
9 For I have eaten ashes like bread,
And mixed my drink with tears,
10 Because of Your displeasure and Your wrath;
For You have lifted me up
And thrown me down.
11 My days are like a shadow that lengthens,
And I wither away like grass.
12 But You, O hWhY, shall be enthroned forever,
And the remembrance of You be to all generations.
13 You Yourself shall arise
And have compassion on Tsiyon,
For the time to favour her,
The appointed time, has come.
1668

PSALMS

For Your servants have been pleased with her
stones,
And they favour her dust.
15 And the nations shall revere the Name of hWhY,
And all the sovereigns of the earth Your esteem,
16 For hWhY shall build up Tsiyon,
He shall appear in His esteem.
17 He shall turn unto the prayer of the destitute,
And He shall not despise their prayer.
18 This is written for a generation to come,
So that a people to be created praise Yah.
19 For He looked down
From the height of His qodesh place;
From the shamayim hWhY viewed the earth,
20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner,
To release those appointed to death,
21 To declare the Name of hWhY in Tsiyon,
And His praise in Yerushalayim,
22 When peoples gather together,
And reigns, to serve HWHY.
23 He has humbled my strength in the way;
He has shortened my days.
24 I said, “O my Ĕl,
Do not take me away in the midst of my days;
Your years are throughout all generations.
25 “You founded the earth of old,
And the shamayim are the work of Your hands.
26 “They shall perish, but You remain;
And all of them grow old like a garment;
You change them like a coat,
And they are changed.
27 “But You are the same,
And Your years have no end.
28 “The sons of Your servants continue,
And their seed is established before You.”
14

1669

TEHILLIM

103 Of Dawiḏ.
Baraḵ hWhY, O my being,
And all that is within me,
His qodesh Name!
2 Baraḵ hWhY, O my being,
And do not forget all His dealings,
3 Who forgives all your wickednesses,
Who heals all your diseases,
4 Who redeems your ḥai from destruction,
Who crowns you with kindness and compassion,
5 Who satisfies your desire with the good,
Your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.
6 hWhY is doing righteousness
And right-ruling for all the oppressed.
7 He made known His Ways to Mosheh,
His acts to the children of Yisra’ĕl.
8 hWhY is compassionate and showing favour,
Patient, and great in kindness.
9 He does not always strive, nor maintain it forever.
10 He has not done to us according to our sins,
Nor rewarded us according to our wickednesses.
11 For as the shamayim are high above the earth,
So great is His kindness toward those who revere
Him;
12 As far as east is from west,
So far has He removed our transgressions from us.
13 As a father has compassion for his children,
So hWhY has compassion for those who revere Him.
14 For He knows how we are made;
He remembers that we are dust.
15 A man’s days are as grass:
As a flower of the field, so he flourishes.
16 For the wind blows over it, and it is no more,
And its place no longer remembers it.
1

1670

PSALMS

But the kindness of hWhY
Is from everlasting to everlasting
Upon those who revere Him,
And His righteousness to children’s children,
18 To those who guard His Covenant,
And to those who remember His Orders to do them.
19 hWhY has established His throne in the
shamayim,
And His reign shall rule over all.
20 Baraḵ hWhY, you His messengers,
Mighty in power, who do His Word,
Listening to the voice of His Word.
21 Baraḵ hWhY, all you His hosts,
You His servants, who do His pleasure.
22 Baraḵ hWhY, all His works,
In all places of His rule.
Baraḵ hWhY, O my being!
17

104 Baraḵ HWHY, O my being!
O HWHY my Elohim,
You have been very great:
You have put on excellency and splendour,
2 Covering Yourself with light as with a garment,
Stretching out the shamayim like a curtain,
3 Who is laying the beams of His upper rooms in
the waters,
Who is making thick clouds His chariot,
Who is walking on the wings of the wind,
4 Making His messengers the winds,
His servants a flame of fire.
5 He established the earth on its foundations,
So that it would not totter forever,
6 You covered it with the deep as with a garment;
The waters stood above the mountains.
1671

TEHILLIM

At Your rebuke they flee;
At the voice of Your thunder they hurry away.
8 They go up the mountains;
They go down the valleys,
To the place which You founded for them.
9 You put a boundary, they do not pass over,
They do not return to cover the earth.
10 Who is sending the springs into the valleys,
They flow among the hills.
11 They give drink to every beast of the field;
Wild donkeys break their thirst.
12 The birds of the shamayim dwell beside them;
They sing from between the branches.
13 Watering the hills from His upper rooms;
The earth is satisfied with the fruit of Your works.
14 Causing the grass to grow for the cattle,
And plants for the service of mankind,
To bring forth food from the earth,
15 And wine that makes glad the heart of man,
Oil to make the face shine,
And bread which sustains man’s heart.
16 The trees of hWhY are satisfied,
The cedars of Leḇanon which He planted,
17 Where the birds make nests;
The stork has her home in the fir trees.
18 The high hills are for wild goats;
Rocks, a refuge for rock badgers.
19 He made the moon for appointed times;
The sun knows it’s going down.
20 You put darkness, and it is night,
In it, all the beasts of the forest creep.
21 The young lions are roaring for prey,
And seeking their food from Ĕl.
22 The sun arises - they withdraw
And lie down in their dens.
7

1672

PSALMS

Man goes out to his work,
And to his labour, till evening.
24 O hWhY, how many have been Your works!
You have made all of them in wisdom.
The earth is filled with Your possessions.
25 There is the sea, great and wide,
In which are innumerable swarms,
Living creatures, small with great.
26 There do ships go;
That Liwiathan which You made, to play there.
27 All of them wait for You,
To give their food in due season.
28 You give to them, they gather in;
You open Your hand, they are satisfied with good.
29 You hide Your face, they are alarmed;
You take away their breath, they die and return to
their dust;
30 You send forth Your Ruaḥ, they are created;
And You renew the face of the earth.
31 The esteem of hWhY is forever,
hWhY rejoices in His works,
32 Who looks on the earth, and it trembles;
He touches the mountains, and they smoke.
33 I sing to hWhY as long as I live,
I sing praise to my Elohim while I exist.
34 My meditation on Him is sweet;
I rejoice in hWhY.
35 Let sinners be consumed from the earth,
And let the wicked be no more.
Baraḵ hWhY, O my being!
Hallelu-Yah!
23

105 Give thanks to hWhY!
Call upon His Name,
Make known His deeds among the peoples.
1673

TEHILLIM

Sing to Him, sing praise to Him;
Speak of all His wonders.
3 Make your boast in His qodesh Name;
Let the hearts rejoice of those seeking hWhY.
4 Seek hWhY and His strength;
Seek His face always.
5 Remember His wonders which He has done,
His miracles, and the Right-Rulings of His mouth,
6 O seed of Aḇraham His servant,
Children of Ya’aqoḇ, His chosen ones!
7 He is hWhY our Elohim;
His Right-Rulings are in all the earth.
8 He has remembered His Covenant forever,
The Word He commanded, for a thousand
generations,
9 That He made with Aḇraham,
And His oath to Yitsḥaq,
10 And established it to Ya’aqoḇ for a Law,
To Yisra’ĕl - an everlasting Covenant,
11 Saying, “To you I give the land of Kena’an,
The portion of your inheritance.”
12 When they were few in number,
Few indeed, and sojourners in it,
13 And they went about from one nation to another,
From one reign to another people,
14 He allowed no one to oppress them,
And He reproved sovereigns for their sakes,
15 “Do not touch My anointed ones,
And do My neḇi’im no evil.”
16 And He called for a scarcity of food in the land;
He cut off all the supply of bread.
17 He sent ahead of them a man,
Yosĕph, sold as a slave.
18 They afflicted his feet with shackles,
His neck was put in irons.
2

1674

PSALMS

Until the time that His Word came,
The Word of hWhY refined him.
20 The sovereign sent and released him,
The ruler of the people let him loose.
21 He made him master of his house,
And ruler over all his possessions,
22 To bind his chiefs at his pleasure,
And to teach his elders wisdom.
23 Then Yisra’ĕl came to Mitsrayim,
And Ya’aqoḇ sojourned in the land of Ḥam.
24 And He increased His people greatly,
And made them stronger than their enemies.
25 He turned their heart to hate His people,
To conspire against His servants.
26 He sent Mosheh His servant,
Aharon whom He had chosen.
27 They put among them the matters of His signs,
And wonders in the land of Ḥam.
28 He sent darkness, and made it dark;
And they did not rebel against His Word.
29 He turned their waters into blood,
And killed their fish.
30 Their land teemed with frogs,
In the rooms of their sovereigns.
31 He spoke, and swarms of flies came,
Gnats in all their borders.
32 He gave them hail for rain,
A flaming fire in their land.
33 And He smote their vines and their fig trees,
And broke the trees of their borders.
34 He spoke, and locusts came,
And larvae, innumerable,
35 And they devoured all the plants in their land,
And they devoured the fruit of their ground.
19

1675

TEHILLIM

Then He smote all the first-born in their land,
The first-fruit of all their strength,
37 And brought them out with silver and gold,
And among His tribes no one faltered.
38 Mitsrayim was glad when they left,
For the fear of them had fallen upon them.
39 He spread a cloud for a covering,
And fire to give light in the night.
40 They asked, and He brought quail,
And satisfied them with the bread of the shamayim.
41 He opened the rock, and water gushed out;
It ran in the dry places, a river.
42 For He remembered His qodesh Word,
To Aḇraham His servant.
43 So He brought out His people with joy,
His chosen ones with singing.
44 And He gave to them the lands of the gentiles,
And they inherited the labour of peoples,
45 In order that they might guard His Laws,
And watch over His Torot. Hallelu-Yah!
36

106 HalleluYah! Oh, give thanks to hWhY,
For He is good!
For His kindness is everlasting.
2 Who relates the mighty acts of hWhY?
Or declare all His praise?
3 Baruḵ are those who guard Right-Ruling,
Who do righteousness at all times!
4 Remember me, O hWhY, in the acceptance of
Your people;
Visit me with Your deliverance,
5 To see the good of Your chosen ones,
To rejoice in the gladness of Your nation,
To make my boast with Your inheritance.
1676

PSALMS

We have sinned with our fathers,
We have acted perversely,
We have done wickedly.
7 Our fathers in Mitsrayim did not understand Your
wonders;
They did not remember Your many kindnesses,
But rebelled by the sea, the Sea of Reeds.
8 But He saved them for His Name’s sake,
To make known His might.
9 And He rebuked the Sea of Reeds, and it dried
up;
And He led them through the depths,
Through a wilderness.
10 And He saved them from the hand of the hater,
And redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
11 And waters covered their adversaries;
Not one of them was left.
12 Then they believed His words;
They sang His praise.
13 They soon forgot His works;
They did not wait for His counsel,
14 But greedily lusted in the wilderness,
And tried Ĕl in the desert.
15 And He gave them their request,
But sent leanness within their being.
16 And they were jealous of Mosheh in the camp,
Of Aharon, the qodeshi of hWhY,
17 The earth opened up and swallowed Dathan,
And covered the company of Aḇiram.
18 And a fire burned in their company;
A flame consumed the wicked.
19 They made a calf in Ḥorĕḇ,
And bowed down to a moulded image.
20 Thus they changed My esteem
Into the form of an ox that eats grass.
6

1677

TEHILLIM

They forgot Ĕl their Saviour,
The Doer of greatness in Mitsrayim,
22 Of wonders in the land of Ḥam,
Of fear by the Sea of Reeds.
23 Then He said that He would destroy them,
Had not Mosheh His chosen one stood before Him
in the breach,
To turn away His wrath from destroying.
24 They then despised the pleasant land;
They did not believe His word,
25 And they grumbled in their tents,
They did not listen to the voice of hWhY.
26 So He lifted up His hand against them,
To make them fall in the wilderness,
27 And to make their seed fall among the gentiles,
And to scatter them in the lands.
28 And they joined themselves to Ba’al Pe’or,
And ate slaughterings made to the dead.
29 Thus they provoked Him with their deeds,
And the plague broke out among them.
30 Then Pineḥas stood up and intervened,
And the plague was stopped.
31 And that was reckoned to him for righteousness,
To all generations forever.
32 And they provoked wrath at the waters of
Meriḇah,
And Mosheh suffered on account of them;
33 Because they embittered his spirit,
And he spoke rashly with his lips.
34 They did not destroy the peoples,
As hWhY had commanded them,
35 But mixed with the gentiles
And learned their works,
36 And served their idols,
And they became a snare to them.
21

1678

PSALMS

And they slaughtered their sons
And their daughters to demons,
38 And they shed innocent blood,
The blood of their sons and daughters,
Whom they offered to the idols of Kena’an;
And the land was defiled with blood.
39 So they became unclean by their own works,
And went whoring by their own deeds.
40 And the wrath of hWhY burned against His
people,
And He loathed His own inheritance.
41 Then He gave them into the hand of the gentiles,
And those who hated them ruled over them.
42 And their enemies oppressed them,
And they were humbled under their hand.
43 Many times He delivered them;
But they rebelled in their plans,
So they were brought low for their wickedness.
44 But He would look on their distress,
When He heard their cry,
45 And remember His Covenant for their sake,
And relent according to the greatness of His
kindness.
46 And He would let them find compassion,
Before all those holding them captive.
47 Save us, O hWhY our Elohim,
And gather us from among the gentiles,
To give thanks to Your qodesh Name,
To exult in Your praise.
48 Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
From everlasting to everlasting!
And all the people shall say,
“Amĕn!”
Hallelu-Yah!
37

1679

TEHILLIM

107 Give thanks to HWHY!
For goodness,
For His kindness is everlasting.
2 Let the redeemed of hWhY say,
Whom He has redeemed from the hand of the
adversary,
3 And gathered out of the lands,
From east and from west,
From north and from south.
4 They wandered in a wilderness, in a desert way;
They found no city to dwell in.
5 Hungry and thirsty,
Their being in them grew faint.
6 Then they cried out to hWhY in their distress,
He delivered them out of their troubles.
7 And He guided them by the right way,
To go to a city to settle.
8 Let them give thanks to hWhY for His kindness,
And His wonders to the children of men!
9 For He has satisfied a longing being,
And has filled the hungry being with goodness.
10 Some sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death,
Bound in affliction and irons,
11 Because they rebelled against the Words of Ĕl,
And despised the counsel of the Most High.
12 And He humbled their heart by toil;
They stumbled, and there was no one to help.
13 And they cried out to hWhY in their distress,
And He saved them out of their troubles.
14 He brought them out of darkness and the shadow
of death,
And He broke their chains in pieces.
1680

PSALMS

Let them give thanks to hWhY for His kindness,
And His wonders to the children of men!
16 For He has broken the gates of bronze,
And He cut the bars of iron in two.
17 Fools, because of their transgression,
And because of their wickednesses, were afflicted.
18 Their being loathed all food,
And they drew near to the gates of death,
19 And cried out to hWhY in their distress,
He saved them out of their troubles.
20 He sent His Word and healed them,
And delivered them from their destructions.
21 Let them give thanks to hWhY for His kindness,
And His wonders to the children of men!
22 And let them bring slaughterings of thanksgiving,
And relate His works with rejoicing.
23 Those who go down to the sea in ships,
Doing work in many waters,
24 They see the works of hWhY,
And His wonders in the deep.
25 For He commands and raises the stormy wind,
Which lifts up the waves of the sea.
26 They go up to the shamayim,
They go down to the depths;
Their being is melted because of evil.
27 They dance and stagger like a drunkard,
And all their wisdom is swallowed up.
28 Then they cry out to hWhY in their distress,
And He brings them out of their troubles.
29 He caused the storm to be still,
So that its waves were silent.
30 And they rejoice because they are hushed;
And He leads them to the haven of their delight.
31 Let them give thanks to hWhY for His kindness,
And His wonders to the children of men!
15

1681

TEHILLIM

And let them exalt Him in the assembly of the
people,
And praise Him in the seat of the elders.
33 He makes rivers become a wilderness,
And the fountains of water become a dry ground;
34 A land of fruit becomes a salty desert,
For the evil of those who dwell in it.
35 He makes a wilderness become a pool of water,
And dry land become fountains of waters.
36 And He causes the hungry to dwell there,
And they build a city to settle in,
37 And they sow fields and plant vineyards,
And they make fruits of increase.
38 And He baraḵ them,
And they increase greatly;
And He does not let their cattle diminish.
39 But when they are diminished and brought low
Through oppression, evil and sorrow,
40 He pours scorn on nobles,
And causes them to wander in a pathless waste;
41 But He raises the poor up from affliction,
And makes clans like a flock.
42 The straight ones see, and rejoice,
And all unrighteousness shuts its mouth.
43 Who is wise?
Then let him observe these!
Let them understand the kindnesses of HWHY.
32

108 A song, a psalm of Dawiḏ.
O Elohim, my heart is steadfast;
I sing and give praise - even my esteem.
2 Awake, harp and lyre!
I awake the dawn.
3 I praise You, O hWhY, among peoples,
And I sing praises to You among the nations.
1

1682

PSALMS

For Your kindness is great above the shamayim,
And Your truth reaches to the clouds.
5 Exalt Yourself above the shamayim, O Elohim,
And Your esteem above all the earth;
6 In order that those You love Might be delivered.
Save with Your right hand,
And answer me.
7 Elohim has spoken in His qodeshah,
“I exult, I portion out Sheḵem,
And I measure out the Valley of Sukkoth.
8 “Gil’aḏ is Mine, Menashsheh is Mine,
And Ephrayim is My chief defence,
Yahuḏah is My lawgiver.
9 “Mo’aḇ is My wash-pot,
Over Eḏom I cast My shoe,
Over Pelesheth I raise a shout.”
10 Who would bring me into the strong city?
Who shall lead me to Eḏom?
11 Have You not rejected us, O Elohim?
And You do not go out with our armies, O Elohim!
12 Give us help from distress,
For the help of man is naught.
13 In Elohim we do mightily,
For it is He who treads down our adversaries.
4

109 To the chief singer. A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
Do not be silent, O Elohim of my praise!
2 For the mouth of the wicked
And the mouth of the deceiver
Have opened against me;
They have spoken against me with a false tongue.
3 They have surrounded me with words of hatred,
And they attack me without a cause.
4 In return for my love they accuse me,
While I am in prayer.
1

1683

TEHILLIM

And they repay me evil for good,
And hatred for my love.
6 Appoint over him one who is wicked,
And let an accuser stand at his right hand.
7 When he is judged, let him be found wicked,
And let his prayer become sin.
8 Let his days be few,
Let another take his office.
9 Let his children be fatherless,
And his wife a widow.
10 And let his children always wander and beg,
And seek out of their ruins.
11 Let the creditor lay a snare for all that he has,
And let strangers plunder his labour.
12 Let him have no one to extend kindness,
Nor any to show favour to his fatherless children.
13 Let his descendants be cut off,
Their name be blotted out in the next generation.
14 Let the wickedness of his fathers
Be remembered before hWhY,
And let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
15 Let them always be before hWhY,
And let Him cut off their remembrance from the
earth;
16 Because he did not remember to show kindness,
But persecuted the poor and needy man;
And the broken-hearted, to put to death.
17 He also loved cursing, so let it come to him;
And he did not delight in beraḵah, so let it be far
from him.
18 And he put cursing on as with his garment,
So let it enter his inward parts like water,
And like oil into his bones.
19 Let it be to him like a cloak he wraps around him,
And as a girdle that he always girds on.
5

1684

PSALMS

This is the reward of my accusers from hWhY,
And to those speaking evil against my being.
21 But You, O hWhY, Aḏonai,
Deal with me for Your Name’s sake;
Because Your kindness is good, deliver me.
22 For I am poor and needy,
And my heart is pierced within me.
23 I have gone like a lengthening shadow,
I have been driven away like a locust.
24 My knees are weak through fasting,
And my flesh grows lean from fatness.
25 And I, I have become a reproach to them;
They see me, they shake their heads.
26 Help me, O hWhY my Elohim!
Save me according to Your kindness,
27 And let them know that this is Your hand.
You, hWhY, You have done it!
28 Let them curse, but You baraḵ.
They shall arise, but be ashamed,
And let Your servant rejoice.
29 Let my accusers put on shame,
And be wrapped in their own confusion as in a cloak.
30 I greatly thank hWhY with my mouth,
And I praise Him in the midst of the throng.
31 For He stands at the right hand of the poor,
To save from those judging his being.
20

110 A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
HWHY said to Aḏoni,
“Sit at My right hand,
Until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet.”
2 hWhY sends Your mighty sceptre out of Tsiyon.
Rule in the midst of Your enemies!
3 Your people volunteer in the day of Your might,
In the splendours of qodeshah!
1

1685

TEHILLIM

From the womb, from the morning,
You have the dew of Your youth!
4 hWhY has sworn and does not relent,
“You are a Kohĕn forever
According to the order of Malkitseḏeq.”
5 hWhY at Your right hand
Shall smite sovereigns in the day of His wrath.
6 He judges among the nations,
He shall fill with dead bodies,
He shall crush the Head over the mighty earth!
7 He drinks of the stream by the wayside,
Therefore He lifts up the head!

111 ‫א‬,� HalleluYah!
I thank HWHY with all my heart,
‫ ב‬, B In the company of the straight, and of the
congregation.
2 ‫ ג‬,� Great are the works of hWhY,
‫ד‬,𐤃 Searched for by all who delight in them.
3 ‫ ה‬, h Splendour and greatness are His work,
‫ ו‬, W And His righteousness stands forever.
4 ‫ ז‬, z He has made His wonders to be
remembered;
‫ ח‬, X hWhY shows favour and is compassionate.
5 ‫ ט‬, j He has given food to those who revere Him;
‫ י‬, Y He remembers His Covenant forever.
6 ‫כ‬, K He has shown His people the power of His
works,
‫ ל‬, L To give to them the inheritance of the gentiles.
7 ‫ מ‬, m The works of His hands are truth and RightRuling,
‫ נ‬, ! All His Orders are trustworthy,
8 ‫ ס‬, s They are upheld forever and ever,
‫ ע‬, [ Performed in truth and straightness.
1686

PSALMS

‫ פ‬, p He sent redemption to His people,
‫ צ‬, C He has commanded His Covenant forever.
‫ ק‬,q Qodesh and awesome is His Name.
10 ‫ ר‬,R The reverence of hWhY is the beginning of
wisdom,
‫ש‬, v All those doing them have a good
understanding.
‫ת‬, t His praise is standing forever.
9

112 HalleluYah!
‫א‬, � Baruḵ is the man who reveres HWHY,
‫ב‬, B Who has greatly delighted in His Commands.
2 ‫ג‬,� Mighty in the earth shall be his seed,
‫ד‬,𐤃 The generation of the straight ones shall be
baruḵ.
3 ‫ה‬, h Wealth and riches are in his house,
‫ו‬, W And his righteousness is standing forever.
4 ‫ז‬, z Light has risen in the darkness to the straight
ones,
‫ח‬, X Showing favour, compassionate, and righteous.
5 ‫ ט‬, j Good is a man showing favour and lending,
‫ י‬, Y He sustains his matters in right-ruling.
6 ‫כ‬, K For he is never shaken;
‫ ל‬, L The righteous is remembered forever.
7 ‫ מ‬, m He is not afraid of an evil report.
‫ נ‬, ! His heart is steadfast, trusting in hWhY.
8 ‫ ס‬, s His heart is upheld, he is not afraid,
‫ ע‬, [ While he looks on his adversaries.
9 ‫ פ‬, p He scattered abroad, he gave to the poor,
‫ צ‬, C His righteousness is standing forever.
‫ ק‬, q His horn is exalted with esteem.
10 ‫ ר‬,R The wicked sees it and shall be wroth;
‫ש‬, v He gnashes his teeth and shall melt.
‫ת‬, t The desire of the wicked perish.
1687

TEHILLIM

113 HalleluYah!
Praise, O servants of HWHY,
Praise the Name of HWHY!
2 Baruḵ be the Name of hWhY,
Now and forever!
3 From the rising of the sun to its going down,
The Name of hWhY is praised.
4 hWhY is high above all nations,
His esteem above the shamayim.
5 Who is like hWhY our Elohim,
Who is enthroned on high?
6 He looks down on the shamayim and in the earth;
7 He raises the poor out of the dust,
Lifts the needy from a dunghill,
8 To make him sit with the nobles,
With the nobles of His people,
9 Causing the barren to dwell in a house,
A rejoicing mother of children.
Hallelu-Yah!

114 When Yisra’ĕl went out of Mitsrayim,
The house of Ya’aqoḇ from a people of strange
language,
2 Yahuḏah became His qodeshah,
And Yisra’ĕl His rule.
3 The sea saw it and fled;
The Yardĕn turned back.
4 The mountains skipped like rams,
The little hills like lambs.
5 Why was it, O sea, that you fled?
O Yardĕn, that you turned back?
6 O mountains, that you skipped like rams?
O little hills, like lambs?
1688

PSALMS

Tremble, O earth, from the face of the Aḏon,
From the face of the Eloah of Ya’aqoḇ,
8 Who turned the rock into a pool of water,
The flint into a fountain of water.
7

115 Not to us,
O HWHY, not to us,
But to Your Name give esteem,
For Your kindness, For your truth.
2 Why should the gentiles say,
“Where now is their Elohim?”
3 But our Elohim is in the shamayim;
Whatever pleased Him, He has done.
4 Their idols are silver and gold,
The work of men’s hands.
5 They have mouths, but they do not speak;
They have eyes, but they do not see;
6 They have ears, but they do not hear;
They have noses, but they do not smell;
7 They have hands, but they do not handle;
They have feet, but they do not walk;
They make no sound through their throat.
8 The ones who make them, shall become like
them All who trust in them.
9 O Yisra’ĕl, trust in hWhY;
He is their help and their shield.
10 O house of Aharon, trust in hWhY;
He is their help and their shield.
11 You who revere hWhY, trust in hWhY;
He is their help and their shield.
12 hWhY has remembered us;
He baraḵ us;
He baraḵ the house of Yisra’ĕl;
He baraḵ the house of Aharon.
1689

TEHILLIM

He baraḵ those who revere hWhY,
The small and the great.
14 hWhY give you increase more and more,
You and your children.
15 You are baruḵ by hWhY,
Who made the shamayim and earth.
16 The shamayim are the shamayim of hWhY;
But He has given the earth to the children of men.
17 The dead do not hallelu-Yah,
Nor any going down to silence.
18 But we, we baraḵ Yah,
Now and forever.
Hallelu-Yah!
13

116 I love hWhY, because He has heard my voice,
my pleas.
2 Because He has inclined His ear to me,
And I shall call throughout my days.
3 The cords of death were around me,
And the pains of the grave came upon me;
I found distress and sorrow.
4 Then I called upon the Name of hWhY,
“O hWhY, I pray to You, deliver my being!”
5 hWhY shows favour and is righteous;
And our Elohim is compassionate.
6 hWhY guards the simple;
I was brought low, but He saved me.
7 Return to your rest, O my being,
For hWhY has treated you well.
8 For You have delivered my being from death,
My eyes from tears,
My feet from falling.
9 I shall walk before hWhY in the land of the living.
10 I have believed, for I speak;
I have been greatly afflicted.
1690

PSALMS

I said in my haste, “All men are liars.”
12 What shall I return to hWhY?
All His bounties are upon me.
13 I lift up the cup of deliverance,
And call upon the Name of hWhY.
14 I pay my vows to hWhY,
Now in the presence of all His people.
15 Precious in the eyes of hWhY
Is the death of His kind ones.
16 O hWhY, I am truly Your servant,
I am Your servant, the son of Your female servant;
You have loosed my bonds.
17 I bring You a slaughtering of thanksgiving,
And call upon the Name of hWhY.
18 I pay my vows to hWhY
In the presence of all His people,
19 In the courts of the House of hWhY,
In your midst, O Yerushalayim.
Hallelu-Yah!
11

117 Hallelu-HWHY, all you nations!
Extol Him, all you peoples!
2 For His kindness is mighty over us,
And the truth of hWhY is everlasting.
Hallelu-Yah!

118 Oh, give thanks to HWHY, for He is good!
Because His kindness is everlasting.
2 Let Yisra’ĕl now say,
“His kindness is everlasting.”
3 Let the house of Aharon now say,
“His kindness is everlasting.”
4 Let those who revere hWhY now say,
“His kindness is everlasting.”
1691

TEHILLIM

I called on Yah in distress;
Yah answered me in a broad place.
6 hWhY is on my side;
I do not fear what man does to me!
7 hWhY is for me among those helping me;
Therefore I look on those hating me.
8 It is better to take refuge in hWhY,
Than to trust in man.
9 It is better to take refuge in hWhY,
Than to trust in princes.
10 All the gentiles surrounded me,
In the Name of hWhY I shall cut them off.
11 They surrounded me,
Even they surrounded me;
In the Name of hWhY shall I cut them off.
12 They surrounded me like bees;
They were extinguished like burning thorns;
In the Name of hWhY I shall cut them off.
13 Pushing, pushing me to fall,
But hWhY helped me.
14 Yah is my strength and song,
And He has become my deliverance.
15 The voice of rejoicing and deliverance
Is in the tents of the righteous;
The right hand of hWhY is doing mightily.
16 The right hand of hWhY is exalted,
The right hand of hWhY acts mightily.
17 Let me not die, but live,
And declare the works of Yah.
18 Yah has punished me severely,
But did not give me over to death.
19 Open to me the gates of righteousness;
I enter through them, I thank Yah.
20 This is the gate of hWhY,
The righteous enter through it.
5

1692

PSALMS

I thank You,
For You have answered me,
And have become my deliverance.
22 The Stone which the builders rejected
Has become the chief Corner-Stone.
23 This was from hWhY,
It is marvelous in our eyes.
24 This is the day hWhY has made,
Let us rejoice and be glad in it.
25 I pray, O hWhY, please save;
I pray, O hWhY, please send prosperity.
26 Baruḵ is He who is coming in the Name of hWhY!
We shall baraḵ you from the House of hWhY.
27 hWhY is Ĕl, and He gave us light;
Bind the festal offering
With cords to the horns of the altar.
28 You are my Ĕl, and I praise You;
You are my Elohim, I exalt You.
29 Give thanks to hWhY, for He is good!
For His kindness is everlasting.
21

119 ‫א‬, � Baruḵ are the perfect in the Way,
Who walk in the Torah of HWHY!
2 Baruḵ are those who observe His Witnesses,
Who seek Him with all the heart!
3 Even they shall do no unrighteousness;
They shall walk in His Ways.
4 You have commanded us
To guard Your Orders diligently.
5 Oh, that my ways were established
To guard Your Laws!
6 Then I would not be ashamed,
When I look into all Your Commands.

1693

TEHILLIM

I thank You with uprightness of heart,
When I learn the Right-Rulings of Your
righteousness.
8 I guard Your Laws;
Oh, do not leave me entirely!
9 ‫ ב‬, B How would a young man cleanse his path?
By guarding it according to Your Word.
10 I have sought You with all my heart;
Let me not stray from Your Commands!
11 I have treasured up Your Word in my heart,
That I might not sin against You.
12 Baruḵ are You, O HWHY!
Teach me Your Laws.
13 With my lips I have recounted
All the Right-Rulings of Your mouth.
14 I have rejoiced in the Way of Your Witnesses,
As over all riches.
15 I meditate on Your Orders,
And regard Your Ways.
16 I delight myself in Your Laws;
I do not forget Your Word.
17 ‫ ג‬,� Do good to Your servant,
Let me live and I guard Your Word.
18 Open my eyes, that I might see
Wonders from Your Torah.
19 I am a sojourner in the earth;
Do not hide Your Commands from me.
20 My being is crushed with longing
For Your Right-Rulings at all times.
21 You rebuked the proud, cursed ones,
Who are straying from Your Commands.
22 Remove from me reproach and scorn,
For I have observed Your Witnesses.
23 Though princes sat, speaking against me,
Your servant meditates on Your Laws.
7

1694

PSALMS

Your Witnesses also are my delight,
My counsellors.
25 ‫ד‬,𐤃 My being has been clinging to the dust;
Revive me according to Your Word.
26 I have recounted my ways and You answered
me;
Teach me Your Laws.
27 Make me understand the way of Your Orders;
That I might meditate on Your wonders.
28 My being has wept from grief;
Strengthen me according to Your Word.
29 Remove from me the way of falsehood,
And favour me with Your Torah.
30 I have chosen the Way of truth;
Your Right-Rulings I have held level.
31 I have clung to Your Witnesses;
O HWHY, do not put me to shame!
32 I run the Way of Your Commands,
For You enlarge my heart.
33 ‫ ה‬, h Teach me, O HWHY, the Way of Your Laws,
And I observe it to the end.
34 Make me understand, that I might observe Your
Torah,
And guard it with all my heart.
35 Make me walk in the path of Your Commands,
For I have delighted in it.
36 Incline my heart to Your Witnesses,
And not to greedy gain.
37 Turn away my eyes from looking at falsehood,
And revive me in Your Way.
38 Establish Your Word to Your servant,
Which leads to the reverence of You.
39 Turn away my reproach which I dread,
For Your Right-Rulings are good.
24

1695

TEHILLIM

See, I have longed for Your Orders;
Revive me in Your righteousness.
41 ‫ ו‬, W And let Your kindnesses come to me, O
HWHY;
Your deliverance, according to Your Word,
42 So that I answer my reprover,
For I have trusted in Your Word.
43 And do not take away from my mouth
The Word of truth entirely,
For I have waited for Your Right-Rulings;
44 That I might guard Your Torah continually,
Forever and ever;
45 That I might walk in a broad place,
For I have sought Your Orders;
46 That I might speak of Your Witnesses before
sovereigns,
And not be ashamed;
47 That I might delight myself in Your Commands,
Which I have loved;
48 That I might lift up my hands to Your Commands,
Which I have loved;
While I meditate on Your Laws.
49 ‫ ז‬, z Remember the Word to Your servant,
On which You have caused me to wait.
50 This is my comfort in my affliction,
For Your Word has given me ḥai.
51 The proud have utterly scorned me,
I did not turn aside from Your Torah.
52 I remembered Your Right-Rulings of old, O HWHY,
And I comfort myself.
53 Rage has seized me because of the wicked
Who forsake Your Torah.
54 Your Laws have been my songs
In the place of my sojournings.
40

1696

PSALMS

I have remembered Your Name in the night, O
HWHY,
And I guard Your Torah.
56 This has become mine,
Because I have observed Your Orders.
57 ‫ ח‬, X You are my portion, O HWHY;
I have promised to guard Your Words.
58 I have sought Your face with all my heart;
Show me favour according to Your Word.
59 I have thought upon my ways,
And turned my feet to Your Witnesses.
60 I have hurried, and did not delay
To guard Your Commands.
61 The cords of the wicked have surrounded me,
Your Torah I have not forgotten.
62 At midnight I rise to give thanks to You,
For Your righteous Right-Rulings.
63 I am a companion of all who revere You,
And of those guarding Your Orders.
64 O HWHY, Your kindness has filled the earth;
Teach me Your Laws.
65 ‫ ט‬, j You have done good to Your servant, O
HWHY,
According to Your Word.
66 Teach me good sense and knowledge,
For I have trusted in Your Commands.
67 Before I was afflicted, I myself was going astray,
But now I have guarded Your Word.
68 You are good, and do good;
Teach me Your Laws.
69 The proud have forged a lie against me,
With all heart I observe Your Orders.
70 Their heart has become like fat,
Without feeling;
I have delighted in Your Torah.
55

1697

TEHILLIM

It was good for me that I was afflicted,
That I might learn Your Laws.
72 The Torah of Your mouth is better to me
Than thousands of gold and silver pieces.
73 ‫ י‬, Y Your hands have made me and formed me;
Make me understand, that I might learn Your
Commands.
74 Those who revere You, see me and rejoice,
For I have waited for Your Word.
75 I know, O HWHY,
That Your Right-Rulings are righteous,
And in trustworthiness You have afflicted me.
76 Please let Your kindness be for my comfort,
According to Your Word to Your servant.
77 Let Your compassions come to me,
That I might live,
For Your Torah is my delight.
78 Let the proud be put to shame,
For with lies they perverted me;
I study Your Orders.
79 Let those who revere You turn to me,
And those who know Your Witnesses.
80 Let my heart be perfect in Your Laws,
So that I am not put to shame.
81 ‫כ‬, K For Your deliverance my being has pined
away,
For I have waited for Your Word.
82 My eyes have pined away for Your Word,
Saying, “When would it comfort me?”
83 For I have become like a wineskin in the smoke,
Your Laws I have not forgotten.
84 How many are the days of Your servant?
When do You execute Right-Ruling
On those who persecute me?
71

1698

PSALMS

The proud have dug pits for me,
Which is not according to Your Torah.
86 All Your Commands are trustworthy;
They have persecuted me with lies;
Help me!
87 They almost made an end of me on earth,
But I, I did not forsake Your Orders.
88 Revive me according to Your kindness,
That I might guard the Witness of Your mouth.
89 ‫ ל‬, L Forever, O HWHY, Your Word stands firm in
the shamayim.
90 Your Trustworthiness is to all generations;
You established the earth, and it stands.
91 According to Your Right-Rulings
They have stood to this day,
For all are Your servants.
92 If Your Torah had not been my delight,
I would have perished in my affliction.
93 Let me never forget Your Orders,
For by them You have given me ḥai.
94 I am Yours, save me;
For I have sought Your Orders.
95 The wicked have waited for me to destroy me;
I understand Your Witnesses.
96 I have seen an end of all perfection;
Your Command is exceedingly broad.
97 ‫ מ‬, m O how I love Your Torah!
It is my study all day long.
98 Your Commands make me wiser than my
enemies;
For it is ever before me.
99 I have more understanding than all my teachers,
For Your Witnesses are my study.
100 I understand more than the aged,
For I have observed Your Orders.
85

1699

TEHILLIM
101 I have restrained my feet from every evil way,

That I might guard Your Word.
102 I have not turned aside from Your Right-Rulings,
For You Yourself have taught me.
103 How sweet to my taste has Your Word been,
More than honey to my mouth!
104 From Your Orders I get understanding;
Therefore I have hated every false way.
105 ‫ נ‬, ! Your Word is a lamp to my feet
And a light to my path.
106 I have sworn, and I confirm,
To guard Your righteous Right-Rulings.
107 I have been afflicted very much;
O HWHY, revive me according to Your Word.
108 Please accept the voluntary offerings of my
mouth,
O HWHY, And teach me Your Right-Rulings.
109 My life is in my hand continually,
And Your Torah I have not forgotten.
110 The wicked have laid a snare for me,
But I have not strayed from Your Orders.
111 Your Witnesses are my inheritance forever,
For they are the joy of my heart.
112 I have inclined my heart to do Your Laws
Forever, to the end.
113 ‫ ס‬, s I have hated doubting thoughts,
But I have loved Your Torah.
114 You are my hiding place and my shield;
I have waited for Your Word.
115 Turn away from me, you evil-doers,
For I observe the Commands of my Elohim!
116 Support me according to Your Word,
That I might live;
And do not put me to shame
Because of my expectation.
1700

PSALMS
117 Sustain me, that I might be saved,

And always look to Your Laws.
118 You have made light of all those
Who stray from Your Laws,
For falsehood is their deceit.
119 You have made to cease
All the wicked of the earth, like dross;
Therefore I have loved Your Witnesses.
120 My flesh has trembled for reverence of You,
And I am in awe of Your Right-Rulings.
121 ‫ ע‬, [ I have done Right-Ruling and righteousness;
Leave me not to my oppressors.
122 Guarantee Your servant’s well-being;
Let not the proud oppress me.
123 My eyes have pined away for Your deliverance,
And for the Word of Your righteousness.
124 Do with Your servant according to Your kindness,
And teach me Your Laws.
125 I am Your servant - make me understand,
That I might know Your Witnesses.
126 It is time for HWHY to act!
For they have broken Your Torah.
127 Therefore I have loved Your Commands
More than gold, even fine gold!
128 Therefore all Orders I count as right;
I have hated every false way.
129 ‫ פ‬, p Your Witnesses are wonders;
So my being observes them.
130 The opening up of Your Words gives light,
Giving understanding to the simple.
131 I have opened my mouth and panted,
For I have longed for Your Commands.
132 Turn to me and show me favour,
According to Your Right-Ruling, toward those who
love Your Name.
1701

TEHILLIM
133 Establish my footsteps by Your Word,

And let no wickedness have rule over me.
134 Redeem me from the oppression of man,
That I might guard Your Orders.
135 Make Your face shine upon Your servant,
And teach me Your Laws.
136 Streams of water have run down from my eyes,
Because they did not guard Your Torah.
137 ‫ צ‬, C Righteous are You, O HWHY,
And Your Right-Rulings are straight.
138 You have commanded Your Witnesses
In righteousness and much truth.
139 My ardour has consumed me,
For my adversaries have forgotten Your Words.
140 Your Word is exceedingly refined;
And Your servant has loved it
141 I am small and despised;
I have not forgotten Your Orders.
142 Your righteousness is righteousness forever,
And Your Torah is truth.
143 Distress and anguish have found me;
Your Commands are my delight.
144 The righteousness of Your Witnesses is forever;
Make me understand, that I might live.
145 ‫ ק‬,q I have called with all my heart;
Answer me, O HWHY!
I observe Your Laws.
146 I have called upon You;
Save me, that I might guard Your Witnesses.
147 I rise before dawn, and cry for help;
I have waited for Your Word.
148 My eyes have gone before the night watches,
To study Your Word.
149 Hear my voice according to Your kindness;
O HWHY, revive me according to Your Right-Ruling.
1702

PSALMS
150 Those who pursue mischief have drawn near;

They have been far from Your Torah.
151 You are near, O HWHY,
And all Your Commands are truth.
152 Of old I have known Your Witnesses,
That You have founded them forever.
153 ‫ ר‬,R See my affliction and deliver me,
For I have not forgotten Your Torah.
154 Plead my cause and redeem me;
Revive me according to Your Word.
155 Deliverance is far from the wicked,
For they have not sought Your Laws.
156 Your compassions are many, O HWHY;
Revive me according to Your Right-Rulings.
157 My persecutors and adversaries are many;
I have not turned aside from Your Witnesses.
158 I saw traitors and was loathed,
Because they did not guard Your Word.
159 See how I have loved Your Orders,
HWHY, revive me according to Your kindness.
160 The sum of Your Word is truth,
And all Your righteous Right-Rulings are forever.
161 ‫ש‬, v Rulers have persecuted me without a cause,
But at Your Word my heart stood in awe.
162 I rejoice at Your Word
As one who finds great treasure.
163 I have hated falsehood and loathe it,
Your Torah I have loved.
164 I have praised You seven times a day,
Because of Your righteous Right-Rulings.
165 Great peace have those loving Your Torah,
And for them there is no stumbling-block.
166 HWHY, I have waited for Your deliverance,
And I have done Your Commands.
1703

TEHILLIM
167 My being has guarded Your Witnesses,

And I love them exceedingly.
168 I have guarded Your Orders and Your Witnesses,
For all my ways are before You.
169 ‫ת‬, t My cry comes before You, O HWHY;
Make me understand according to Your Word.
170 Let my prayer come before You;
Deliver me according to Your Word.
171 My lips pour forth praise,
For You teach me Your Laws.
172 My tongue sings of Your Word,
For all Your Commands are righteousness.
173 Your hand is a help to me,
For I have chosen Your Orders.
174 I have longed for Your deliverance,O HWHY,
And Your Torah is my delight.
175 My being lives, and it praises You;
And Your Right-Rulings help me.
176 I have strayed like a lost sheep;
Seek Your servant,
For I have not forgotten Your Commands.

120 A song of degrees.
In my distress I cried to HWHY,
And He answered me.
2 HWHY, deliver my being from false lips,
From a treacherous tongue.
3 What would one give to you,
Or what would one do to you,
O treacherous tongue?
4 Sharp arrows of a mighty man,
With coals of the broom-wood!
5 Woe to me for I have sojourned in Mesheḵ,
I have dwelt among the tents of Qĕḏar!
1

1704

PSALMS

My being has dwelt too long
With him who hates peace.
7 I am peace;
But when I speak, they are for fighting.
6

121 A song of degrees.
I lift up my eyes to the hills;
Where does my help come from?
2 My help comes from HWHY,
Maker of the shamayim and earth.
3 He does not allow your foot to be moved;
He who watches over you does not slumber.
4 See, He who is guarding Yisra’ĕl Neither
slumbers nor sleeps.
5 HWHY is your guard;
HWHY is your shade at your right hand.
6 The sun does not strike you by day,
Nor the moon by night.
7 HWHY guards you from all evil;
He guards your being.
8 HWHY guards your going out and your coming in
Now and forever.
1

122 A song of degrees. Of Dawiḏ.
I was glad when they said to me,
“Let us go into the House of HWHY.”
2 Our feet have been standing
Within your gates, O Yerushalayim!
3 Yerushalayim is built
As a city that is bound together,
4 Where the tribes have come up,
The tribes of Yah,
A witness to Yisra’ĕl,
To give thanks to the Name of HWHY.
1

1705

TEHILLIM

For there the thrones of right-ruling were
appointed,
The thrones of the house of Dawiḏ.
6 Pray for the peace of Yerushalayim,
Let those who love You be at rest.
7 Peace be within your walls,
Rest in your citadels.
8 For the sake of my brothers and companions,
I say, “Peace be within you.”
9 For the sake of the House of HWHY our Elohim
I seek your good.
5

123 A song of degrees.
I shall lift up my eyes
Unto You who dwell in the shamayim.
2 See, as the eyes of servants
Are toward the hand of their masters,
As the eyes of a female servant
Are toward the hand of her mistress,
So are our eyes toward HWHY our Elohim,
Until He shows favour to us.
3 Show favour to us,
O HWHY, show favour to us!
For we are exceedingly filled with mockery.
4 Our being is exceedingly filled
With the scoffing of those who are at ease,
With the mockery of the proud.
1

124 A song of degrees. Of Dawiḏ.
“If it had not been HWHY who was on our side,”
Let Yisra’ĕl now say;
2 “If it had not been HWHY who was on our side,
When men rose up against us,
3 “Then they would have swallowed us alive,
In their burning rage against us;
1

1706

PSALMS

“Then the waters would have overwhelmed us,
The stream would have gone over our being;
5 “Then the proud waters
Would have gone over our being.”
6 Baruḵ be HWHY,
Who did not give us as prey to their teeth.
7 Our being has escaped like a bird
From the snare of the trappers;
The snare was broken, and we have escaped.
8 Our help is in the Name of HWHY,
Maker of the shamayim and earth.
4

125 A song of degrees.
Those who trust in HWHY
Are like Mount Tsiyon It is not shaken, it remains forever.
2 As the mountains surround Yerushalayim,
So HWHY surrounds His people,
Now and forever.
3 For the sceptre of wickedness shall not rest
On the land allotted to the righteous,
Lest the righteous stretch forth their hands to
unrighteousness.
4 Do good, O HWHY, to those who are good,
And to those who are upright in their hearts.
5 But those who turn aside to their crooked ways,
HWHY shall lead them away
With the workers of wickedness.
Peace be upon Yisra’ĕl!
1

126 A song of degrees.
When HWHY turns back the captivity of Tsiyon,
We shall be like dreamers.
2 Then our mouth shall be filled with laughter,
And our tongue with singing,
1

1707

TEHILLIM

Then shall they say among the gentiles,
“HWHY has done greatness for them.”
3 HWHY shall do greatness for us,
We shall be glad.
4 Turn back our captivity, O HWHY,
Like the streams in the South.
5 Those sowing in tears, shall reap with songs of
joy.
6 He who goes on and weeps,
Bearing seed for sowing,
Shall indeed come in with rejoicing,
Bearing his sheaves.

127 A song of degrees. To Shelomoh.
If HWHY does not build the house,
Its builders have laboured in vain.
If HWHY does not guard the city,
The watchman has stayed awake in vain.
2 In vain do you rise up early,
To sit up late, to eat the bread of toil;
So He gives His beloved sleep.
3 Look, children are an inheritance from HWHY,
The fruit of the womb is the reward.
4 As arrows in the hand of a mighty man,
So are the children of one’s youth.
5 Baruḵ is the man
Who has filled his quiver with them.
They are not ashamed,
When they speak with their enemies in the gate.
1

128 A song of degrees.
Baruḵ are all who revere HWHY,
Who walk in His Ways.
2 You shall eat the labour of your hands.
Be baruḵ, and let it be well with you.
1

1708

PSALMS

Let your wife be
As a fruit-bearing vine within your house,
Your sons like olive plants all around your table.
4 Look, so shall the man be baruḵ
Who reveres HWHY.
5 HWHY shall baraḵ you out of Tsiyon,
And let you see the good of Yerushalayim
All the days of your life,
6 And let you see your children’s children!
Peace be upon Yisra’ĕl!
3

129 A song of degrees.
“Often they have distressed me from my youth.”
Let Yisra’ĕl now say,
2 “Often they have distressed me from my youth,
But they have not overcome me.
3 “The ploughers ploughed on my back
They made their furrows long.”
4 HWHY is righteous;
He has cut the cords of the wicked in two.
5 Let all those who hate Tsiyon
Be put to shame and turned back.
6 Let them be as the grass on the house-tops,
Which withers before it grows up,
7 That shall not fill the reaper’s hand,
Nor the sheaves the binder’s bosom.
8 And those who pass by shall not say,
“The beraḵah of HWHY be upon you;
We have baraḵ you in the Name of HWHY!”
1

130 A song of degrees.
Out of the depths I have cried to You, O HWHY.
2 O HWHY, hear my voice!
Let Your ears be attentive
To the voice of my prayers.
1

1709

TEHILLIM

O Yah, if You should watch wickednesses,
O HWHY, who would stand?
4 But with You there is forgiveness,
That You might be revered.
5 I looked to HWHY, My being has looked,
And for His Word I have waited.
6 My being, for HWHY
More than those watching for morning, watching for
morning.
7 O Yisra’ĕl, wait for HWHY;
For with HWHY there is kindness.
And with Him is much redemption,
8 For He shall redeem Yisra’ĕl
From all his wickednesses.
3

131 A song of degrees. Of Dawiḏ.
O HWHY, my heart has not been proud,
Nor have my eyes been haughty.
Neither have I concerned myself with great matters,
Nor with those too wondrous for me.
2 Have I not calmed, and kept my being silent,
Like one weaned by its mother?
My being is like one weaned.
3 O Yisra’ĕl, wait for HWHY,
Now and forever.
1

132 A song of degrees.
O HWHY, remember Dawiḏ,
All his afflictions;
2 How he swore to HWHY,
Vowed to the Mighty One of Ya’aqoḇ:
3 “Not to enter into my dwelling-house,
Not to get into my bed,
4 “Not to give sleep to my eyes,
Or slumber to my eyelids,
1

1710

PSALMS

“Until I find a place for HWHY,
A Mishkan for the Mighty One of Ya’aqoḇ.”
6 See, we heard of it in Ephrathah;
We found it in the fields of the forest.
7 Let us go into His Mishkanoth;
Let us bow ourselves at His footstool.
8 Arise, O HWHY, to Your place of rest,
You and the ark of Your strength.
9 Let Your kohenim put on righteousness,
And Your kind ones shout for joy.
10 For the sake of Your servant Dawiḏ,
Do not turn away the face of Your Anointed One.
11 HWHY has sworn in truth to Dawiḏ;
He does not turn from it,
“Of the fruit of your body I place upon your throne.
12 “If your sons guard My Covenant
And My Witnesses that I teach them,
Their sons shall sit upon your throne forever.”
13 For HWHY has chosen Tsiyon;
He has desired it for His dwelling:
14 “This is My place of rest forever;
Here I dwell, for I have desired it.
15 “I greatly baraḵ her provision,
I satisfy her poor with bread.
16 “And I put deliverance on her kohenim,
And her kind ones sing for joy.
17 “There I make the horn of Dawiḏ grow;
I shall prepare a lamp for My Anointed One.
18 “I put shame on His enemies,
While on Him His diadem shall shine.”
5

133 A song of degrees. Of I Dawiḏ.
See how good and how pleasant it is for brothers
to dwell together in unity

1

1711

TEHILLIM

Like the precious oil on the head,
Running down on the beard,
The beard of Aharon,
Running down on the collar of his robes 3 Like the dew of Ḥermon,
That comes down on the mountains of Tsiyon.
For there HWHY commanded the beraḵah,
Ḥai forever!
2

134 A song of degrees.
Come, baraḵ HWHY,
All you servants of HWHY,
Who are standing in the House of HWHY by night!
2 Lift up your hands in the qodesh place,
And baraḵ HWHY.
3 HWHY, Maker of the shamayim and earth,
Baraḵ you from Tsiyon!
1

135 HalleluYah! Praise the Name of HWHY;
Praise, you servants of HWHY,
2 Who are standing in the House of HWHY,
In the courts of the House of our Elohim,
3 Hallelu-Yah, for HWHY is good;
Sing praises to His Name, for it is pleasant.
4 For Yah has chosen Ya’aqoḇ for Himself,
Yisra’ĕl for His treasured possession.
5 For I know that HWHY is great,
And our Aḏon is above all mighty ones.
6 HWHY has done whatever pleased Him,
In the shamayim and in earth,
In the seas and in all the depths,
7 Causing vapours to go up
From the ends of the earth;
He made lightning for the rain,
Bringing forth wind from His treasuries;
1712

PSALMS

Who smote the first-born of Mitsrayim,
From man to beast.
9 He sent signs and wonders
Into your midst, O Mitsrayim,
On Pharaoh and on all his servants;
10 Who smote many nations,
And slew mighty sovereigns,
11 Even Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites,
And Oḡ sovereign of Bashan,
And all the reigns of Kena’an.
12 And He gave their land as an inheritance,
An inheritance to Yisra’ĕl His people.
13 O HWHY, Your Name is forever,
O HWHY, Your remembrance to all generations,
14 For HWHY rightly rules His people,
And has compassion on His servants.
15 The idols of the gentiles are silver and gold,
The work of men’s hands.
16 They have mouths, but they do not speak;
They have eyes, but they do not see;
17 They have ears, but they do not hear;
Also there is no breath in their mouth.
18 Those making them become like them,
Everyone who is trusting in them.
19 Baraḵ HWHY, O house of Yisra’ĕl!
Baraḵ HWHY, O house of Aharon!
20 Baraḵ HWHY, O house of Lĕwi!
You who revere HWHY, baraḵ HWHY!
21 Baruḵ from Tsiyon, HWHY be,
Who dwells in Yerushalayim!
Hallelu-Yah.
8

136 Give thanks to HWHY, for He is good!
For His kindness is everlasting.
1713

TEHILLIM

Give thanks to the Elohim of mighty ones!
For His kindness is everlasting.
3 Give thanks to the Aḏon of masters!
For His kindness is everlasting:
4 To Him who alone does great wonders,
For His kindness is everlasting;
5 To Him who by wisdom made the shamayim,
For His kindness is everlasting;
6 To Him who spread the earth on the waters,
For His kindness is everlasting;
7 To Him who made great lights,
For His kindness is everlasting;
8 The sun to rule by day,
For His kindness is everlasting;
9 The moon and stars to rule by night,
For His kindness is everlasting.
10 To Him who smote Mitsrayim in their first-born,
For His kindness is everlasting;
11 And brought out Yisra’ĕl from their midst,
For His kindness is everlasting;
12 With a strong hand, and with an outstretched
arm,
For His kindness is everlasting;
13 To Him who split apart the Sea of Reeds,
For His kindness is everlasting;
14 And made Yisra’ĕl pass through the midst of it,
For His kindness is everlasting;
15 But shook off Pharaoh and his army in the Sea of
Reeds,
For His kindness is everlasting;
16 To Him who led His people through the
wilderness,
For His kindness is everlasting;
17 To Him who smote great sovereigns,
For His kindness is everlasting;
2

1714

PSALMS

And slew mighty sovereigns,
For His kindness is everlasting;
19 Even Siḥon sovereign of the Amorites,
For His kindness is everlasting;
20 And Oḡ sovereign of Bashan,
For His kindness is everlasting;
21 And gave their land as an inheritance,
For His kindness is everlasting;
22 An inheritance to Yisra’ĕl His servant,
For His kindness is everlasting.
23 Who remembered us in our humiliation,
For His kindness is everlasting;
24 And rescued us from our adversaries,
For His kindness is everlasting;
25 Who gives food to all flesh,
For His kindness is everlasting.
26 Give thanks to the Ĕl of the shamayim!
For His kindness is everlasting.
18

137 By the rivers of Baḇel,
There we sat down and we wept
As we remembered Tsiyon.
2 We hung our lyres
Upon the willows in the midst of it.
3 For there our captors
Asked us for the words of a song,
And our plunderers for rejoicing,
“Sing to us a song of Tsiyon!”
4 How could we sing the song of HWHY
On foreign land?
5 If I forget you, O Yerushalayim,
Let my right hand forget.
6 Let my tongue cling to my palate,
If I do not remember you,
1715

TEHILLIM

If I do not exalt Yerushalayim
Above my chief joy.
7 Remember, O HWHY, against the sons of Eḏom;
The day of Yerushalayim,
Who said, “Lay it bare, lay it bare,
To its foundation!”
8 O daughter of Baḇel, who are to be destroyed,
Baruḵ is he who repays you your deed,
What you did to us!
9 Baruḵ is he who shall take
And dash your little ones against the rock.

138 Of Dawiḏ.
I will praise HWHY with all my heart;
Before HWHY Elohim, I sing Your praises.
2 I bow myself toward Your qodesh Hĕyḵal,
And give thanks to Your Name;
For Your kindness and for Your truth;
For You have made great Your Word,
Your Name, above all.
3 On the day I called, You answered me,
You made me bold with strength in my being.
4 Let all the sovereigns of the earth
Give thanks to You, O HWHY,
When they shall hear the words of Your mouth.
5 And let them sing of the Ways of HWHY,
For great is the esteem of HWHY.
6 Though HWHY is exalted,
He looks on the humble;
But the proud He perceives from a distance.
7 Though I walk in the midst of distress,
You revive me; You stretch out Your hand
Against the wrath of my enemies,
And Your right hand saves me.
1

1716

PSALMS

HWHY does perfectly for me.
O HWHY, Your kindness is everlasting.
Do not forsake the works of Your hands.

8

139 To the chief singer. A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
O HWHY, You have searched me
And know me.
2 You know my sitting down and my rising up;
You understand my thought from afar.
3 You spread my path and my lying down,
And know well all my ways.
4 For there is not a word on my tongue,
But see, O HWHY, You know it all!
5 You have closed me in, behind and before,
And laid Your hand upon me 6 Knowledge too wondrous for me,
It is high, I cannot fathom.
7 Where would I go from Your Ruaḥ?
Or where would I flee from Your face?
8 If I go up into the shamayim, You are there;
If I make my bed in the grave, see, You are there.
9 I take the wings of the morning,
I dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
10 There too, Your hand would lead me,
And Your right hand hold me.
11 If I say, “Darkness shall cover me,”
Then night would be light to me;
12 Even darkness is not dark for You,
But night shines as the day As is darkness, so is light.
13 For You, You possessed my kidneys,
You have covered me in my mother’s womb.
14 I give thanks to You,
For I am awesomely and wondrously made!
1

1717

TEHILLIM

Wondrous are Your works,
And my being knows it well.
15 My bones were not concealed from You,
When I was shaped in a hidden place,
Knit together in the depths of the earth.
16 Your eyes saw my unformed body,
And in Your Book all of them were written,
The days they were formed,
While none was among them.
17 And how precious are Your thoughts to me, O Ĕl!
How great has been the sum of them!
18 If I should count them,
They would be more than the sand;
When I wake up, I am still with You.
19 Oh, that You would slay the wicked, O Eloah!
Depart from me therefore, men of bloodshed!
20 They speak against You wickedly.
Bring Your enemies to naught!
21 O HWHY, do I not hate them, who hate You?
And do I not loathe those who rise up against You?
22 With a complete hatred I hate them;
They have become my enemies.
23 Search me, O Ĕl, and know my heart;
Try me, and know my thoughts;
24 And see if an idolatrous way is in me,
And lead me in the Way everlasting,

140 To the chief singer.
A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
1 Rescue me, O HWHY, from men of evil;
Preserve me from men of violence,
2 Who have devised evils in their hearts;
They stir up conflicts all day long.
3 They sharpen their tongues like a snake;
The poison of cobras is under their lips. Selah.
1718

PSALMS

Guard me, O HWHY, from the hands of the
wicked;
Guard me from a man of violence,
Who have schemed to trip up my steps.
5 The proud have hidden a trap for me, and cords;
They have spread a net by the wayside;
They have laid snares for me. Selah.
6 I said to HWHY, “You are my Ĕl;
Hear the voice of my prayers, O HWHY.
7 “O Aḏonai HWHY, my saving strength,
You have covered my head in the day of battle.
8 “Do not grant the desires of the wicked, O HWHY;
Do not promote his scheme. Selah.
9 “Those who surround me lift up their head;
The trouble of their lips cover them;
10 “Let burning coals fall on them;
Let them be made to fall into the fire,
Into deep pits, let them not rise again.
11 “Let not a slanderer be established in the earth;
Let evil capture the man of violence speedily.”
12 I have known that HWHY maintains
The cause of the afflicted,
The right-ruling of the poor.
13 Only, let the righteous give thanks to Your Name,
Let the straight ones dwell in Your presence.
4

141 A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
HWHY, I have cried out to You;
Hasten to me! Give ear to my voice when I cry out to
You.
2 Let my prayer be prepared before You as
incense,
The lifting up of my hands as the evening offering.
3 O HWHY, place a guard for my mouth;
Watch over the door of my lips.
1

1719

TEHILLIM

Let not my heart be inclined to evil,
To practise deeds of wickedness
With men working wickedness,
And let me not eat of their delicacies.
5 Let the righteous one smite me
Or reprove me in kindness It is oil on my head.
Let my head not refuse it.
My prayer is still against their evil deeds.
6 Their judges have been thrown down
By the sides of the rock,
But they have heard my words,
For they have been pleasant.
7 Our bones are scattered at the mouth of the
grave,
As when one ploughs and breaks up the earth.
8 But my eyes are upon You, O Aḏonai HWHY.
In You I take refuge;
Do not pour out my life.
9 Guard me from the clutches
Of the trap they have laid for me,
And from the snares
Of the workers of wickedness.
10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets,
While I pass by.
4

142 A poem of Dawiḏ. A prayer when he was in
the cave.
1 I cry out to HWHY with my voice;
I pray to HWHY with my voice.
2 I pour out my complaint before Him;
I declare before Him my distress.
3 When my spirit grew faint within me,
Then You know my path.
1720

PSALMS

In the way in which I walk
They have hidden a trap for me.
4 Look to the right hand and see,
And no one is concerned for me;
No refuge remains to me;
No one inquires after my being.
5 I cried out to You, O HWHY:
I said, “You are my refuge,
My portion in the land of the living.
6 “Listen to my cry,
For I am brought very low;
Deliver me from my persecutors,
For they are too strong for me.
7 “Bring my being out of prison,
To give thanks to Your Name.
Let the righteous gather around me,
Because You deal kindly with me.”

143 A psalm, of Dawiḏ.
Hear my prayer, O HWHY,
Give ear to my pleadings.
In Your trustworthiness,
Answer me in Your righteousness,
2 And do not enter into right-ruling with Your
servant,
For before You no one living is in the right.
3 For the enemy has pursued my being;
He has crushed my life to the ground;
He has made me dwell in dark places,
Like the dead of old.
4 Therefore my spirit grew faint within me,
My heart within me is stunned.
5 I remembered the days of old;
I meditated on all Your works;
I ponder on the work of Your hands.
1

1721

TEHILLIM

I have spread out my hands to You;
My being is like a thirsty land for You. Selah.
7 Hasten, answer me, O HWHY;
My spirit fails!
Do not hide Your face from me,
Lest I be like those going down into the pit.
8 Let me hear Your kindness in the morning,
For in You I have put my trust;
Let me know the way in which I should walk,
For I have lifted up my being to You.
9 Deliver me from my enemies, O HWHY;
I take refuge in You.
10 Teach me to do Your good pleasure,
For You are my Elohim.
Let Your good Ruaḥ lead me
In the land of straightness.
11 For the sake of Your Name, O HWHY revive me!
In Your righteousness,
Bring my being out of distress.
12 And in Your kindness,
Cut off my enemies.
And destroy all the adversaries of my life,
For I am Your servant!
6

144 Of Dawiḏ.
Baruḵ be HWHY my Rock,
Who is teaching my hands for fighting,
My fingers for battle;
2 My kindness and my stronghold,
My tower and my deliverer,
My shield, and in whom I take refuge,
Who is subduing peoples under me.
3 HWHY, what is man, that You should know him?
Son of man, that You should think of him?
1

1722

PSALMS

Man is like a breath,
His days like a passing shadow.
5 Stretch Your shamayim, O HWHY, and
comedown;
Touch the mountains that they smoke.
6 Send forth lightning and scatter them,
Send forth Your arrows and confuse them.
7 Send forth Your hand from above;
Rescue me and deliver me out of great waters,
From the hand of foreigners,
8 Whose mouth has spoken falsehood,
And whose right hand is a right hand of lies.
9 O Elohim, a new song I sing to You;
On a harp of ten strings I sing praises to You,
10 Who gives deliverance to sovereigns,
Who rescues Dawiḏ His servant
From the evil sword.
11 Rescue me and deliver me from the hand of
foreigners,
Whose mouth has spoken falsehood,
And whose right hand is a right hand of lies;
12 Because our sons are like plants
Grown up in their youth;
Our daughters like hewn stones,
Polished, like a palace building;
13 Let our storehouses be filled,
Supplying all kinds;
Let our sheep bring forth thousands
And ten thousands in our fields;
14 Our cattle well-laden;
No breaking in, no going out;
And no crying in our streets.
15 Baruḵ are the people who have it so;
Baruḵ are the people whose Elohim is HWHY!
4

1723

TEHILLIM

145 Tehillah of Dawiḏ.
‫א‬, A I exalt You, my Elohim, O Sovereign;
And baraḵ Your Name forever and ever.
2 ‫ב‬, B All day long I baraḵ You,
And praise Your Name forever and ever.
3 ‫ג‬,G Great is HWHY, and greatly to be praised;
And His greatness is unsearchable.
4 ‫ד‬,𐤃 Generation after generation praise Your
works,
And they declare Your mighty acts.
5 ‫ה‬, h I declare the esteemed splendour of Your
excellency,
And the matters of Your wondrous works.
6 ‫ו‬, W And they speak of the might of Your awesome
acts,
And I recount Your greatness.
7 ‫ ז‬, z They send forth the remembrance of Your
great goodness,
And they sing of Your righteousness.
8 ‫ח‬, X HWHY shows favour and is compassionate,
Patient and great in kindness.
9 ‫ט‬, j HWHY is good to all,
And He has compassion on all His works.
10 ‫י‬, Y All Your works give thanks to You, O HWHY,
And Your kind ones baraḵ You.
11 ‫כ‬, K They speak of the esteem of Your reign,
And talk of Your might,
12 ‫ל‬, L To make known to the sons of men His
mighty acts,
And the esteemed splendour of His reign.
13 ‫מ‬, m Your reign is an everlasting reign,
And Your rule is throughout all generations.
‫ נ‬, ! HWHY is trustworthy in all His words
And shows favour in all His deeds.
1

1724

PSALMS

‫ס‬, s HWHY is supporting all who are falling,
And raising up all who are bowed down.
15 ‫ע‬, [ The eyes of all look to You expectantly,
And You are giving them their food in its season,
16 ‫פ‬, p Opening Your hand and satisfying
The desire of all that live.
17 ‫צ‬, C HWHY is righteous in all His ways,
And kind in all His works.
18 ‫ ק‬,q HWHY is near to all who call upon Him,
To all who call upon Him in truth.
19 ‫ ר‬,R He does the desire of those who revere Him;
And He hears their cry and saves them.
20 ‫ש‬, v HWHY preserves all those loving Him,
But all the wicked He destroys.
21 ‫ת‬, t My mouth speaks the praise of HWHY,
And let all flesh baraḵ His qodesh Name,
Forever and ever.
14

146 Hallelu-Yah!
HalleluHWHY, O my being!
2 While I live I hallelah HWHY;
I sing praises to my Elohim while I exist.
3 Do not put your trust in princes,
In a son of man, in whom is no deliverance.
4 His spirit goes out, he returns to his earth;
In that day his plans perish.
5 Baruḵ is he who has the Ĕl of Ya’aqoḇ for his
help,
Whose expectancy is in HWHY his Elohim,
6 Maker of the shamayim and earth,
The sea and all that is in them,
Who is guarding truth forever,
7 Doing right-ruling for the oppressed,
Giving bread to the hungry.
HWHY releases those who are bound,
1725

TEHILLIM

HWHY opens the blind,
HWHY raises those who are bowed down,
HWHY loves the righteous.
9 HWHY guards the strangers,
He lifts up the fatherless and widow,
But the way of the wicked He turns upside down.
10 HWHY reigns forever, O Tsiyon,
Your Elohim to all generations.
Hallelu-Yah!
8

147 HalleluYah!
For it is good to sing praises to our Elohim.
For it is pleasant - praise is fitting.
2 HWHY builds up Yerushalayim,
He gathers the outcasts of Yisra’ĕl 3 Heals the broken-hearted
And binds up their wounds.
4 Appoints the number of the stars,
He gives names to all of them.
5 Great is our Aḏon and mighty power,
There is no limit to His understanding.
6 HWHY lifts up the meek ones;
He throws the wicked down to the ground.
7 Respond to HWHY with thanksgiving;
Sing praises on a lyre to our Elohim,
8 Who covers the shamayim with clouds,
Who prepares rain for the earth,
Who makes grass to sprout on the mountains,
9 Giving to the beast its food,
To the young ravens that cry.
10 He does not delight in the strength of the horse,
He takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
11 HWHY takes pleasure in those who revere Him,
In those who wait for His kindness.
1726

PSALMS

Extol HWHY, O Yerushalayim!
Praise your Elohim, O Tsiyon!
13 For He has strengthened the bars of your gates,
He has baraḵ your children in your midst,
14 Who makes peace in your borders,
He satisfies you with the finest wheat;
15 Who sends out His Command to the earth,
His word runs very speedily;
16 Who gives snow like wool,
He scatters the frost like ashes;
17 Throwing out His hail like pieces;
Who stands before His cold?
18 He sends out His word and melts them,
He causes His wind to blow - the waters flow;
19 Declaring His Word to Ya’aqoḇ,
His Laws and His Right-Rulings to Yisra’ĕl.
20 He has not done so with any nation;
And they have not known Right-Rulings!
Hallelu-Yah!
12

148 HalleluYah!
Hallelu-HWHY from the shamayim,
Praise Him in the heights!
2 Praise Him, all His messengers;
Praise Him, all His hosts!
3 Praise Him, sun and moon;
Praise Him, all you stars of light!
4 Praise Him, shamayim of shamayim,
And you waters above the shamayim!
5 Let them praise the Name of HWHY,
For He commanded and they were created.
6 And He established them forever and ever,
He gave a law and they pass not beyond.
7 Hallelu-HWHY from the earth,
You great sea creatures and all the depths,
1727

TEHILLIM

Fire and hail, snow and clouds,
Stormy wind that does His word,
9 The mountains and all hills,
Fruit tree and all cedars,
10 Wild beasts and all cattle,
Creeping creatures and flying birds,
11 Sovereigns of the earth and all peoples,
Rulers and all judges of the earth,
12 Both young men and maidens,
Old men and children.
13 Let them praise the Name of HWHY,
For His Name alone is exalted,
His splendour is above the earth and shamayim.
14 He also lifts up the horn of His people,
The praise of all His kind ones;
Of the children of Yisra’ĕl,
A people near to Him.
Hallelu-Yah!
8

149 HalleluYah!
I Sing to HWHY a new song,
His praise in an assembly of kind ones.
2 Let Yisra’ĕl rejoice in their Maker;
Let the children of Tsiyon exult in their Sovereign.
3 Let them praise His Name in a dance;
Let them sing praises to Him with the tambourine
and lyre.
4 For HWHY takes pleasure in His people;
He embellishes the meek ones with deliverance.
5 Let the kind ones exult in esteem;
Let them sing aloud on their beds.
6 Let the exaltation of Ĕl be in their mouth,
And a two-edged sword in their hand,
7 To execute vengeance on the gentiles,
Punishments on the peoples;
1728

PSALMS

To bind their sovereigns with chains,
And their nobles with iron bands;
9 To execute on them the written Right-Ruling;
A splendour it is for all His kind ones.
Hallelu-Yah!
8

150 HalleluYah!
Praise Ĕl in His qodeshah
Praise Him in His mighty expanse!
2 Praise Him for His mighty acts;
Praise Him according to His excellent greatness!
3 Praise Him with the blowing of the ram’s horn;
Praise Him with the harp and lyre!
4 Praise Him with tambourine and dance;
Praise Him with stringed instruments and flutes!
5 Praise Him with sounding cymbals;
Praise Him with resounding cymbals!
6 Let all that have breath hallĕl Yah.
Hallelu-Yah!

1729

PROVERBS

MISHLĔY
‫ משלי‬YLvm

1 The proverbs of Shelomoh son of Dawiḏ,
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl:
2 For knowing wisdom and discipline,
For understanding the words of understanding,
3 For receiving the discipline of wisdom,
Righteousness, right-ruling, and straightness;
4 For giving insight to the simple,
Knowledge and discretion to the young.
5 The wise one hears and increases learning,
And the understanding one gets wise counsel,
6 For understanding a proverb and a figure,
The words of the wise and their riddles.
7 The reverence of HWHY is the beginning of
knowledge;
Fools despise wisdom and discipline.
8 My son, heed the discipline of your father,
And do not forsake the Torah of your mother;
9 For they are a wreath of esteem on your head,
And necklaces of your neck.
10 My son, if sinners entice you, do not give in.
11 If they say, “Come with us, let us lie in wait for
blood,
Let us ambush the innocent without cause.
12 “Let us swallow them alive like the grave,
And entirely, like those going down to the pit.
13 “Let us find all precious goods,
Let us fill our houses with spoil.
14 “Cast in your lot among us,
Let us all have one purse,”
15 My son, do not walk in the way with them,
Keep your foot from their path;
1730

MISHLĔY

For their feet run to evil,
And they hurry to shed blood.
17 For in vain the net is spread
In the sight of any bird.
18 But they lie in wait for their own blood,
They ambush their own lives.
19 Such are the ways of everyone greedy for gain;
It takes away the life of its owners.
20 Wisdom calls aloud outside;
She raises her voice in the broad places.
21 At the head of the noisy streets she cries out,
At the openings of the gates,
In the city she speaks her words:
22 “How long, you simple ones,
Would you love simplicity,
And shall scoffers delight in their scoffing,
And fools hate knowledge?
23 “Turn at my reproof.
See, I pour out my spirit on you,
I make my words known to you.
24 “Because I called and you refused,
I have stretched out my hand and no one inclined,
25 “And you spurned all my counsel,
And would not yield to my reproof,
26 “Let me also laugh at your calamity,
Mock when your dread comes,
27 “When your dread comes like a storm,
And your calamity comes like a whirlwind,
When distress and anguish come upon you.
28 “Let them then call on me, but I answer not;
Let them seek me, but not find me.
29 “Because they hated knowledge
And did not choose the reverence of HWHY,
30 “They did not accept my counsel,
They despised all my reproof,
16

1731

PROVERBS

“Therefore let them eat the fruit of their own way,
And be filled with their own counsels.
32 “For the turning away of the simple slays them,
And the complacency of fools destroys them.
33 “But whoever listens to me dwells safely,
And is at ease from the dread of evil.”
31

2 My son, if you accept my words,
And treasure up my Commands with you,
2 So that you make your ear attend to wisdom,
Incline your heart to understanding;
3 For if you cry for discernment,
Lift up your voice for understanding,
4 If you seek her as silver,
And search for her as hidden treasures,
5 Then you would understand the reverence of
hWhY,
And find the knowledge of Elohim.
6 For hWhY gives wisdom;
Out of His mouth - knowledge and understanding.
7 And He treasures up stability for the straight,
A shield to those walking blamelessly,
8 To watch over the paths of right-ruling,
And the way of His kind ones He guards.
9 Then you would understand righteousness and
right-ruling,
And straightness - Every good path.
10 For wisdom would enter your heart,
And knowledge be pleasant to your being,
11 Discretion would guard you;
Understanding would watch over you,
12 To deliver you from the evil way,
From the man who speaks perversities,
13 Those who leave the paths of straightness
To walk in the ways of darkness;
1732

MISHLĔY

Who rejoice to do evil;
They delight in the perversities of evil;
15 Whose paths are crooked,
And they are perverted in their ways;
16 To deliver you from the strange woman,
From the foreigner who flatters with her words,
17 Who forsakes the companion of her youth,
And has forgotten the Covenant of her Elohim.
18 For her house has sunk down to death,
And her paths to the dead;
19 None going in to her returns,
Nor do they reach the paths of ḥai 20 So walk in the way of goodness,
And guard the paths of righteousness.
21 For the straight shall dwell in the earth,
And the perfect be left in it;
22 But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth,
And the treacherous ones plucked out of it.
14

3 My son, do not forget my Torah,
And let your heart watch over my Commands;
2 For length of days and long life
And peace they add to you.
3 Let not kindness and truth forsake you Bind them around your neck,
Write them on the tablet of your heart,
4 Thus finding favour and good insight
In the eyes of Elohim and man.
5 Trust in hWhY with all your heart,
And lean not on your own understanding;
6 Know Him in all your ways,
And He makes all your paths straight.
7 Do not be wise in your own eyes;
Revere hWhY and turn away from evil.
1733

PROVERBS

It is healing to your navel,
And moistening to your bones.
9 Esteem HWHY with your goods,
And with the first-fruits of all your increase;
10 Then your storehouses shall be filled with plenty,
And your vats overflow with new wine.
11 My son, do not despise the discipline of hWhY,
And do not loathe His reproof;
12 For whom hWhY loves He reproves,
As a father the son whom he delights in.
13 Baruḵ is the man who has found wisdom,
And the man who gets understanding;
14 For the gain from it is better
Than gain from silver,
And its increase than fine gold.
15 She is more precious than rubies,
And all your delights are not comparable to her.
16 Length of days is in her right hand,
Riches and esteem in her left hand.
17 Her ways are pleasant ways,
And all her paths are peace.
18 She is a tree of ḥai to those taking hold of her,
And baruḵ are all who retain her.
19 HWHY founded the earth by wisdom;
He established the shamayim by understanding;
20 By His knowledge the depths were broken up,
And clouds drop down dew.
21 My son, let them not depart from your eyes;
Watch over sound wisdom and discretion;
22 Then they become ḥai to your being
And an adorning to your neck.
23 Then you would walk safely in your way,
And your foot would not stumble.
8

1734

MISHLĔY

When you lie down, you need not be afraid.
And you shall lie down and your sleep shall be
sweet.
25 Do not be afraid of sudden dread,
Nor of the ruin of the wicked when it comes;
26 For hWhY is at your side,
And He shall guard your foot from being caught.
27 Do not withhold good from those who deserve it,
When it is in the power of your hand to do so.
28 Do not say to your neighbour, “Go, and come
back,
And tomorrow I give it,” when you have it with you.
29 Do not plan evil against your neighbour,
Seeing he dwells safely beside you.
30 Do not strive with a man without cause,
If he has done you no evil.
31 Do not envy a violent man,
And choose none of his ways;
32 For the perverse one is an abomination to hWhY,
And His secret counsel is with the straight.
33 The curse of hWhY is on the house of the wicked,
But He baraḵ the home of the righteous.
34 He certainly scoffs the scoffers,
But gives favour to the humble.
35 The wise inherit esteem,
But fools are bearing away shame!
24

4 Children, listen to the discipline of a father,
And give attention to know understanding;
2 For I gave you good instruction:
Do not forsake my Torah.
3 For I was my father’s son,
Tender and the only one in the eyes of my mother,

1735

PROVERBS

Then he taught me and said to me,
“Let your heart hold fast my words;
Guard my Commands, and live.
5 “Get wisdom! Get understanding!
Do not forget, and do not turn away from the words
of my mouth.
6 “Do not leave her, and let her guard you;
Love her, and let her watch over you.
7 “The beginning of wisdom is:
Get wisdom! And with all your getting, get
understanding.
8 “Exalt her, and let her uplift you;
She brings you esteem when you embrace her.
9 “She gives your head a wreath of esteem,
She shields you with an adorning crown.”
10 Hear, my son, and accept my words,
And let the years of your life be many.
11 I have taught you in the way of wisdom,
I have led you in straight paths.
12 When you walk your steps shall not be hindered,
And if you run you shall not stumble.
13 Hold fast to discipline, do not let go;
Watch over her, for she is your ḥai.
14 Do not enter the path of the wicked,
And do not walk in the way of evil-doers.
15 Avoid it, do not pass by it;
Turn away from it and pass on.
16 For they do not sleep unless they have done evil.
And their sleep is taken away unless they make
someone fall.
17 For they have eaten the bread of wickedness,
And they drink the wine of violence.
18 But the path of the righteous is like the light of
dawn,
That shines ever brighter unto the perfect day.
4

1736

MISHLĔY

The way of the wicked is like darkness;
They do not know at what they stumble.
20 My son, listen to my words;
Incline your ear to my sayings.
21 Let them not depart from your eyes;
Guard them in the midst of your heart;
22 For they are ḥai to those who find them,
And healing to all their flesh.
23 Watch over your heart with all diligence,
For out of it are the sources of ḥai.
24 Turn away from you a crooked mouth,
And put perverse lips far from you.
25 Let your eyes look forward,
And your eyelids look straight before you.
26 Consider the path of your feet,
And all your ways are established.
27 Do not turn to the right or the left;
Turn your foot away from evil.
19

5 My son, listen to my wisdom;
Incline your ear to my understanding,
2 So as to watch over discretion,
And your lips guard knowledge.
3 For the lips of a strange woman drip honey,
And her mouth is smoother than oil;
4 But in the end she is bitter as wormwood,
Sharp as a two-edged sword.
5 Her feet go down to death,
Her steps lay hold of the grave.
6 She does not consider the path of ḥai;
Her ways are unstable - you do not know it.
7 So now, listen to me, you children,
And do not turn away from the words of my mouth.
8 Keep your way far from her,
And do not come near the door of her house,
1737

PROVERBS

Lest you give your splendour to others,
And your years to one who is cruel;
10 Lest strangers be filled with your strength,
And your labours go to the house of a foreigner.
11 Then you shall howl in your latter end,
When your flesh and your body are consumed,
12 And shall say, “How I have hated discipline,
And my heart has despised reproof!
13 “And I have not heeded the voice of my teachers,
And I have not inclined my ear to those who
instructed me!
14 “In a little while I was in all evil,
In the midst of an assembly and a congregation.”
15 Drink water from your own cistern,
And running water from your own well.
16 Should your springs be scattered abroad,
Rivers of water in the streets?
17 Let them be only your own,
And not for strangers with you.
18 Let your fountain be baruḵ,
And rejoice with the wife of your youth 19 A loving deer and a pleasant doe!
Let her breasts satisfy you at all times.
And be captivated by her love always.
20 For why should you, my son,
Be captivated by a strange woman,
And embrace the bosom of a foreigner?
21 For the ways of man are before the eyes of
hWhY,
And He considers all his paths.
22 The wicked is entrapped
In his own wickednesses,
And he is caught in the cords of his sin.
23 He dies for lack of discipline,
And in the greatness of his folly He goes astray.
9

1738

MISHLĔY

6 My son, if you:
Have become guarantor for your friend,
Have shaken hands in pledge for a stranger,
2 Have been snared by the words of your own
mouth,
Have been caught by the words of your mouth 3 Do this at once, my son, and deliver yourself,
For you have come into the hand of your friend:
Go, humble yourself, and urge your friend.
4 Give no sleep to your eyes,
Nor slumber to your eyelids.
5 Deliver yourself like a gazelle from the hand,
And like a bird from the hand of the trapper.
6 Go to the ant, you lazy one!
See her ways and be wise,
7 Which, having no commander, overseer or ruler,
8 Provides her supplies in the summer,
Gathers her food in the harvest.
9 How long would you lie down, O lazy one?
When do you arise from your sleep?
10 A little sleep, a little slumber,
A little folding of the hands to lie down;
11 And your poverty shall come like a prowler,
And your need as an armed man.
12 A man of Beliya’al, a wicked man,
Walks with a perverse mouth,
13 Winks with his eyes, shuffles his feet,
Points with his fingers;
14 Perverseness is in his heart,
Plotting evil at all times,
He sends out strife.
15 Therefore his calamity comes suddenly
Instantly he is broken,
And there is no healing.
1739

PROVERBS

These six hWhY hates,
And seven are an abomination to Him:
17 A proud look,
A lying tongue,
And hands shedding innocent blood,
18 A heart devising wicked schemes,
Feet quick to run to evil,
19 A false witness breathing out lies,
And one who causes strife among brothers.
20 My son, watch over your father’s command,
And do not forsake the Torah of your mother.
21 Bind them on your heart always;
Tie them around your neck.
22 When you are walking about, it leads you;
When you lie down, it guards you.
And when you have woken up,
It talks to you.
23 For the Command is a lamp,
And the Torah a light,
And reproofs of discipline a way of ḥai,
24 To guard you against an evil woman,
From the flattering tongue of a strange woman.
25 Do not desire her prettiness in your heart;
Neither let her captivate you with her eyelids.
26 For because of a whore is the crust of bread.
And an adulteress entraps a precious life.
27 Would a man take fire to his bosom,
And his garments not be burned?
28 Would a man walk on hot coals,
And his feet not be scorched?
29 So is he who goes in to his neighbour’s wife;
None who touches her goes unpunished.
30 They do not despise a thief
If he steals to satisfy his appetite when he is
starving.
16

1740

MISHLĔY

Yet if he is caught he repays sevenfold;
He gives all the wealth of his house.
32 He who commits adultery with a woman lacks
heart;
He who does it destroys his own ḥai.
33 He finds smiting and shame,
And his reproach is not wiped away.
34 For jealousy enrages a man,
And he does not spare in the day of vengeance.
35 He does not regard any ransom,
Nor accept your bribe, however great!
31

7 My son, guard my words,
And treasure up my Commands with you.
2 Guard my Commands and live,
And my Torah as the apple of your eye.
3 Bind them on your fingers;
Write them on the tablet of your heart.
4 Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,”
And call understanding a close friend,
5 To guard you against the strange woman,
Against the foreigner who flatters with her words.
6 For at the window of my house
I looked through my lattice,
7 And I saw among the simple,
I perceived among the youths,
A young man lacking heart,
8 Passing through the street near her corner;
And he went the way to her house
9 In the twilight, in the evening,
In the black and dark night.
10 And look, a woman met him,
Dressed like a whore,
With a hidden heart.
1741

PROVERBS

She was boisterous and stubborn,
Her feet did not stay at her own house.
12 Now in the street, now in the square,
And at every corner she lurks.
13 And she took hold of him and kissed him;
She hardened her face and said to him:
14 “Peace offerings are with me;
Today I have paid my vows.
15 “Therefore I came out to meet you,
To earnestly seek your face, and I found you.
16 “I have spread my bed with coverings,
Coloured linens of Mitsrayim.
17 “I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and
cinnamon.
18 “Come, let us take our fill of love until morning;
Let us delight ourselves with love.
19 “For my husband is not at home;
He has gone on a long journey;
20 “He took a bag of silver with him;
He comes home on the day of the covering.”
21 With her many words she leads him astray,
With her smooth lips she seduces him.
22 He goes after her immediately,
Like an ox he goes to the slaughter,
And as in chains, a fool to the punishment,
23 Till an arrow strikes through his liver;
Like a bird rushing into a snare,
And did not know it would take his ḥai.
24 And now, listen to me, you children;
Pay attention to the words of my mouth:
25 Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways,
Do not go astray in her paths.
26 For many are the wounded she has caused to
fall,
And numerous all her slain ones.
11

1742

MISHLĔY

Her house is the way to the grave,
Going down to the rooms of death.

27

8 Does not wisdom call,
And understanding lift up her voice?
2 On the top of the heights along the way,
Between the paths she has taken her stand.
3 Beside the gates, leading to the city,
At the entrances, she shouts:
4 “O men, I call to you,
And my voice is to the sons of men.
5 “You simple ones, understand insight,
And you fools, be of an understanding heart.
6 “Listen, for I speak noble words,
And the opening of my lips is about straightness;
7 “For my mouth speaks truth;
And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
8 “All the words of my mouth are in righteousness,
None of them twisted or crooked,
9 “All of them plain to him who understands,
And straight to those who find knowledge.
10 “Accept my discipline, and not silver,
And knowledge rather than choice gold;
11 “For wisdom is better than rubies,
And all delights are not comparable to her.
12 “I, wisdom, have dwelt with insight,
And I find knowledge, foresight.
13 “The reverence of hWhY is to hate evil.
I have hated pride and arrogance, and the evil way,
And the perverse mouth.
14 “Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom;
I am understanding, mightiness is mine.
15 “By me sovereigns reign,
And rulers make righteous decrees.
1743

PROVERBS

“By me princes rule, and nobles,
All the judges of the earth.
17 “I love those who love me,
And those who earnestly seek me find me.
18 “Riches and esteem are with me,
Enduring wealth and righteousness.
19 “My fruit is better than gold and fine gold,
And my increase than choice silver.
20 “I walk in the Way of righteousness,
In the midst of the paths of Right-Ruling,
21 “To bestow substance on those who love me,
And to fill their treasuries.
22 “HWHY possessed Me,
The beginning of His Way,
As the first of His works of old.
23 “I was anointed ages ago, at the first,
Before the earth ever was.
24 “When there were no depths I was brought forth,
When there were no springs heavy with water.
25 “Before mountains were sunk,
Before the hills, I was brought forth,
26 “Before He had made the earth and the fields,
Or the first dust of the world.
27 “When He prepared the shamayim,
I was there,
When He decreed a vault on the face of the deep,
28 “When He established the clouds above,
When He made the fountains of the deep strong,
29 “When He gave to the sea its limit,
So that the waters would not transgress His
command,
When He decreed the foundations of the earth,
30 “Then I was beside Him, a skilled Workman,
A delight, day by day
Rejoicing before Him all the time,
16

1744

MISHLĔY

“Rejoicing in the world, His earth;
And My delights were with the sons of men.
32 “And now, listen to Me, you children,
For baruḵ are they who guard My Ways.
33 “Listen to discipline and become wise,
And do not refuse it.
34 “Baruḵ is the man who listens to Me,
Watching daily at My gates,
Waiting at the posts of My doors.
35 “For whoever finds me shall find ḥai,
And obtain favour from hWhY,
36 “But he who sins against Me injures himself;
All who hate Me love death!”
31

9 Wisdom has built her house,
She has hewn out its seven columns,
2 She has slaughtered her meat,
She has mixed her wine,
She has also prepared her table.
3 She has sent out her young women,
She cries out from the highest places of the city:
4 “Who is simple? Let him turn in here!”
As for him who lacks heart, she says to him,
5 “Come, eat of my bread and drink of the wine I
have mixed.”
6 Leave the simple ones and live,
And walk in the way of understanding.
7 He who reproves a scoffer gets shame for
himself,
And he who rebukes a wicked one gets himself a
blemish.
8 Do not reprove a scoffer, lest he hate you;
Reprove a wise one, and he loves you.
9 Give to a wise one, and he is wiser still;
Teach a righteous one, and he increases in learning.
1745

PROVERBS

The reverence of hWhY is the beginning of
wisdom,
And the knowledge of the Qadosh One is
understanding.
11 For by me your days become many,
And years of life are added to you.
12 If you have become wise, you have become wise
for yourself,
And if you have scoffed, you alone bear it.
13 A foolish woman is loud,
Simple, and without knowledge.
14 For she has seated herself at the door of her
house,
On a seat by the highest places of the city,
15 To call to those who pass by,
Who go straight on their way:
16 “Who is simple?
Let him turn in here.”
And as for him who lacks heart, she says to him,
17 “Stolen waters are sweet,
And bread in secret is pleasant.”
18 But he does not know that the dead are there,
Her guests are in the depths of the grave.
10

10 Proverbs of Shelomoh:
A wise son makes a father rejoice,
But a foolish son is his mother’s sorrow.
2 Treasures of wickedness are of no value,
But righteousness delivers from death.
3 hWhY does not let the being of the righteous go
hungry,
But He thrusts away the desire of the wicked.
4 Poor is he who works with a lazy hand,
But the hand of the hard worker makes rich.
1746

MISHLĔY

He who gathers in summer is a wise son,
He who sleeps in harvest is a son who causes
shame.
6 Bireḵoth are on the head of the righteous,
But violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
7 The remembrance of the righteous is baruḵ,
But the name of the wicked rot.
8 The wise in heart accepts Commands,
But one with foolish lips falls.
9 He who walks in integrity walks safely,
But he who perverts his ways becomes known.
10 He who winks with the eye causes sorrow,
And one with foolish lips falls.
11 The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of ḥai,
But violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
12 Hatred stirs up strife,
But love covers all transgressions.
13 Wisdom is found on the lips of him who has
understanding,
But a rod is for the back of him who lacks heart.
14 The wise treasure up knowledge,
But the mouth of a fool is near ruin.
15 The rich man’s wealth is his strong city;
The ruin of the poor is their poverty.
16 The wage of the righteous is for ḥai,
The increase of the wicked is for sin.
17 He who heeds discipline is in the Way of ḥai,
But he who refuses reproof goes astray.
18 He who hides hatred has lying lips,
And he who sends out slander is a fool.
19 When words are many,
Transgression is not absent,
But he who restrains his lips is wise.
20 The tongue of the righteous is choice silver;
The heart of the wicked is of little.
5

1747

PROVERBS

The lips of the righteous shepherd many,
But fools die for lack of heart.
22 The beraḵah of hWhY makes one rich,
And He adds no pain with it.
23 To work out wicked schemes is like sport to a
fool,
But wisdom is for a man of understanding.
24 What the wicked fears comes upon him,
But the desire of the righteous is granted.
25 As the whirlwind passes by, the wicked is no
more,
But the righteous, an everlasting foundation.
26 As vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,
So is the lazy one to those who send him.
27 The reverence of hWhY prolongs days,
But the years of the wicked are shortened.
28 The righteous look forward to joy,
But the expectancy of the wicked perish.
29 The Way of hWhY is a stronghold for the perfect,
But ruin to the workers of wickedness.
30 The righteous are never shaken,
While the wicked shall not dwell in the earth.
31 The mouth of the righteous bring forth wisdom,
But the tongue of perverseness is cut out.
32 The lips of the righteous know what is pleasing,
But the mouth of the wicked, perverseness.
21

11 A false scale is an abomination to HWHY,
But a perfect weight is His delight.
2 Pride comes, then comes shame;
But with the humble is wisdom.
3 The integrity of the straight ones guides them,
But the slipperiness of the treacherous destroys
them.
1748

MISHLĔY

Riches do not profit in the day of wrath,
But righteousness delivers from death.
5 The righteousness of the perfect makes his way
straight,
But by his own wickedness the wicked one falls.
6 The righteousness of the straight ones delivers
them,
But the treacherous are caught by greed.
7 When a wicked man dies, expectancy perishes,
And the ambition of the wicked shall be lost.
8 The righteous is delivered from distress,
And the wicked takes his place.
9 The defiled one destroys his neighbour with his
mouth,
But the righteous is delivered by knowledge.
10 When the righteous prosper, the city rejoices.
And when the wicked perish, there is shouting.
11 By the beraḵah of the straight the city is exalted,
But by the mouth of the wicked it is overthrown.
12 He who lacks heart despises his neighbour,
But a man of understanding keeps silence.
13 A slanderer is a revealer of secrets,
But one with a trustworthy spirit conceals a matter.
14 Without guidance the people fall,
But in a great counsellor there is safety.
15 He who is guarantor for a stranger suffers harm,
But one who hates shaking hands in a pledge is
safe.
16 A woman showing favour obtains esteem,
But ruthless men obtain riches.
17 A kind man is rewarding his being,
But he who is cruel troubles his own flesh.
18 The wicked earns false wages,
But the one sowing righteousness, a true reward.
4

1749

PROVERBS

Thus righteousness is to ḥai,
And one pursuing evil, to his own death.
20 The perverse of heart are an abomination to
hWhY,
But the perfect in the Way are His delight.
21 Hand to hand, the evil one does not go
unpunished,
But the seed of the righteous shall escape.
22 Like a ring of gold in a pig’s snout,
Is a lovely woman who lacks good sense.
23 The desire of the righteous is only good,
The expectancy of the wicked is wrath.
24 There is one who scatters, yet increases more.
And one who withholds from what is right, and is
impoverished.
25 The generous being is enriched,
And he who waters is also watered himself.
26 The people curse him who withholds grain,
But beraḵah is on the head of him who sells it.
27 He who earnestly seeks good, seeks what is
pleasing;
But to him who seeks evil,
It comes to him.
28 He who trusts in his riches falls,
But the righteous flourish like a leaf.
29 He who troubles his own house inherits wind,
And the fool is servant to the wise of heart.
30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of ḥai,
And he who is winning lives is wise.
31 See, the righteous in the earth shall be rewarded,
How much more the wicked and the sinner!
19

12 Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge,
But he who hates reproof is stupid.
1750

MISHLĔY

The good obtains favour from HWHY,
But the man of wicked devices He declares wicked.
3 A man is not established by wickedness,
But the root of the righteous shall not be moved.
4 A capable wife is the crown of her husband,
But one causing shame is like rottenness in his
bones.
5 The thoughts of the righteous are Right-Ruling,
The counsels of the wicked are deceit.
6 The words of the wicked are, “Lie in wait for
blood,”
But the mouth of the straight delivers them.
7 The wicked are overthrown, and are no more,
But the house of the righteous stands.
8 A man is praised according to his wisdom,
But the perverted of heart becomes despised.
9 Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servant,
Than the highly esteemed who lacks bread.
10 The righteous regards the life of his beast,
But the compassion of the wicked is cruelty.
11 He who tills his land is satisfied with bread,
But he who pursues vanities is lacking heart.
12 The wicked shall covet the catch of evil-doers,
But the root of the righteous yields fruit.
13 In the transgression of the lips is an evil snare,
But the righteous gets out of distress.
14 From the fruit of his mouth one is filled with good,
And the work of a man’s hands is given back to him.
15 The way of a fool is right in his own eyes,
But he who listens to advice is wise.
16 A fool’s wrath is known at once,
But a clever one covers shame.
17 He who speaks truth declares righteousness,
But a false witness, deceit.
2

1751

PROVERBS

Rash speaking is like piercings of a sword,
But the tongue of the wise is healing.
19 The lip of truth is established forever,
But a lying tongue is but for a moment.
20 Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil,
But counsellors of peace have joy.
21 No harm befalls the righteous,
But the wicked shall be filled with evil.
22 Lying lips are an abomination to hWhY,
But those who deal truly are His delight.
23 A clever man is concealing knowledge,
But the heart of fools proclaims folly.
24 The hand of the hard worker rules,
But the lazy is put to compulsory labour.
25 Anxiety in the heart of man causes depression,
But a good word makes him glad.
26 The righteous is a guide to his neighbour,
But the way of the wicked leads them astray.
27 The lazy one has no game to roast,
But the hard worker prizes his possessions.
28 In the Way of righteousness is ḥai,
And in its pathway there is no death.
18

13 A son is wise through his father’s discipline,
But a scoffer shall not listen to rebuke.
2 From the fruit of the mouth a man eats the good,
But the desire of the treacherous is for violence.
3 He who watches over his mouth guards his
being,
But he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.
4 The being of the lazy one craves, but has not;
While the being of the hard workers are enriched.
5 A righteous one hates a lying word,
But a wicked man is loathsome and comes to
shame.
1752

MISHLĔY

Righteousness watches over him who is perfect
in the Way,
But wickedness overthrows the sinner.
7 There is one who makes himself rich,
Yet has none at all.
And one who makes himself poor,
Yet has great riches.
8 The ransom of a man’s life is his riches,
But the poor does not hear rebuke.
9 The light of the righteous rejoices,
But the lamp of the wicked is put out.
10 By pride comes only strife,
But wisdom is with those who take advice.
11 Wealth from vanity diminishes,
But he who gathers by hand increases.
12 Expectancy drawn out makes the heartsick,
But a longing come true is a tree of ḥai.
13 He who despises the Word is destroyed,
But he who reveres the Command is rewarded.
14 The Torah of the wise is a fountain of ḥai,
Turning one away from the snares of death.
15 Good understanding gains favour,
But the way of the treacherous is hard.
16 Every one with insight acts with knowledge,
But a fool spreads folly.
17 A messenger that is wicked falls into evil,
But a trustworthy envoy is a healing.
18 Poverty and shame are for him who ignores
discipline,
But he who heeds reproof is esteemed.
19 A desire accomplished is sweet to the being,
But to turn away from evil is an abomination to fools.
20 He who walks with the wise, shall be wise,
But the companion of fools suffers evil.
6

1753

PROVERBS

Evil pursues sinners,
But good is repaid to the righteous.
22 A good man leaves an inheritance to his
children’s children,
But the wealth of the sinner is stored up for the
righteous.
23 Much food is in the tillable ground of the poor,
But lack of right-ruling sweeps it away.
24 He who spares his rod hates his son,
But he who loves him, seeks him with discipline.
25 The righteous eats to the satisfying of his being,
But the stomach of the wicked is lacking.
21

14 Every wise woman has built her house,
But the foolish breaks it down with her hands.
2 He who walks in his straightness reveres hWhY,
But he whose ways are crooked despises Him.
3 In the mouth of a fool is a rod of pride,
But the lips of the wise guard them.
4 Where there are no oxen, the crib is clean;
But from the strength of an ox comes much
increase.
5 A trustworthy witness does not lie,
But a false witness breathes out lies.
6 A scoffer shall seek wisdom but is unable,
But knowledge is swift to him who has
understanding.
7 Leave the presence of a foolish man,
For you shall not perceive the lips of knowledge.
8 The wisdom of the clever is to understand His
Way,
But the folly of fools is deceit.
9 Fools scoff at guilt,
But among the straight there is delight.
1754

MISHLĔY

The heart knows its own bitterness,
And no stranger shares its joy.
11 The house of the wicked is destroyed,
But the tent of the straight flourishes.
12 There is a way which seems right to a man,
But its end is the way of death.
13 Even in laughter the heart is in pain,
And the end of that joy is heaviness.
14 The backslider in heart is satisfied with his own
ways,
But a good man, from above.
15 The simple believes every word,
But the clever one watches his step.
16 The wise fears and turns away from evil,
But a fool rushes on and is reckless.
17 He who is impatient acts foolishly,
And a man who plans wickedness is hated.
18 The simple shall inherit folly,
But the clever are crowned with knowledge.
19 The evil ones shall bow before the good,
And the wicked ones at the gates of the righteous.
20 The poor is hated even by his own neighbour,
But the rich has many friends.
21 He who despises his neighbour sins;
But he who shows favour to the poor,
O baruḵ is he.
22 Do not those who plan evil go astray?
But kindness and truth are to those who plan good.
23 In all labour there is profit,
But talk of the lips, only to poverty.
24 The crown of the wise is their wealth,
The folly of fools is folly.
25 A true witness saves lives,
But he who breathes out lies is a betrayer.
10

1755

PROVERBS

In the reverence of hWhY is strong trust,
And His children have a place of refuge.
27 The reverence of hWhY is a fountain of ḥai,
To turn away from the snares of death.
28 In a multitude of people
Is a sovereign’s splendour,
But in the lack of people
Is the ruin of a prince.
29 He who is patient has great understanding,
But he who is short of spirit exalts folly.
30 A healthy heart is life to the body,
But envy is rottenness to the bones.
31 He who oppresses the poor reproaches his
Maker,
But he who esteems Him shows favour to the needy.
32 By his own evildoing the wicked is thrust down,
But the righteous has a refuge in his death.
33 Wisdom rests in the heart of him who has
understanding,
And among fools it becomes known.
34 Righteousness exalts a nation,
But sin is a reproach to peoples.
35 The sovereign’s delight is toward a wise servant,
But his wrath is towards him who causes shame.
26

15 A soft answer turns away wrath,
But a harsh word stirs up displeasure.
2 The tongue of the wise makes knowledge good,
But the mouth of fools pours out foolishness.
3 The eyes of hWhY are in every place,
Watching the evil and the good.
4 A healing tongue is a tree of ḥai,
But perverseness in it crushes the spirit.
5 A fool despises his father’s discipline,
But he who heeds reproof is clever.
1756

MISHLĔY

The household of the righteous is a great
treasure,
But in the income of the wicked is trouble.
7 The lips of the wise scatter knowledge,
But the heart of fools is not so.
8 The slaughtering of the wicked is an abomination
to hWhY,
But the prayer of the straight is His delight.
9 The way of the wicked is an abomination to
HWHY,
But He loves him who pursues righteousness.
10 Discipline is grievous to him who forsakes the
Way;
He who hates reproof dies.
11 The grave and destruction are before hWhY,
How much more the hearts of the sons of men.
12 A scoffer does not love his reprover,
Nor does he go to the wise.
13 A glad heart makes good a face,
But by sorrow of heart the spirit is stricken.
14 The heart of the understanding one seeks
knowledge,
But the mouth of fools feeds on folly.
15 All the days of the afflicted are evil,
But gladness of heart is a continual feast.
16 Better is a little with the reverence of hWhY,
Than great treasure with trouble.
17 Better is a meal of vegetables where love is,
Than a fatted calf with hatred.
18 A man of wrath stirs up strife,
But he who is patient appeases strife.
19 The way of a lazy one is like a hedge of thorns,
But the way of the straight is a highway.
20 A wise son makes a father glad,
But a foolish man despises his mother.
6

1757

PROVERBS

Folly is joy to one lacking heart,
But a man of understanding walks straight.
22 Without counsel, plans are nullified,
But by great counsellors they are established.
23 A man has joy by the answer of his mouth,
And how good is a word in its season!
24 The path of ḥai is upward for the wise,
To turn away from the grave below.
25 hWhY tears down the house of the proud,
And He establishes the boundary of the widow.
26 Evil thoughts are an abomination to hWhY,
But pleasant words are clean.
27 He who is greedy for gain, troubles his own
house,
But he who hates bribes lives.
28 The heart of the righteous ponders how to
answer,
But the mouth of the wicked pours out evil.
29 hWhY is far from the wicked,
But He hears the prayer of the righteous.
30 The light of the eyes rejoices the heart,
A good report gives marrow to the bones.
31 An ear that hears the reproof of ḥai
Dwells among the wise.
32 He who ignores discipline hates himself,
But he who listens to reproof gets understanding.
33 The reverence of hWhY is the discipline of
wisdom,
And before esteem is humility.
21

16 To man belongs the preparations of the heart,
But from hWhY is the answer of the tongue.
2 All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes,
But hWhY weighs the spirits.
1758

MISHLĔY

Commit your works to hWhY,
And your plans shall be established.
4 hWhY has made all for His purpose,
And also the wicked for the day of evil.
5 Everyone proud in heart is an abomination to
hWhY;
Hand to hand: he does not go unpunished.
6 By kindness and truth wickedness is pardoned.
And in the reverence of hWhY one turns away from
evil.
7 When a man’s ways please hWhY,
He makes even his enemies to be at peace with
him.
8 Better is a little with righteousness,
Than a large income without Right-Ruling.
9 A man’s heart plans his way,
But hWhY establishes his steps.
10 An oath is on the lips of the sovereign,
In right-ruling his mouth trespasses not.
11 A right scale and balances are of HWHY;
All the weights in the bag are His work.
12 It is an abomination for sovereigns to commit
wickedness,
For a throne is established by righteousness.
13 Righteous lips are the delight of sovereigns,
And they love him who speaks what is straight.
14 The sovereign’s wrath is a messenger of death,
But a wise man appeases it.
15 In the light of a sovereign’s face is life,
And his delight is like a cloud of the latter rain.
16 How much better it is to get wisdom than gold!
And to get understanding is preferable to silver.
17 The highway of the straight
Is to turn away from evil;
He who guards his ḥai watches over His Way.
3

1759

PROVERBS

Before destruction: pride,
And before a fall a haughty spirit!
19 Better to be lowly in spirit with the poor,
Than to divide the spoil with the proud.
20 He who acts wisely concerning the Word finds
good,
And baruḵ is he who trusts in hWhY.
21 The wise-hearted is called discerning,
And sweetness of lips increases learning.
22 Understanding is a fountain of ḥai to him who has
it,
But the disciplining of fools is folly.
23 The heart of the wise gives discretion to his
mouth,
And he increases learning to his lips.
24 Pleasant words are like a honeycomb,
Sweet to the being, and healing to the bones.
25 There is a way that seems right to a man,
But its end is the way of death.
26 He who labours, labours for himself,
For his mouth drives him on.
27 A man of Beliya’al plots evil,
And on his lips it is like a burning fire.
28 A perverse man sends forth strife,
And a slanderer separates intimate friends.
29 A malicious man entices his neighbour,
And leads him in a way that is not good,
30 Winking with his eye to plot perversity,
Moving his lips he shall bring about evil.
31 Grey hair is a crown of adorning,
It is found in the way of righteousness.
32 He who is patient is better than the mighty,
And he who rules over his spirit, than he who takes
a city.
18

1760

MISHLĔY

The lot is cast into the lap,
But every decision by it is from hWhY.

33

17 Better is a dry piece of bread and rest with it,
Than a house filled with the offerings of strife.
2 A wise servant rules over a son who causes
shame,
And shares an inheritance among the brothers.
3 A refining pot is for silver and a furnace for gold,
But hWhY tries the hearts.
4 An evil-doer gives heed to wicked lips;
A liar gives ear to a tongue of desire.
5 He who mocks the poor reproaches his Maker;
He who rejoices at calamity does not go
unpunished.
6 Children’s children are the crown of old men,
And the adornment of children is their fathers.
7 Excellent speech is not fitting for a fool,
Much less lying lips for a noble.
8 A present is a stone of favour in the eyes of its
owner;
Wherever he turns, he prospers.
9 He who covers a transgression seeks love,
But he who repeats a matter separates intimate
friends.
10 Reproof enters deeper into a wise man
Than a hundred blows on a fool.
11 An evil one seeks only rebellion,
So a cruel messenger is sent against him.
12 Let a bereaved bear meet a man,
Rather than a fool in his folly.
13 Whoever rewards evil for good,
Evil does not leave his house.
14 The beginning of strife is like releasing water;
Therefore stop fighting before it breaks out.
1761

PROVERBS

He who declares the wicked right,
And he who condemns the righteous,
Both of them are an abomination to HWHY.
16 Why is this - a price in the hand of a fool to buy
wisdom,
When there is no heart?
17 A friend loves at all times,
And a brother is born for adversity.
18 A man lacking heart shakes hands in a pledge,
He becomes a guarantor for his friend.
19 He who loves transgression loves strife,
He who exalts his door seeks destruction.
20 He who has a crooked heart finds no good,
And he who has a perverse tongue falls into evil.
21 He who brings forth a fool has sorrow for it,
And the father of a fool has no joy.
22 A rejoicing heart causes good healing,
But a stricken spirit dries the bones.
23 One who is wicked accepts a bribe behind the
back
To pervert the paths of right-ruling.
24 Wisdom is before the face of the understanding
one,
But the eyes of a fool are on the ends of the earth.
25 A foolish son is a grief to his father,
And bitterness to her who bore him.
26 It is also not good to punish the righteous one,
To smite noble ones for straightness.
27 He who has knowledge spares his words,
And a man of understanding is cool of spirit.
28 Even a fool keeping silence is regarded as wise,
As understanding, when he closes his lips.
15

18 The separatist seeks self desire;
He breaks out against all sound wisdom.
1762

MISHLĔY

A fool does not delight in understanding,
But in uncovering his own heart.
3 When a wicked one comes, scorn comes too.
And with shame, reproach.
4 The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters;
The fountain of wisdom is a flowing stream.
5 It is not good to show partiality to the wicked,
Or to turn aside the righteous in right-ruling.
6 A fool’s lips enter into strife,
And his mouth calls for blows.
7 A fool’s mouth is his ruin,
And his lips are the snare of his life.
8 The words of a slanderer are like delicacies,
And they go down into the inner parts of the heart.
9 Also, he who is slack in his work
Is a brother of a master destroyer.
10 The Name of hWhY is a strong tower;
The righteous run into it and are safe.
11 The rich man’s wealth is his strong city,
And like a high wall in his own imagination.
12 Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty,
And before esteem is humility.
13 He who answers a matter before he hears it,
It is folly and shame to him.
14 The spirit of a man sustains him in sickness,
But who can bear a broken spirit?
15 The heart of the understanding one gets
knowledge,
And the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.
16 A man’s gift makes room for him,
And brings him before great men.
17 The first to state his own case, is right,
Until another comes and examines him.
18 The lot settles disputes,
And separates between the mighty.
2

1763

PROVERBS

A brother transgressed against is a strong city,
And contentions are like the bars of a citadel.
20 A man’s stomach is satisfied
From the fruit of his mouth;
He is satisfied by the increase of his lips.
21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue,
And those loving it eat its fruit.
22 He who has found a wife has found good,
And receives favour from HWHY.
23 The poor speaks beseechingly,
But the rich answers fiercely.
24 A man of friends might come to ruin,
But there is a Loving One who sticks closer than a
brother!
19

19 Better is the poor walking in his integrity
Than one of perverse lips, who is a fool.
2 Also, desire without knowledge is not good;
And he who hurries with his feet sins.
3 The foolishness of a man perverts his way;
And his heart is wroth against hWhY.
4 Wealth adds many friends,
But the poor is separated from his friend.
5 A false witness does not go unpunished,
And he who breathes out lies does not escape.
6 Many entreat the favour of the noble.
And all are friends to him who gives gifts.
7 All the brothers of the poor shall hate him;
How much more shall his friends go far from him!
He pursues promises - they are gone!
8 He who gets heart loves his own life;
He who guards understanding finds good.
9 A false witness does not go unpunished,
And he who breathes out lies perishes.
1764

MISHLĔY

Luxury is not fitting for a fool,
Much less for a servant to rule over princes.
11 A man’s discretion makes him patient,
And his adorning is to pass over a transgression.
12 The sovereign’s wrath is like the roaring of a lion,
But his delight is like dew on the grass.
13 A foolish son is a calamity to his father,
And the contentions of a wife are a continual
dripping.
14 Houses and riches are the inheritance from
fathers,
But an understanding wife is from hWhY.
15 Laziness makes one fall into a deep sleep,
And an idle being suffers hunger.
16 He who guards the Command guards his ḥai,
He who despises His Ways dies.
17 He who shows favour to the poor lends to HWHY,
And He repays his deed.
18 Discipline your son because there is expectation,
But do not apply your being to his destruction.
19 One of great wrath bears punishment;
For if you rescue,
You only have to do it again.
20 Listen to counsel and accept discipline,
So that you are wise in your latter end.
21 Many are the plans in a man’s heart,
But it is the counsel of HWHY that stands.
22 What is desirable in a man is his kindness,
And a poor man is better than a liar.
23 The reverence of hWhY leads to ḥai,
And he remains satisfied,
He is not visited by evil.
24 A lazy one buries his hand in a dish,
And does not bring it back to his mouth.
10

1765

PROVERBS

Beat a scoffer, and the simple is made wise;
And reprove one who has understanding,
And he discerns knowledge.
26 He who plunders a father,
Chases away his mother,
Is a son causing shame and bringing reproach.
27 Cease, my son, to hear discipline,
You will stray from the words of knowledge.
28 A witness of Beliya’al scorns right-ruling,
And the mouth of the wicked devours wickedness.
29 Judgments are in store for scoffers,
And beatings for the backs of fools.
25

20 Wine is a scoffer, strong drink a brawler,
And whoever is led astray by it is not wise.
2 The dread of a sovereign is like the roaring of a
lion;
Whoever provokes him sins against his own life.
3 For a man to cease from strife is esteem,
But every fool bursts out.
4 The lazy one does not plough after the autumn;
At harvest time he inquires - there is none!
5 Counsel in the heart of man is like deepwater,
But a man of understanding draws it up.
6 Most men proclaim each his own kindness,
But who finds a trustworthy man?
7 The righteous man walks in his integrity;
His children are baruḵ after him.
8 A sovereign who sits on the throne of judgment
Is scattering all evil with his eyes.
9 Who says, “I have cleansed my heart,
I am purged of my sin”?
10 Differing weights and differing measures,
Both of them are an abomination to hWhY.
1766

MISHLĔY

Even a child is known by his deeds,
Whether his work is clear and right.
12 The hearing ear and the seeing eye,
HWHY has made both of them.
13 Do not love sleep, lest you become poor;
Open your eyes, be satisfied with bread.
14 “Evil! Evil!” cries the buyer;
But when he has gone his way, then he boasts.
15 There is gold and a multitude of rubies,
But the lips of knowledge are a precious vessel.
16 Take the garment of one who is guarantor for a
stranger,
And hold it as a pledge when it is for foreigners.
17 Bread gained by deceit might be sweet to a man,
But afterward his mouth is filled with gravel.
18 By counsel, plans are established;
And by wise guidance wage a battle.
19 He who goes about as a slanderer reveals
secrets;
Therefore do not associate with him
Who speaks smoothly with his lips.
20 Whoever curses his father or his mother,
His lamp is put out in deep darkness.
21 An inheritance obtained with greed at the
beginning
Is not baruḵ at the end.
22 Do not say, “I repay evil.”
Wait for hWhY, and He saves you.
23 Differing weights are an abomination to hWhY,
And a false scale is not good.
24 The steps of a man are from hWhY;
What does a man know about his own way?
25 It is a snare for a man to say rashly,
“It is qodesh,”
And only later to reconsider his vows.
11

1767

PROVERBS

A wise sovereign winnows out the wicked,
And turns the wheel over them.
27 The spirit of a man is the lamp of hWhY,
Searching all his inmost parts.
28 Kindness and truth watch over the sovereign,
And he shall support his throne by kindness.
29 The comeliness of young men is their strength,
And the splendour of old men is their grey hair.
30 The blows that wound cleanse away evil,
And strokes the inner parts of the heart.
26

21 The sovereign’s heart is as channels of water
In the hand of hWhY;
He turns it wherever He wants.
2 All a man’s ways are right in his own eyes,
But hWhY weighs the hearts.
3 To do righteousness and Right-Ruling
Is more acceptable to hWhY than a slaughtering.
4 A haughty look, a proud heart,
The lamp of the wicked, are sin.
5 The plans of the hard worker lead only to plenty,
But all rash haste only to poverty.
6 Gaining treasures by a lying tongue
Is a fleeting vapour, heading for death.
7 The spoil of the wicked catches them,
Because they refused to do Right-Ruling.
8 The way of a guilty man is perverse;
But as for the innocent, his work is right.
9 It is better to dwell in a corner of a roof,
Than in a house shared with a contentious woman.
10 The desire of the wicked is applied to evil;
His neighbour finds no favour in his eyes.
11 When the scoffer is punished, the simple is made
wise;
1768

MISHLĔY

But when the wise is instructed, he receives
knowledge.
12 The Righteous One wisely considers the house
of the wicked;
He overthrows the wicked for their evil.
13 Whoever shuts his ears to the cry of the poor,
Let him also cry and not be heard.
14 A gift in secret subdues displeasure,
And a bribe in the bosom, strong wrath.
15 To do Right-Ruling is joy to the righteous,
But ruin to the workers of wickedness.
16 A man who strays from the Way of
understanding,
Rests in the assembly of the dead.
17 He who loves pleasure is a poor man;
He who loves wine and oil does not become rich.
18 The wicked is a ransom for the righteous,
And the treacherous for the straight.
19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness,
Than with a contentious and wroth woman.
20 Desirable treasure and oil,
Are in the dwelling of the wise,
But a foolish man swallows it up.
21 He who pursues righteousness and kindness
Finds ḥai, righteousness and esteem.
22 A wise one scales the city of the mighty,
And brings down the trusted stronghold.
23 Whoever guards his mouth and tongue
Guards his life from distresses.
24 Proud, haughty, “Scoffer” is his name;
He acts with arrogant pride.
25 The desire of the lazy man slays him,
For his hands refused to work.
26 He covets greedily all day long,
But the righteous gives and does not withhold.
1769

PROVERBS

The slaughtering of the wicked is an abomination;
How much more when he brings it with wickedness!
28 A false witness perishes,
But the man who obeys speaks forever.
29 A wicked man hardens his face,
But as for the straight, he establishes his way.
30 There is no wisdom or understanding
Or counsel against hWhY.
31 The horse is prepared for the day of battle,
But the deliverance is of hWhY.
27

22 A name is preferable to great riches.
Favour is better than silver and gold.
2 The rich and the poor meet together hWhY is the Maker of them all.
3 A clever one foresees evil and hides himself,
But the simple go on and are punished.
4 The reward of humility is the reverence of hWhY,
Riches, and esteem and ḥai.
5 Thorns, snares are in the way of the perverse;
He who guards his ḥai keeps far away from them.
6 Train up a child in the way he should go,
Even when he is old he turns not away from it.
7 The rich rules over the poor,
And the borrower is slave to the lender.
8 He who sows unrighteousness reaps trouble,
And the rod of his wrath perishes.
9 He who has a good eye is baruḵ,
For he gives of his bread to the poor.
10 Cast out the scoffer and strife goes out,
And contention and shame cease.
11 He who loves cleanness of heart,
Whose speech is pleasant,
A sovereign is his friend.
1770

MISHLĔY

The eyes of hWhY shall watch over knowledge,
But He overthrows the words of the treacherous.
13 The lazy one says, “There is a lion outside!
I am going to be killed in the streets!”
14 The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit;
The one denounced by hWhY falls in there.
15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a child;
The rod of discipline drives it far him.
16 One oppresses the poor to increase,
Another gives to the rich, only to come to poverty.
17 Incline your ear and hear the words of the wise,
And apply your heart to my knowledge;
18 For they are pleasant
If you guard them within you;
Let all of them be ready on your lips.
19 That your trust might be in hWhY,
I caused you to know today, even you:
20 Have I not previously written to you
Of counsels and knowledge,
21 To cause you to know the certainty of the words
of truth,
To return words of truth to those who send to you?
22 Do not rob the poor because he is poor,
And oppress not the afflicted at the gate.
23 For hWhY pleads their cause,
And shall plunder those who plunder them.
24 Make no friendship with one given to wrath,
And do not go with a man of rage,
25 Lest you learn his ways,
And find yourself ensnared.
26 Do not be one of those who shakes hands in a
pledge,
One of those who are guarantors for debts.
27 If you do not have the means to pay,
Why should he take away your bed from under you?
12

1771

PROVERBS

Do not move the ancient boundary
Which your fathers have established.
29 Do you see a man who is skilled in his work?
He stands before sovereigns,
He does not stand before obscure ones.
28

23 When you sit down to eat with a ruler,
Look well what is before you;
2 And put a knife to your throat
If you are a man given to appetite.
3 Do not desire his delicacies,
For that food is deceptive.
4 Do not labour to be rich.
Cease from your own understanding!
5 Do you lay your eyes on that which is not?
For riches certainly make themselves wings;
They fly away like an eagle to the shamayim.
6 Do not eat the bread of an evil eyed one,
Nor desire his delicacies;
7 For as he reckons in his life, so is he.
“Eat and drink!” he says to you,
But his heart is not with you.
8 You vomit the piece you have eaten,
And lose your sweet words.
9 Do not speak in the ears of a fool,
For he treads on the wisdom of your words.
10 Do not move the ancient boundary,
And do not enter the fields of the fatherless;
11 For their Redeemer is strong;
He shall plead their cause against you.
12 Bring your heart to discipline,
And your ears to words of knowledge.
13 Do not withhold discipline from a child;
If you beat him with a rod, he does not die.
1772

MISHLĔY

Beat him with a rod
And deliver his being from the grave.
15 My son, if your heart shall be wise,
My heart rejoices, even I,
16 And my kidneys exult
When your lips speak what is straight.
17 Do not let your heart envy sinners,
But be in the reverence of hWhY all daylong;
18 For certain, there is a latter end,
And let your expectancy not be cut off.
19 Hear, my son, and be wise,
And guide your heart in the Way.
20 Be not among heavy drinkers of wine
Or with gluttonous eaters of meat;
21 For the drunkard and the glutton become poor,
And slumber clothes in rags.
22 Listen to your father who brought you forth,
And do not despise your mother when she is old.
23 Attain the truth and do not sell it Wisdom and discipline and understanding.
24 The father of the righteous greatly rejoices,
And he who brings forth a wise one delights in him.
25 Let your father and your mother rejoice,
And let her who bore you exult.
26 My son, give me your heart,
And let your eyes watch my ways.
27 For a whore is a deep pit,
And a strange woman is a narrow well.
28 She too lies in wait as for a prey,
And increases the treacherous among men.
29 Who has woe?
Who has sorrow?
Who has contentions?
Who has complaints?
14

1773

PROVERBS

Who feels hurt without cause?
Who has redness of eyes?
30 Those staying long at the wine,
Those going in to search out mixed wine.
31 Do not look on the wine when it is red,
When it gives its colour in the cup,
As it flows smoothly;
32 In the end it bites like a snake,
And stings like an adder 33 Your eyes look on strange women,
And your heart speaks perversities.
34 And you shall be as one
Lying down in the midst of the sea,
And as one lying at the top of the mast, saying,
35 “They smote me, I was not sick!
They beat me, I did not know!
When shall I wake up?
Let me seek it again!”

24 Do not envy evil men,
Nor desire to be with them;
2 For their heart plots to ravage,
And their lips talk of trouble.
3 By wisdom a house is built,
And by understanding it is established;
4 And by knowledge the rooms are filled
With all precious and pleasant riches.
5 Mighty is the wise in strength,
And a man of knowledge strengthens power;
6 For by wise guidance you wage your own battle,
And delivery is by a great counsellor.
7 Wisdom is high for a fool;
He does not open his mouth in the gate.
8 He who plots to do evil
Is called a master of evil plots.
1774

MISHLĔY

The purpose of folly is sin,
And the scoffer is an abomination to men.
10 If you falter in the day of distress,
Your strength is small!
11 Deliver those taken to death,
And hold back those stumbling to the slaughter,
12 If you say, “See, we did not know this,”
Would not He who weighs the hearts discern it?
He who watches over your life,
Would He not know it?
And shall He not repay man according to his work?
13 My son, eat honey, for it is good,
And the honeycomb, sweet to your taste;
14 Know that wisdom is thus to your being;
If you have found it, there is a future,
And your expectancy is not cut off.
15 Do not lie in wait, O wicked,
Against the dwelling of the righteous;
Do not ravage his resting place;
16 For seven times a righteous man falls and rises,
But the wicked stumbles into evil.
17 Do not exult when your enemy falls,
And let not your heart rejoice when he stumbles;
18 Lest hWhY see and it be evil in His eyes,
And He turn away His wrath from him.
19 Do not fret because of evil-doers,
And do not envy the wicked;
20 For there is no future for the evil-doer;
The lamp of the wicked is put out.
21 My son, revere hWhY and the sovereign;
Do not mingle with those who change;
22 For their calamity arises suddenly,
And who knows the ruin of both of them?
23 These also are for the wise:
It is not good to show partiality in right-ruling.
9

1775

PROVERBS

He who says to the wicked,
“You are righteous” - Peoples curse him,
Nations despise him.
25 But those who rebuke,
It is pleasant,
And a good beraḵah comes on them.
26 He who gives a right answer
Kisses the lips.
27 Prepare your work outside,
And make it fit for yourself in the field;
Then you shall build your house.
28 Do not witness against your neighbour without
cause,
And do not deceive with your lips.
29 Do not say, “Let me do to him as he did to me;
I repay each according to his work.”
30 I passed by the field of the lazy,
And by the vineyard of the man lacking heart;
31 And see, it was all overgrown with thorns;
Its surface was covered with nettles;
And its stone wall was broken down.
32 When I saw it, I applied my heart to it;
I looked and received discipline:
33 A little sleep, a little slumber,
A little folding of the hands to rest;
34 And your poverty shall come progressing,
And your need like an armed man.
24

25 These too are proverbs of Shelomoh which the
men of Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah copied:
2 It is the esteem of Elohim to hide a matter,
And the esteem of sovereigns to search out a
matter.
3 The shamayim for height and the earth for depth,
But the heart of sovereigns is unsearchable.
1776

MISHLĔY

Take away the dross from silver,
And a vessel comes forth for the refiner.
5 Take away the wicked from before the sovereign,
And his throne is established in righteousness.
6 Do not exalt yourself before a sovereign,
And do not stand in the place of great men;
7 For it is better for him to say to you,
“Come up here,”
Than that you should be put lower
Before a noble whom your eyes have seen.
8 Do not go forth to strive in haste,
For what would you do in the end,
When your neighbour has put you to shame?
9 Plead your case with your neighbour himself,
And do not disclose the secret of another;
10 Lest he who hears it put you to shame,
And your evil report turn not back.
11 A word spoken at the right time
Is like apples of gold in mountings of silver.
12 A ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold,
Is a wise one’s reproof to an ear that hears.
13 Like the cold of snow in time of harvest
Is a trustworthy messenger to those who send him,
For he refreshes the life of his masters.
14 Clouds and wind without rain
Is he who boasts of his gifts falsely.
15 Through patience a ruler is persuaded,
And a soft tongue shatters a bone.
16 Have you found honey?
Eat only as much as you need,
Lest you be satisfied with it and vomit.
17 Make your foot rare in your neighbour’s house,
Lest he gets enough of you and hate you.
4

1777

PROVERBS

A club and a sword and a sharp arrow
Is a man bearing false witness against his
neighbour.
19 A broken tooth or a foot out of joint
Is trust in a treacherous man in time of distress.
20 One who takes away a garment in cold weather,
Is vinegar on soda,
And a singer of songs on an evil heart.
21 If your enemy is hungry give him bread to eat,
And if he is thirsty give him water to drink,
22 For you are heaping coals of fire on his head,
And hWhY rewards you.
23 The north wind brings rain,
And a secret tongue an enraged face.
24 It is better to dwell in a corner of a roof,
Than in a house shared with a contentious woman.
25 Cold water to a parched throat,
Is good news from a distant land.
26 A muddied spring and a ruined fountain
Is a righteous man who gives way before the
wicked.
27 It is not good to eat much honey.
Is it esteem to seek one’s own esteem?
28 A broken-down city without a wall
Is a man who has no control over his spirit.
18

26 Like snow in summer, and rain in harvest,
So esteem is not fitting for a fool.
2 As a bird wanders, as a swallow flies about,
So a curse without cause does not come.
3 A whip for a horse, a bridle for a donkey,
And a rod for the fool’s back.
4 Do not answer a fool according to his folly,
Lest you also become like him.
1778

MISHLĔY

Answer a fool according to his folly,
Lest he become wise in his own eyes.
6 He who sends a message by the hand of a fool
Cuts off feet, drinks violence.
7 The legs of the lame hang limp,
So is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
8 Like one binding a stone in a sling,
So is he who gives esteem to a fool.
9 A thorn goes into the hand of a drunkard
So is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
10 An archer who wounds anyone,
Is he who hires a fool or any passerby.
11 As a dog returns to his own vomit,
So a fool repeats his folly.
12 Have you seen a man wise in his own eyes?
There is more expectancy for a fool than for him.
13 The lazy one says, “There is a lion in the way!
A fierce lion is in the streets!”
14 A door turns on its hinges,
So does the lazy one turn on his bed.
15 The lazy one buries his hand in a dish;
It tires him to bring it back to his mouth.
16 The lazy one is wiser in his own eyes
Than seven rendering advice.
17 One who takes a dog by the ears
Is a passer-by meddling in a strife not his own.
18 Like a madman who throws sparks, arrows, and
death,
19 So is a man who deceived his neighbour,
And says, “I was only joking!”
20 For lack of wood, the fire goes out.
And without a slanderer, strife ceases.
21 Charcoal is for burning coals, and wood to fire,
So is a contentious man to kindle strife.
5

1779

PROVERBS

The words of a slanderer are as dainty morsels,
Which go down into the inner parts of the heart.
23 Earthenware covered with silver dross
Are burning lips with an evil heart.
24 He who hates, pretends with his lips,
And lays up deceit within him;
25 Though he speaks kindly, do not believe him,
For there are seven abominations in his heart.
26 Hatred is covered by deceit.
His evil is disclosed in the assembly.
27 Whoever digs a pit falls into it,
And whoever rolls a stone, it turns back on him.
28 A lying tongue hates its bruised ones,
And a flattering mouth works ruin.
22

27 Do not boast of tomorrow,
For you do not know what a day brings forth.
2 Let another man praise you, and not your own
mouth A stranger, and not your own lips.
3 A stone is heavy and sand is weighty,
But a fool’s wrath is heavier than both.
4 Wrath is cruel and displeasure overwhelming,
But who is able to stand before jealousy?
5 Open reproof is better than hidden love.
6 The wounds of a friend are true,
But the kisses of an enemy are profuse.
7 One satisfied loathes the honeycomb,
But to a hungry one any bitter is sweet.
8 Like a bird that wanders from its nest,
So is a man who wanders from his place.
9 Ointment and perfume gladden the heart,
So one’s counsel is sweet to his friend.
10 Do not forsake your own friend or your father’s
friend,
1780

MISHLĔY

And do not go into your brother’s house
In the day of your calamity Better is a neighbour nearby than a brother far
away.
11 My son, be wise, and gladden my heart,
That I might have a word for him who reproaches
me.
12 A clever man foresees calamity, hides himself;
The simple shall go on, they are punished.
13 Take the garment of him who is guarantor for a
stranger,
And for a strange woman pledge it.
14 He who greets his friend loudly early in the
morning,
Shall have it reckoned to him as a curse.
15 Drops that never cease on a very rainy day
And a contentious woman are alike;
16 Whoever represses her represses the wind,
And his right hand encounters oil.
17 Iron is sharpened by iron,
And a man sharpens the face of his friend.
18 He who tends the fig tree eats its fruit;
And he who guards his master is esteemed.
19 As in water face is to face,
So a man’s heart to man.
20 The grave and destruction are not satisfied;
So the eyes of man are not satisfied.
21 A refining pot is for silver and a furnace for gold,
So a man is tried by his praise.
22 Even if you pound a fool in a mortar
With a pestle along with crushed grain,
His folly shall not leave him.
23 Know well the state of your flocks;
Apply your heart to your herds;
1781

PROVERBS

For riches are not forever,
Nor a diadem to all generations.
25 Grass vanishes, and new grass appears,
And the vegetation of the mountains are gathered in.
26 The lambs are for your garments,
And the goats for the price of a field;
27 And goats’ milk enough for your food,
For the food of your household,
And sustenance for your girls.
24

28 The wicked shall flee though no one pursues,
But the righteous are as bold as a lion.
2 Because of transgression of a land, many are its
rulers;
But by a man of understanding and knowledge, right
is maintained.
3 A poor man who oppresses the poor
Is a sweeping rain that leaves no food.
4 Those who forsake the Torah praise the wicked,
Those who guard the Torah strive with them.
5 Evil men do not understand Right-Ruling,
But those who seek hWhY understand all.
6 Better is the poor who walks in his integrity
Than one perverse in his ways, who is rich.
7 He who watches over the Torah is a discerning
son,
But a companion of gluttons shames his father.
8 He who increases his possessions by interest
and profit
Gathers it for him who shows favour to the poor.
9 He who turns away his ear from hearing the
Torah,
Even his prayer is an abomination.
10 He who causes the straight to go astray in an evil
way,
1782

MISHLĔY

Falls into his own pit;
But the perfect inherit the good.
11 A rich man is wise in his own eyes,
But the poor who has understanding searches him
out.
12 When the righteous exult, there is great
comeliness;
But when the wicked arise, a man is searched for.
13 He who hides his transgressions does not
prosper,
But he who confesses and forsakes them finds
compassion.
14 Baruḵ is the man who always reveres,
But he who hardens his heart falls into evil.
15 A roaring lion and a charging bear
Is a wicked ruler over poor people,
16 A leader who lacks understanding is a great
oppressor,
But the hater of greed prolongs his days.
17 A man oppressed by blood-guilt flees into a pit;
Let no one help him.
18 He who walks blamelessly is saved,
But the perverted of ways falls at once.
19 He who tills his land is satisfied with bread,
But he who pursues vanities is filled with poverty.
20 A man of truth has many bireḵoth,
But one in a hurry to be rich does not go
unpunished.
21 To show partiality is not good,
Because for a piece of bread a man would
transgress.
22 A man with an evil eye runs after wealth,
And does not know that poverty awaits him.

1783

PROVERBS

He who reproves a man finds more favour
afterward
Than he who flatters with the tongue.
24 He who robs his father or his mother, and says,
“It is no transgression,”
He is a companion to a destroyer.
25 He who is greedy stirs up strife,
But he who trusts in HWHY prospers.
26 He who trusts in his own heart is a fool,
But he who walks wisely is delivered.
27 He who gives to the poor does not lack,
But he who hides his eyes has many curses.
28 When the wicked rise up, men hide themselves;
But when they perish, the righteous increase.
23

29 One often reproved, hardening his neck,
Is suddenly broken, and there is no healing.
2 When the righteous increase, the people rejoice;
But when a wicked one rules, the people sigh.
3 He who loves wisdom gladdens his father,
But a companion of whores destroys wealth.
4 A sovereign establishes a land by Right-Ruling,
But one who receives bribes throws it down.
5 A man who flatters his neighbour
Spreads a net for his own feet.
6 An evil man is ensnared by transgression,
But the righteous sings and rejoices.
7 The righteous knows the plea of the poor,
The wicked do not understand knowledge.
8 Scoffers ensnare a city,
But the wise turn away wrath.
9 When a wise man disputes with a foolish man,
Whether he rages or laughs, there is no peace.
10 Bloodthirsty men hate the perfect,
And seek the life of the straight.
1784

MISHLĔY

A fool lets out all his breath,
But the wise calms it down afterward.
12 If a ruler listens to lying words,
All his servants become wicked.
13 The poor man and the oppressor have this in
common:
hWhY gives light to the eyes of both.
14 The sovereign who rightly rules the poor with
truth,
His throne is established forever.
15 A rod and reproof give wisdom,
But a child unrestrained brings shame to his mother.
16 When the wicked become many, transgression
increases;
But the righteous look on their fall.
17 Discipline your son,
And he brings you rest and delight to your life.
18 Where there is no vision, the people are let loose,
But baruḵ is he who guards the Torah.
19 A servant is not disciplined by words;
Though he understands, he does not respond.
20 Have you seen a man hasty in his words?
There is more expectancy for a fool than for him.
21 He who deals tenderly
With his servant from youth,
Has him as a son in the end.
22 A man of displeasure stirs up strife,
And a master of rage has many a transgression.
23 The pride of man brings him low,
But the humble in spirit obtains esteem.
24 He who shares with a thief hates his own ḥai;
He hears an oath, but does not report.
25 The fear of man brings a snare,
But whoever trusts in hWhY is made high.
11

1785

PROVERBS

Many seek the face of a ruler,
But Right-Ruling for man comes from hWhY.
27 An unrighteous man
Is an abomination to the righteous,
And he who is straight in the Way
Is an abomination to the wicked.
26

30 The words of Aḡur son of Yaqeh, a message.
This man declared to Ithi’ĕl, to Ithi’ĕl and Uḵal:
2 For I am more stupid than anyone,
And do not have the understanding of a man.
3 And I have not learned wisdom
That I should know the knowledge of the Qadosh
One.
4 Who has gone up to the shamayim and come
down?
Who has gathered the wind in His fists?
Who has bound the waters in a garment?
Who established all the ends of the earth?
What is His Name, and what is the Name of His
Bĕn,
If you know?
5 Every Word of Eloah is refined;
He is a shield to those taking refuge in Him.
6 Do not add to His Words,
Lest He reprove you, and you be found a liar.
7 Two I have asked of You - do not deny them to
me before I die:
8 Remove falsehood and a lying word far from me;
Give me neither poverty nor riches;
Feed me my portion of bread;
9 Lest becoming satisfied and I deny, and I say,
“Who is hWhY?”
And lest I be poor, and steal,
And seize the Name of my Elohim.
1786

MISHLĔY

Do not slander a servant to his master,
Lest he curse you, and you be found guilty.
11 There is a generation that curses its father,
And does not baraḵ its mother 12 There is a generation, clean in its own eyes,
But not washed from its own filth.
13 There is a generation; oh, how haughty are their
eyes!
And their eyelids are lifted up.
14 There is a generation whose teeth are swords,
And whose jaw-teeth are knives,
To devour the poor from off the earth,
And the needy from men.
15 The leech has two daughters: “Give! Give!”
Three are not satisfied,
Four that never say, “Enough”:
16 The grave, and the barren womb,
Land not satisfied with water,
And fire which never says, “Enough.”
17 An eye that mocks his father,
And scorns to obey his mother Ravens of the wadi dig it out,
And young eagles eat it!
18 Three are too marvellous for me,
And four which I do not understand:
19 The way of an eagle in the shamayim,
The way of a snake on a rock,
The way of a ship in the heart of the sea,
And the way of a man with a girl.
20 This is the way of an adulterous woman:
She shall eat and wipe her mouth,
And say, “I have not done wickedness.”
21 Under three the earth trembles,
And under four, it is unable to bear:
10

1787

PROVERBS

Under a servant when he reigns,
And a fool when he is satisfied with food,
23 Under a hated woman who marries,
And a female servant who supplants her mistress.
24 There are four
Which are little on the earth,
But they are exceedingly wise:
25 The ants are a people not strong,
Yet they prepare their food in the summer;
26 The rock badgers are a weak folk,
Yet they make their homes in the crags;
27 The locusts have no sovereign,
Yet they all go out in formation;
28 A spider takes hold with two hands,
And is in sovereigns’ palaces.
29 There are three
That are going well,
And four are good in walking:
30 A lion, which is mighty among beasts
And does not turn away from facing all;
31 A greyhound, and a male goat,
And a sovereign whose army is with him.
32 If you have been foolish in lifting up yourself,
Or if you have plotted evil,
Put your hand on your mouth.
33 For as milk under pressure brings forth curds,
And as a nose under pressure brings forth blood,
So wrath under pressure brings forth strife.
22

31 The words of Sovereign Lemu’ĕl, a message
which his mother taught him:
2 What, my son?
And what, son of my womb?
And what, son of my vows?
1788

MISHLĔY

Do not give your strength to women,
Nor your ways to wiping away sovereigns.
4 Not for sovereigns, O Lemu’ĕl,
Not for sovereigns to drink wine,
Nor for princes to desire strong drink;
5 Lest they drink and forget the Law,
And pervert the right of all the afflicted.
6 Give strong drink to him who is perishing,
And wine to those embittered in being.
7 Let him drink and forget his poverty,
And remember his trouble no more.
8 Open your mouth for the dumb,
In the cause of all the sons of the departed.
9 Open your mouth, judge righteously,
And plead the cause of the poor and needy.
10 ‫א‬,� Who finds a capable wife?
For she is worth far more than rubies.
11 ‫ ב‬, B The heart of her husband shall trust her,
And he has no lack of gain.
12 ‫ ג‬,� She shall do him good, and not evil,
All the days of her life.
13 ‫ד‬,𐤃 She shall seek wool and flax,
And with delight she works with her hands.
14 ‫ ה‬, h She shall be as the ships of Tarshish,
She brings in her food from afar.
15 ‫ ו‬, W She also rises while it is still night,
And provides food for her household,
And a portion for her girls.
16 ‫ ז‬, z She shall consider a field and buy it;
From her profits she shall plant a vineyard.
17 ‫ ח‬, X She shall gird herself with strength,
And strengthen her arms.
18 ‫ ט‬, j She shall taste when her gain is good;
Her lamp does not go out by night.
3

1789

PROVERBS

‫ י‬, Y She shall stretch out her hands to the distaff,
And her hand shall hold the spindle.
20 ‫כ‬, K She shall extend her hand to the poor,
And she shall reach out her hands to the needy.
21 ‫ ל‬, L She is not afraid of snow for her household,
For all her household is dressed in scarlet.
22 ‫ מ‬, m She shall make tapestry for herself;
She is dressed in fine linen and purple.
23 ‫ נ‬, ! Her husband is known in the gates,
When he sits among the elders of the land.
24 ‫ ס‬, s She shall make fine linen and sell them,
And shall give girdles for the merchants.
25 ‫ ע‬, [ Strength and splendour are her garments,
And she rejoices in time to come.
26 ‫ פ‬,ּ p She shall open her mouth with wisdom,
And on her tongue is the Torah of kindness.
27 ‫ צ‬, C She watches over the ways of her
household,
And does not eat the bread of idleness.
28 ‫ ק‬,q Her children shall rise up and call her baruḵ;
Her husband, and he praises her:
29 ‫ ר‬,R “Many daughters have done nobly,
But you have risen over them all.”
30 ‫ש‬, v Loveliness is deceptive
And prettiness is vain,
A woman who reveres hWhY is to be praised.
31 ‫ת‬, t Give her of the fruit of her hands,
And let her works praise her in the gates.
19

1790

JOB

IYOḆ
‫ איוב‬BWYA

1 There was a man in the land of Uts, whose name
was lyoḇ. And that man was perfect and straight, and
one who revered Elohim and turned aside from evil.
2 And seven sons and three daughters were born to
him.
3 And his possessions were seven thousand sheep,
and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of
oxen, and five hundred female donkeys, and a very
large body of servants, so that this man was the
greatest of all the people of the East.
4 And his sons went and had a feast in the house of
each on his day, and sent and invited their three
sisters to eat and to drink with them.
5 And it came to be, when the days of feasting had
gone round, that lyoḇ would send and qadosh them,
and he would rise early in the morning and offer burnt
offerings - the number of them all - for lyoḇ said, “It
might be that my sons have sinned and cursed
Elohim in their hearts.” This lyoḇ always did.
6 And the day came to be that the sons of Elohim
came to present themselves before HWHY, and
ha’Satan also came among them.
7 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “From where do you
come?” And ha’Satan answered HWHY and said,
“From diligently searching in the earth, and from
walking up and down in it.”
8 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “Have you considered
My servant lyoḇ, that there is none like him on the
earth, a perfect and straight man, one who reveres
Elohim and turns aside from evil?”
1791

IYOḆ

And ha’Satan answered HWHY and said, “Is lyoḇ
revering Elohim for naught?
10 “Have You not made a hedge around him, and
around his household, and around all that he has on
every side? You have baraḵ the work of his hands,
and his possessions have increased in the land.
11 But stretch out Your hand, please, and strike all
that he has - if he would not curse You to Your face!”
12 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “See, all that he has
is in your hand. Only do not lay a hand on himself.”
And ha’Satan went out from the presence of HWHY.
13 And the day came to be when his sons and
daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house
of their brother, the first-born.
14 And a messenger came to lyoḇ and said, “The
oxen were ploughing and the donkeys feeding
alongside them,
15 when Sheḇa fell upon them and took them away,
and they smote the servants with the edge of the
sword. And I alone have escaped to inform you!”
16 While he was still speaking, another also came
and said, “The fire of Elohim fell from the shamayim
and burned up the sheep and the servants, and
consumed them. And I alone have escaped to inform
you!”
17 While he was still speaking, another also came
and said, “The Kasdites formed three bands, and
made a raid on the camels and took them away, and
they smote the servants with the edge of the sword.
And I alone have escaped to inform you!”
18 While he was still speaking, another also came
and said, “Your sons and daughters were eating and
drinking wine in the house of their brother, the firstborn,
9

1792

JOB

and see, a great wind came from the wilderness
and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on
the young men, and they are dead. And I alone have
escaped to inform you!”
20 Then lyoḇ rose up and tore his robe, and shaved
his head, and he fell to the ground and did obeisance.
21 And he said, “Naked I came from my mother’s
womb, and naked I return there. HWHY has given, and
HWHY has taken away. Baruḵ be the Name of HWHY.”
22 In all this lyoḇ did not sin nor ascribe wickedness
unto Elohim.
19

2 Again the day came to be that the sons of Elohim
came to present themselves before HWHY, and
ha’Satan also came among them to present himself
before HWHY.
2 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “From where do you
come?” And ha’Satan answered HWHY and said,
“From diligently searching in the earth, and from
walking up and down in it.”
3 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “Have you considered
My servant lyoḇ, that there is none like him on the
earth, a perfect and straight man, one who reveres
Elohim and turns aside from evil? And still he holds
fast to his integrity, although you incited Me against
him, to destroy him without cause.”
4 And ha’Satan answered HWHY and said, “Skin for
skin, and all that a man has he would give for his life!
5 “But stretch out Your hand, please, and strike his
bone and his flesh - if he would not curse You to Your
face!”
6 And HWHY said to ha’Satan, “See, he is in your
hand, only spare his life.”

1793

IYOḆ

And ha’Satan went out from the presence of HWHY,
and smote lyoḇ with loathsome sores from the sole of
his foot to the crown of his head.
8 And he took a potsherd with which to scrape
himself while he sat in the midst of the ashes.
9 And his wife said to him, “Do you still hold fast to
your integrity? Curse Elohim and die!”
10 But he said to her, “You speak as one of the foolish
women speaks. Indeed, should we accept good from
Elohim, and not accept evil?” In all this lyoḇ did not
sin with his lips.
11 And three of the friends of lyoḇ heard of all this evil
that came on him, and each one came from his own
place - Eliphaz the Tĕmanite, and Bildaḏ the Shuḥite,
and Tsophar the Na’amathite - and they met together
to come to sympathise with him and to comfort him.
12 And they lifted up their eyes from a distance, and
did not recognise him, and they lifted their voices and
wept. And each one tore his robe and sprinkled dust
on his head toward the shamayim.
13 Then they sat down with him on the ground seven
days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to
him, for they saw that the pain was very great.
7

3 After this lyoḇ opened his mouth and cursed the day
of his birth.
2 And lyoḇ spoke, and said,
3 “Let the day perish on which I was born, and the
night it was said, ‘A male child has been conceived.’
4 Let that day be darkness. Let not Eloah from
above seek for it, nor let light shine upon it.
5 Let darkness and the shadow of death buy it back,
let a cloud dwell on it, let all that blackens the day
frighten it.
1794

JOB

That night - let darkness seize it. Let it not be
included among the days of the year, let it not come
into the number of the months.
7 Look, let that night be silent! Let no singing come
into it!
8 Let those curse it who curse the day, who are
ready to stir up Liwiathan.
9 Let the stars of its twilight be dark. Let it wait for
light, but have none. And let it not see the eyelashes
of the dawn.
10 For it did not shut up the doors of my body, nor
hide trouble from my eyes.
11 Why did I not die from the womb, come forth from
the body and expire?
12 Why were there knees to receive me? Or breasts
for me to nurse on?
13 For now I would have been lying in peace. I would
have slept - then I would have been at rest,
14 with sovereigns and counsellors of the earth, who
built ruins for themselves,
15 or with rulers who had gold, who filled their houses
with silver,
16 or as a hidden untimely birth, as infants who never
saw light?
17 There the wicked cease raging, and there the
weary are at rest,
18 the prisoners rest together, they do not hear the
voice of the oppressor.
19 The small and great are there, and the servant is
free from his master.
20 Why does He give light to the sufferer, and life to
the bitter of being,
21 who are waiting for death, but it does not come,
and search for it more than treasures;
6

1795

IYOḆ

who rejoice exceedingly, they are glad when they
find the grave?
23 Why does He give light to a man whose way has
been hidden, and whom Eloah has hedged in?
24 For my sighing comes before I eat, and my
groanings pour out like water.
25 For that which I greatly feared has come upon me
and that which I dreaded has overtaken me.
26 I have not been at ease, nor have I been
undisturbed, nor been at rest, yet trouble comes!”
22

4 And Eliphaz the Tĕmanite answered and said,
“If one tries a word with you, would you become
impatient? But who is able to withhold himself from
speaking?
3 See, you have instructed many, and you have
made weak hands strong.
4 Your words have raised up him who was
stumbling, and you have strengthened the weak
knees.
5 But now it has come to you, and you are impatient;
it strikes you, and you are troubled.
6 Is not your reverence your trust, the integrity of
ways your expectancy?
7 Remember, please: who, being innocent, has ever
perished? And where have the straight ones ever
been cut off?
8 According to what I have seen, those who plough
wickedness and sow suffering reap the same.
9 Through the breath of Eloah they perish, and
through the wind of His nostrils they are consumed.
10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce
lion, but the teeth of the young lions shall be broken.
11 An old lion perishes for lack of prey, and the cubs
of the lioness are scattered.
2

1796

JOB

And unto me a word was secretly brought, and my
ear received a little of it.
13 Amid thoughts from visions of the night, when
deep sleep falls on men,
14 fear came upon me, and trembling, causing my
bones to shake greatly.
15 Then a spirit passed before my face, the hair on
my body stood up.
16 It stood still, but I could not discern its appearance.
A form was before my eyes - silence, then a voice I
heard,
17 ‘Is mortal man more righteous than Eloah? Is man
more clean than his Maker?
18 ‘Look, He puts no trust in His servants, and He
charges His messengers with straying.
19 ‘How much more those who dwell in houses of
clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are
crushed like a moth?
20 ‘From morning till evening they are beaten down,
they perish forever, with no one regarding.
21 ‘Are not the cords of their tents pulled up? They
die, without wisdom!’
12

5 “Call out, please, is there anyone to answer you?
And to which of the qodeshim would you turn?
2 For wrath kills the fool and envy slays the simple.
3 I myself have seen the fool taking root, but
suddenly his home was cursed.
4 His sons are far from safety, they are crushed in
the gate, with no one to deliver.
5 The hungry eat up his harvest, taking it even from
the thorns, and the snare snaps up their wealth.
6 For evil does not come from the dust, nor does
trouble spring from the ground;
1797

IYOḆ

for man is born for trouble, and the sparks fly
upward.
8 But as for me, I would seek Ĕl, and I would submit
my case to Elohim,
9 who is doing great and unsearchable deeds,
innumerable wonders,
10 who is giving rain on the earth’s face, and is
sending waters on the field’s face;
11 to put the lowly on high, and those who mourn
shall be lifted to safety,
12 thwarting the schemes of the crafty, so that their
hands do not work effectively;
13 catching the wise in their own craftiness, and the
counsel of schemers are swept away.
14 By day they encounter darkness, and at noon they
grope as in the night.
15 But He saves the needy from the sword of their
mouth, from the clutches of the strong.
16 Thus
the poor have expectancy, and
unrighteousness shuts her mouth.
17 Look, baruḵ is the man whom Eloah reproves, so
do not despise the discipline of Ĕl Shaddai.
18 For He bruises, but He binds up; He smites, but
His hands heal.
19 In six distresses He delivers you, and in seven no
evil strikes you.
20 In scarcity of food He shall redeem you from
death, and in battle, from the power of the sword.
21 When the tongue scourges, you are shielded and
you have no fear when destruction comes.
22 At destruction and at starvation you laugh, and
you have no fear of the beasts of the earth.
23 For your covenant is with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with you.
7

1798

JOB

And you shall know that your tent is in peace, and
shall visit your tent and not sin,
25 and shall know that your seed are many, and your
offspring like the grass of the earth.
26 You shall come to the grave in ripe old age, like
the stacking of grain in its season.
27 Look, this we have searched out, it is so. Hear it,
and know for yourself.”
24

6 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“Oh, that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and
my calamity be placed on the scales!
3 For it would outweigh the sand of the sea,
therefore my words have been rash.
4 For the arrows of Ĕl Shaddai are within me, my
spirit drinks in their poison, the onslaughts of Eloah
are arrayed against me.
5 Does the wild donkey bray when it has grass, or
does the ox bellow over its fodder?
6 Is tasteless food eaten without salt? Is there any
flavour in the juice of mallows?
7 I refuse to touch it, they are like food when I am
sick.
8 Oh that I might have my desire, that Eloah would
grant me what I long for!
9 That it would please Eloah to crush me, loose His
hand and cut me off!
10 Then I would still have comfort, and I would rejoice
in pain, though not spared, for I have not hidden the
words of the Qadosh One.
11 What strength do I have, that I should wait? And
what is my end, that I should prolong my life?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones? Is my flesh
of bronze?
2

1799

IYOḆ

Is my help not within me? And is ability driven from
me?
14 To one afflicted: kindness, even the one forsaking
the reverence of Ĕl Shaddai.
15 My brothers are as undependable as a wadi, as a
bed on which streams once ran,
16 which are dark because of the ice, in which the
snow is hidden.
17 When it is warm, they cease to flow; when it is hot,
they vanish from their place.
18 The paths of their way turn aside, they enter
wastes and perish.
19 Passengers
of Tĕma looked expectantly,
travellers of Sheḇa waited for them.
20 They were ashamed because they had trusted,
they came there and were disappointed.
21 Indeed, you have now become the same! You see
downfall and are afraid.
22 Did I ever say, ‘Give to me’? or, ‘Offer a bribe for
me from your wealth’?
23 or, ‘Rescue me from the hand of the enemy?’ or,
‘Redeem me from the hand of oppressors’?
24 Teach me, and I shall be silent. And show me
where I have gone astray.
25 Words of uprightness are harsh! But what does
your reproving reprove?
26 Do you reckon to reprove my words, and the
sayings of one in despair, which are as wind?
27 You would cast lots over the fatherless, and make
merchandise of your friend!
28 But now, please look at me - whether I would lie to
your face.
29 Relent, please, let there be no unrighteousness.
Relent! My righteousness is still in it.
13

1800

JOB

Is there unrighteousness on my tongue? Does my
taste not discern what is perverse?

30

7 “Does not man have to struggle on earth? For his
days are like the days of a hired man.
2 Like a servant who sighs for the shade, and like a
hireling longing for his wages,
3 so am I allotted months of futility. And nights of
trouble have been appointed to me.
4 When I lie down, I say, ‘When am I going to rise,
and the night be ended?’ For I have had my fill of
tossing till dawn.
5 My body is covered with worms and dirt, my skin
is cracked and it festers.
6 My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and
are spent without expectancy.
7 Remember that my life is a breath! My eye is never
again to see good.
8 The eye of him who sees me sees me no longer.
Your eyes are upon me, and I am no more.
9 The cloud fades and vanishes away, so he who
goes down to the grave does not come up.
10 He returns no more to his house, nor does his
place know him any more.
11 I also, I do not hold my mouth, I speak in the
distress of my spirit, I complain in the bitterness of my
being.
12 Am I the sea, or a sea serpent, that You put a
guard over me?
13 When I say, ‘My bed comforts me, my couch
eases my complaint,’
14 then You frighten me with dreams and make me
afraid with visions,
15 so that my being chooses strangling, death rather
than my bones.
1801

IYOḆ

I have wasted away, I would not live forever.
Leave me alone, for my days are a breath.
17 What is man, that You should make him great, that
You should apply Your heart to him,
18 that You should visit him every morning, trying him
every moment?
19 How long do You not look away from me, nor leave
me alone till I swallow my saliva?
20 Have I sinned? What have I done to You, O
Watcher of men? Why have You marked me as Your
target, so that I am a burden to You?
21 And why do You not pardon my transgression, and
take away my wickedness? For now I lie down in the
dust, and You shall seek me, but I am not.”
16

8 And Bildaḏ the Shuḥite answered and said,
“How long are you going to speak like this, since
the words of your mouth are a strong wind?
3 Does Ĕl twist right-ruling? Or does Ĕl Shaddai
twist what is right?
4 If your sons have sinned against Him, and He
delivers them into the hand of their transgression,
5 if you diligently seek Ĕl and plead with Ĕl Shaddai,
6 if you were clear and straight, then indeed He
would awake for you, and shall baraḵ your righteous
dwelling place.
7 Though your beginning was small, yet your latter
end would greatly increase.
8 Indeed, please ask the former generation, and
prepare for the research of their fathers,
9 for we are but of yesterday, and know not,
because our days on earth are as a shadow.
10 Do they not teach you, speak to you, and bring
forth words from their heart?
2

1802

JOB

Does papyrus grow without a marsh, a reed thrive
without water?
12 While it is yet green, not cut down, it dries out
before any plant.
13 So are the paths of all who forget Ĕl, and the
expectancy of a defiled one perishes,
14 whose refuge is cut off, and whose trust is a
spider’s web.
15 He leans on his house, but it does not stand. He
holds it fast, but it does not last.
16 He is moist before the sun, and his branches
spread out in his garden.
17 His roots wrap around a heap, and look for a place
in the stones.
18 If he is destroyed from his place, then it shall deny
him: ‘I have not seen you.’
19 See, this is the joy of His way, and out of the dust
others grow.
20 See, Ĕl does not cast away the perfect, neither
hold the hand of evil-doers.
21 While He fills your mouth with laughter, and your
lips with rejoicing,
22 those hating you put on shame, and the tent of the
wicked is no more.”
11

9 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“Truly I know it is so. But how is man right with
Elohim?
3 If one wanted to dispute with Him, he would not
answer Him one time out of a thousand.
4 Wise in heart and mighty in strength - who has
hardened himself against Him and is at peace?
5 He who removes mountains, and they do not know
it, when He overturns them in His displeasure;
2

1803

IYOḆ

who shakes the earth out of its place, and its
columns tremble;
7 who commands the sun, and it does not rise; and
He seals up the stars,
8 stretching out the shamayim by Himself, and
treading upon the waves of the sea;
9 who made Ash, Kesil, and Kimah, and the rooms
of the south;
10 who performs great and unsearchable deeds, and
innumerable wonders.
11 Look, He goes by me, and I do not see; and He
moves past, but I do not discern Him.
12 Look, He snatches away, who brings it back? Who
says to Him, ‘What are You doing?’
13 Eloah does not turn back His displeasure, the
helpers of pride stoop under Him.
14 How much less would I answer Him, choose my
words with Him?
15 For though I were righteous, I would not answer
Him. I pray to Him for my right-ruling.
16 Though I had called and He answered me, I would
not believe that He was listening to my voice.
17 For He crushes me with a storm, and has
multiplied my wounds for no cause.
18 He does not allow me to recover my breath, but
fills me with bitterness.
19 If I speak of power? Look, He is mighty. And if of
right-ruling? Who appoints me a time?
20 If I am righteous? My mouth would declare me
wicked. Am I perfect? It would declare me perverse.
21 Am I perfect? Do I not know my own being? I
despise my life!
22 It is all the same, therefore I say, ‘He destroys the
perfect and the wicked.’
6

1804

JOB

If the scourge slays suddenly, He laughs at the
trial of the innocent.
24 Earth has been given into the hand of the wicked.
He covers the faces of its judges. If it is not He, then
who is it?
25 My days have become swifter than a runner - they
have fled, they have not seen good.
26 They have passed by like swift ships, like an eagle
swooping on its prey.
27 If I say, ‘Let me forget my complaint, let me put off
my sad face, and let me smile,’
28 I shall be afraid of all my sufferings. I know that
You do not hold me innocent.
29 If I am wicked, why should I labour in vain?
30 If I washed myself with snow water, and cleansed
my hands with soap,
31 then You would plunge me into a ditch, and my
garments shall abhor me.
32 For not a man as I should answer Him, and we
come together into right-ruling.
33 There is no mediator between us, to lay his hand
upon us both.
34 Let Him take His rod away from me, and let His
dread frighten me.
35 I would speak and not fear Him, for I am not so
within myself.
23

10 “My being has grown weary of life. I let loose my
complaint, I speak in the bitterness of my being.
2 I say to Eloah, ‘Do not declare me wicked, show
me why You strive with me.
3 Is it good to You that You should crush, that You
should despise the work of Your hands, and shine on
the counsel of the wicked?
1805

IYOḆ

Do You have eyes of flesh? Do You see as man
sees?
5 Are Your days like the days of a mortal man? Are
Your years like the days of a mighty man,
6 that You should seek for my wickedness and
search out my sin?
7 For You know that I am not wicked, and there is
no one to deliver from Your hand.
8 Your hands have made me and shaped me,
together all around, yet You destroy me.
9 Remember, please, that You have made me like
clay. And would You turn me into dust again?
10 Did You not pour me out like milk, and curdle me
like cheese?
11 Skin and flesh you put on me, and wove me with
bones and sinews.
12 Life and kindness You have bestowed on me, and
Your visitation has preserved my spirit.
13 And these You have laid up in Your heart, I know
that this was with You:
14 If I sin, then You watch me, and let no wickedness
of mine go unpunished.
15 If I am wicked, woe to me! And if I am righteous, I
would not lift up my head - filled with shame and
seeing my grief!
16 If I lift it up high, You hunt me as a lion, and again
You would show Yourself marvellous against me.
17 You renew Your witnesses against me, and
increase Your wrath toward me; changes and a host
are with me.
18 So why have You brought me forth from the
womb? Oh, that I had perished and no eye had seen
me!
19 I should have been as though I had not been brought from the womb to the grave.
4

1806

JOB

Are not my days few? Then cease! Leave me
alone, so that I brighten up a little,
21 Before I go, and not return, to the land of darkness
and the shadow of death,
22 a land as dark as darkness itself, as the shadow
of death, without any order, whose light is as
darkness.”
20

11 And Tsophar the Na’amathite answered and
said,
2 “Should a multitude of words go unanswered? And
should a man of lips be declared right?
3 Should your babblings silence men? And should
you mock, and no one make you ashamed?
4 Since you have said, ‘My discourse is flawless,
and I have been clean in Your eyes.’
5 But if only Eloah would speak, and open His lips
against you,
6 and show you the secrets of wisdom, doubling
your ability. Know then that Eloah forgets your
wickedness for you.
7 Would you find out Eloah by searching, or search
out the end of Ĕl Shaddai?
8 It is higher than the shamayim - what would you
do? Deeper than the grave - what would you know?
9 Their measure is longer than the earth, and
broader than the sea.
10 If He passes through and shuts up, and gathers,
then who reverses it?
11 For He knows false men. When He sees
wickedness does He not consider it?
12 But a senseless man takes heart when a wild
donkey’s colt is born a man!
13 If you would prepare your heart, and stretch out
your hands toward Him;
1807

IYOḆ

if wickedness were in your hand, put it far away
and do not let perverseness dwell in your tents;
15 then indeed you shall lift up your face without spot;
and you shall stand firm, and not be afraid,
16 because you would forget sorrow, and remember
it as waters that have passed away,
17 and your life would be brighter than noon. You
would soar upward, you would be like the morning.
18 And you shall trust, because there is expectancy.
And when you have searched you shall lie down in
safety.
19 And you shall rest, and no one would make you
afraid, and many shall seek your favour.
20 But the eyes of the wicked are consumed, and
they shall not escape, and their expectancy is the
breathing out of life!”
14

12 And Iyoḇ answered and said,
“Truly you are the people, and wisdom would die
with you!
3 But I, like you, have a heart too; I am not less than
you. And who does not know such as these?
4 I have become a laughing-stock to my friends one who has called on Eloah and He answered him!
A laughing-stock is the righteous, the perfect one!
5 A lamp is despised in the thought of one who is at
ease - prepared for those whose feet slip.
6 The tents of robbers are at peace, and those who
provoke Ĕl are complacent, to him who brings Eloah
into his hand!
7 But now ask the beasts, and they teach you; and
the birds of the shamayim, and they declare it to you;
8 or speak to the earth, and it teaches you; and the
fish of the sea inform you.
2

1808

JOB

Who among all these does not know that the hand
of HWHY has done this,
10 in whose hand is the life of all that live, and the
breath of all mankind?
11 Does the ear not try words? And the mouth taste
food for itself?
12 With the aged is wisdom, and understanding with
length of days.
13 With Him are wisdom and might, He has counsel
and understanding.
14 Look, He breaks down, and it is not rebuilt. If He
imprisons a man, there is no release.
15 Look, He withholds the waters, and they dry up.
And He sends them out, and they overwhelm the
earth.
16 With Him are strength and ability. The misled and
the misleader are His.
17 He leads counsellors away stripped, and makes
judges go mad.
18 He loosens the bonds of sovereigns, and binds a
girdle on their loins;
19 who leads away kohenim as a spoil, and
overthrows the mighty;
20 turning aside the lip of the trusted ones, and takes
away the discernment of the elders;
21 pouring scorn on nobles, and loosens the girdle of
the strong;
22 revealing deepness out of darkness, and He
brings the shadow of death to light;
23 making nations great, and He destroys them;
spreading out the nations, and He leads them out,
24 turning aside the heart of the chiefs of the people
of the earth, and He makes them wander in a pathless
waste.
9

1809

IYOḆ

They grope in darkness, having no light, and He
makes them stagger like a drunkard.

25

13 “Look, my eye has seen it all, my ear has heard
and understood it.
2 What you know, I know too; I am not less than you.
3 But I would speak to Ĕl Shaddai, and I delight to
reason with Ĕl.
4 But you smear with falsehood, worthless healers,
all of you!
5 If you would only be silent, then it would be your
wisdom!
6 Please hear my reasoning, and listen to the
pleadings of my lips.
7 Would you speak perversely for Ĕl, and speak
deceit for Him?
8 Would you be partial towards Him? Would you
plead for Ĕl?
9 Would it be well when He searches you out? Or
could you deceive Him as one deceives a man?
10 He would certainly reprove you if you secretly
show partiality.
11 Should not His excellence make you afraid, and
the dread of Him fall upon you?
12 Your weighty sayings are proverbs of ashes, your
shields are shields of clay.
13 Be silent before me, and let me speak, and let
whatever come upon me!
14 Why do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life
in my hands?
15 Though, He slays me - I wait! But I show my ways
to be right before Him.
16 He also is my deliverance, for a defiled one does
not come before Him.
1810

JOB

Listen closely to my words, and with your ears to
what I say.
18 Look, please, I have prepared my case, I know
that I am in the right.
19 Who is he who would strive with me? For then I
would keep silent and die.
20 Only twofold do not do to me, then I am not hidden
from Your face:
21 Withdraw Your hand far from me, and let not dread
of You make me afraid.
22 Then call, and let me answer; or let me speak, and
You reply to me.
23 How many are my wickednesses and sins? Let me
know my transgression and my sin.
24 Why do You hide Your face, and reckon me as
Your enemy?
25 Would You frighten a leaf driven to and fro? And
would You pursue dry stubble?
26 For You write bitterness against me, and make me
inherit the wickednesses of my youth,
27 and put my feet in the stocks, and look closely to
all my paths. You draw a limit for the soles of my feet.
28 And he, like that which is rotten, wastes away, as
a garment that is moth-eaten.
17

14 “Man born of woman is of few days and turmoilfilled.
2 He comes forth like a flower and withers. He flees
like a shadow and does not continue.
3 Yet on such a one You open Your eyes, and bring
me to right-ruling with Yourself!
4 Who brings the clean out of the unclean? No one!
5 Since his days are decided, the number of his
months is with You, You have appointed his bounds
which he does not pass over.
1811

IYOḆ

Look away from him and let him rest, till like a hired
man he enjoys his day.
7 For there is expectancy for a tree, if it is cut down,
that it sprouts again, and that its tender branch does
not cease.
8 Though its root grows old in the earth, and its
stump dies in the ground,
9 at the scent of water it buds and brings forth
foliage like a plant.
10 But man dies and is powerless, and man expires,
and where is he?
11 Water disappears from the sea, and a river dries
up and is parched,
12 and man shall lie down and not rise. Till the
shamayim are no more, they awake not, nor are
aroused from their sleep.
13 If only You would hide me in the grave; conceal
me until Your wrath turns away. Appoint me a time,
and remember me!
14 If a man dies, would he live again? All the days of
my struggle I wait, till my change comes.
15 You would call, and I would answer You. You have
yearned for the work of Your hands.
16 For now You count my steps - do You not watch
over my sin?
17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and You
cover over my wickedness.
18 But a falling mountain crumbles away, and a rock
is moved from its place,
19 as water wears away stones, its out-pouring
washes away the soil of the earth - so You have
destroyed the expectancy of man.
20 You overpower him, forever, and he is gone - his
face changes and You send him away.
6

1812

JOB

His sons come to esteem, and he does not know
it. And they are brought low, and he does not perceive
it.
22 He feels only the pain of his flesh, and he mourns
over himself.”
21

15 And Eliphaz the Tĕmanite answered and said,
“Would a wise man answer with vain knowledge,
or fill his body with the east wind?
3 Would he reason with useless talk, or by speeches
which do not profit?
4 Indeed, you do away with reverence, and withhold
prayer before Ĕl.
5 For your wickedness teaches your mouth, and you
choose the tongue of the crafty.
6 Not I, but your own mouth condemns you. And
your own lips witness against you.
7 Were you the first one born? Or were you made
before the hills?
8 Have you heard the secret counsel of Eloah? And
do you limit wisdom to yourself?
9 What do you know that we do not know understand, that is not within us?
10 Both the grey-haired and the aged are among us,
much older than your father.
11 Are the comforts of Ĕl not enough for you - and a
word that deals gently with you?
12 What have you taken to heart? And why do your
eyes flash?
13 That you should turn, your spirit against Ĕl, and let
words go out of your mouth?
14 What is man, that he should be clean? And one
born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
15 Look, He puts no trust in His qodeshim, and the
shamayim are not clean in His eyes,
2

1813

IYOḆ

how much less one who is loathsome and corrupt,
drinking unrighteousness like water!
17 Let me show you - hear me - and this I have seen
and declare,
18 which the wise declare, and have not hidden from
their fathers,
19 to them alone the land was given, and no stranger
passed over into their midst:
20 All the days of the wicked he is paining himself,
and few years have been stored up for the ruthless.
21 A frightening sound is in his ears; in peace a
destroyer comes to him.
22 He believes not to return from darkness, and he is
reserved for the sword.
23 He wanders about for food - where is it? He knows
that a day of darkness is prepared for him.
24 Distress and pain frighten him - they overwhelm
him, like a sovereign ready for the attack.
25 Because he has stretched out his hand against Ĕl,
and acts mightily against Ĕl Shaddai.
26 He runs against Him defiantly, with thick-bossed
shields.
27 For he has covered his face with his fatness, and
he has put layers of fat on his loins.
28 But he dwells in ruined cities, in houses which no
one lives in, which have been ready to become
heaps.
29 He shall not be rich, and his wealth shall not rise,
and his possessions shall not overspread the earth.
30 He does not turn away from darkness. The flame
dries up his branches, and he turns aside by the
breath of His mouth.
31 Let him not trust in falsehood, deceiving himself,
for falsehood is his reward.
16

1814

JOB

Before his day it is accomplished, and his branch
shall not be green.
33 He shakes off his unripe grape like a vine, and
throws off his blossom like an olive tree.
34 For the company of the defiled ones is barren, and
fire consumes the tents of bribery.
35 They conceive trouble and bring forth wickedness,
even their womb prepares deception.”
32

16 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“I have heard many like these; all of you are
comforters of trouble!
3 Is there an end to words of wind? Or what
provokes you that you answer?
4 I might also speak like you, if you were in my
place. I might heap up words against you, and shake
my head at you.
5 I might strengthen you with my mouth, and my
moving lips might bring relief.
6 If I speak, my pain is not relieved; and if I refrain,
does it leave me?
7 But now He has wearied me. You have stunned all
my company.
8 And You have plucked me, and it is a witness. And
my failure rises up against me, it bears witness to my
face.
9 He has torn in His wrath, and He hates me. He has
gnashed at me with His teeth; my adversary sharpens
His eyes upon me.
10 They open wide their mouths at me, in scorn they
have smitten my cheeks, they mass themselves
together against me.
11 Ĕl has handed me over to the perverse, and cast
me into the hands of the wicked.
2

1815

IYOḆ

I was at ease, but He broke me. And He took me
by my neck and shattered me, and He has stood me
up for His target.
13 His archers surround me, He splits my kidneys in
two and does not spare, He pours out my bile on the
ground.
14 He made a breach in me, breach upon breach. He
runs upon me like a mighty man.
15 I sewed sackcloth over my skin, and laid my horn
in the dust.
16 My face is reddened from weeping, and on my
eyelids is the shadow of death;
17 though no violence was on my hand, and my
prayer sincere.
18 O earth, do not cover my blood, and let my cry
have no resting place!
19 See, even now my witness is in the shamayim,
and my defender is on high.
20 My friends are they that scorn me; my eyes pour
out tears to Eloah.
21 O that one might plead for a man with Eloah, as a
man with his neighbour!
22 When a few years are past, then I shall go the way
of no return.
12

17 “My spirit has been broken, my days have been
extinguished, graves are for me.
2 Truly, mockeries are with me, and my eye rests on
their insults!
3 Please lay down a pledge for me with Yourself.
Who would strike hands with me?
4 For
You have hidden their heart from
understanding, therefore You do not exalt them.
5 He who denounces friends for a share, even the
eyes of his children shall fail.
1816

JOB

But He has made me a byword of the people,
whereas in former times I was as a drum.
7 And from sorrow my eye has grown dim, and all
my members are like shadows.
8 Upright ones are astonished at this, and the
innocent stirs himself up against the defiled one.
9 And the righteous holds to his way, and he who
has clean hands becomes stronger and stronger.
10 But please, come back again, all of you, for I do
not find a wise one among you.
11 My days have passed by, my plans have been
broken off - the desires of my heart.
12 They put night as day, that light is near, in the face
of darkness!
13 If I wait - the grave is my house, I shall make my
bed in darkness,
14 I shall say to corruption, ‘You are my father,’ - to
the worm, ‘You are my mother and my sister.’
15 Where then is my expectancy? As for my
expectancy, who would see it?
16 Would it sink down into the grave? Would we
together go down into the dust?”
6

18 And Bildaḏ the Shuḥite answered and said,
“When do you put an end to words? Understand,
and let us then talk.
3 Why should we be reckoned as beasts, as stupid
in your eyes?
4 You who tear yourself to pieces in displeasure would the earth be forsaken for your sake? Or the
rock move from its place?
5 Indeed, the light of the wicked goes out, and the
flame of his fire does not shine.
6 The light shall be dark in his tent, and his lamp
beside him is put out.
2

1817

IYOḆ

The steps of his strength are impeded and his own
counsel overthrows him.
8 For he is sent into a net by his own feet, and he
walks on a pit-fall.
9 The net seizes his heel, a snare prevails over him.
10 A noose is hidden on the ground for him, and a
trap for him in the path.
11 Alarms frighten him on all sides, and chase him at
his heels.
12 His strength is starved, and calamity is ready at his
side.
13 It devours parts of his skin, the first-born of death
devours his parts.
14 He is torn from the shelter of his tent, and they
parade him before the sovereign of alarms.
15 In his tent dwells that which is none of his;
brimstone is scattered on his house.
16 His roots below dry up, and his branch is cut off
above.
17 Remembrance of him perishes from the earth, and
he has no name on the street.
18 They thrust him from light into darkness, and
chase him out of the world.
19 He leaves no offspring or descendant among his
people, nor any survivor in his dwellings.
20 Those in the west are astonished at his day, as
those in the east are frightened.
21 Indeed, such are the dwellings of the perverse,
and this is the place of him who does not know Ĕl.”
7

19 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“How long would you grieve my life, and crush me
with words?
3 These
ten times you have insulted me,
shamelessly you attack me.
2

1818

JOB

Even if I have truly gone astray, my straying
remains with me.
5 If indeed you would exalt yourselves above me,
and plead against me my reproach,
6 know then that Eloah has overthrown me, and has
surrounded me with His net.
7 See, I cry, ‘Violence!’ but I am not heard. I cry
aloud, but there is no right-ruling.
8 He has fenced up my way, and I do not pass over.
And He has placed darkness in my paths.
9 He has stripped me of my esteem, and taken the
crown from my head.
10 He breaks me down on every side, and I am gone;
and uproots my expectancy like a tree.
11 And He kindled His wrath against me, and He
counts me as one of His enemies.
12 His companies come together, and they cast up
their way against me, and encamp all around my tent.
13 He has removed my brothers far away from me,
and my friends are completely estranged from me.
14 My near ones have fallen away, and my close
friends have forgotten me.
15 The guests in my house, and my female servants,
reckon me for a stranger - I am a foreigner in their
eyes.
16 I have called my servant, but he gives no answer
- I have to beg him with my mouth.
17 My spirit is strange to my wife, and my kindness to
the children of my own body.
18 Even young children have scorned me. I rise, and
they speak against me.
19 All my intimate friends loathe me, and those whom
I love have turned against me.
20 My bone clings to my skin and to my flesh, and I
have escaped by the skin of my teeth.
4

1819

IYOḆ

Show favour to me, show favour to me, O you my
friends, for the hand of Eloah has struck me!
22 Why do you persecute me like Ĕl, and are not
satisfied with my flesh?
23 Oh, that my words were written down! Oh, that
they were inscribed in a book,
24 engraved on a rock with an iron pen and lead,
forever!
25 For I know that my Redeemer lives, and to the
end, shall stand over the earth;
26 and after my skin has been struck off, then in my
flesh I shall see Eloah,
27 whom I myself shall see on my side, and not a
stranger. My kidneys have failed within me!
28 If you say, ‘Why do we persecute him?’ Seeing the
root of the matter has been found in me,
29 fear the sword yourselves, for wrath is the
punishment of the sword, so that you know there is a
judgment.”
21

20 Then Tsophar the Na’amathite answered and
said,
2 “Truly, my thoughts make me respond, even
because of my haste within me.
3 I have listened to the reproof which insults me, and
the spirit of my understanding makes me answer.
4 You have known this of old, since man was placed
on earth,
5 that the singing of the wicked is short-lived, and
the joy of the defiled one is but for a moment.
6 Although his pride mounts up to the shamayim and
his head reaches to the clouds,
7 he perishes forever like his own dung. Those who
have seen him say, ‘Where is he?’
1820

JOB

He flies away like a dream, and is not found. And
he is driven away like a vision of the night.
9 Eyes that saw him do so no more, nor does his
place see him any more.
10 His sons seek the favour of the poor, and his
hands give back his wealth.
11 His bones filled with his youth, lie down with him
in the dust.
12 Though evil is sweet in his mouth, he hides it
under his tongue,
13 he fondles it and does not forsake it, but still keeps
it in his mouth,
14 his food is turned in his stomach, the bitterness of
cobras is in him.
15 He has swallowed down riches, then vomits them
up - Ĕl drives it out of his stomach.
16 He sucks the poison of cobras; the tongue of the
poisonous snake slays him.
17 He looks not on streams, the rivers flowing with
honey and cream.
18 He is giving back what he laboured for, and does
not eat it - like wealth from his trade, but he does not
enjoy.
19 For he has oppressed, he has forsaken the poor,
he has seized a house which he did not build.
20 For he shall not know ease in his innermost,
neither save what he desires.
21 There is no left-over after he has eaten, therefore
his good does not last.
22 With all his plenty he is in distress; the hand of
every labourer comes against him.
23 It shall be, at the filling of his stomach, that He
casts on him His burning wrath, and rains it down on
him while he is eating.
8

1821

IYOḆ

He shall flee from the iron weapon, a bronze bow
pierce him through.
25 It is drawn, and comes out of the body, and the
gleaming point comes out of his gall. Fears come
upon him.
26 All darkness waits for his treasures. A fire not
blown consumes him, it destroys what remains in his
tent.
27 The shamayim reveal his wickedness, and the
earth rises up against him.
28 The increase of his house departs, flowing away
in the day of His wrath.
29 This is the portion from Elohim for a wicked man,
and the heritage Ĕl has decreed for him.”
24

21 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“Listen closely to my word, and let this be your
comfort.
3 Bear with me and let me speak, and after I have
spoken, keep mocking.
4 As for me, is my complaint against man? And why
should I not be impatient?
5 Look at me and be appalled, then put your hand
on your mouth.
6 And when I consider it I am frightened, and my
body shudders.
7 Why do the wicked live, become old, and become
mighty in power?
8 Their seed is established with them before their
face, and their offspring before their eyes.
9 Their houses are peace without fear, neither is the
rod of Eloah upon them.
10 Their bull breeds and does not fail, their cow
calves without miscarriage.
2

1822

JOB

They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their children dance.
12 They sing to the tambourine and lyre, and rejoice
to the sound of the flute.
13 They spend their days in goodness, and in a
moment go down to the grave.
14 And they say to Ĕl, ‘Turn aside from us, for we
have no desire to know Your Ways.
15 Who is Ĕl Shaddai, that we should serve Him? And
what profit do we have if we pray to Him?’
16 See, is their good not in their own hand? The
counsel of the wicked has been far from me.
17 How often is the lamp of the wicked put out, and
calamity comes upon them, sorrows He allots in His
displeasure?
18 They are like straw before the wind, and like chaff
that a storm steals away.
19 Eloah stores up one’s wickedness for his children.
Let Him repay him, so that he knows it.
20 Let his eyes see his destruction, and let him drink
of the wrath of Ĕl Shaddai.
21 For what is his delight in his house after him, when
the number of his months is cut off?
22 Does anyone teach Ĕl knowledge, since He
judges those that are exalted?
23 One dies in his perfect strength, completely at
ease and satisfied;
24 His pails are filled with milk, and his bones are
juicy with marrow.
25 Another one dies in the bitterness of his being, and
never eats with pleasure.
26 Together they lie down in the dust, and worms
cover them.
27 Look, I know your thoughts, and the plots with
which you would wrong me.
11

1823

IYOḆ

For you say, ‘Where is the house of the noble one?
And where is the tent, the dwelling place of the
wicked?’
29 Have you not asked those passing by the way?
And do you not know their signs?
30 That the wicked is kept for the day of calamity?
They are brought to the day of wrath.
31 Who declares his way to his face? And who repays
him for what he has done?
32 As for him, he is brought to the grave, and a watch
is kept over the tomb.
33 The clods of the wadi shall be sweet to him, and
all men follow him, innumerable are those before him.
34 How then do you comfort me in vain, seeing that
perverseness remains in your answers?”
28

22 And Eliphaz the Tĕmanite answered and said,
“Would a strong man be of use to Ĕl? Even he who
is wise be of use to Him?
3 Is it a delight to Ĕl Shaddai that you are righteous?
Or gain, that you make your ways perfect?
4 Is it because of your reverence of Him that He
reproves you, or enters into right-ruling with you?
5 Is not your evil great? And is there no end to your
wickednesses?
6 For you take pledges from your brother for naught,
and strip the naked of their garments.
7 You do not give the weary water to drink, and you
have withheld bread from the hungry.
8 But the man of strength, he has the earth, and the
highly respected man dwells in it.
9 You have sent widows away empty, and the arms
of the fatherless are crushed.
10 Therefore snares are all around you, and sudden
fear alarms you,
2

1824

JOB

or darkness, so that you do not see, and a flood of
water covers you.
12 Is not Eloah in the height of shamayim? And see
the highest stars, how lofty they are!
13 And you have said, ‘What does Ĕl know? Would
He judge through the dense cloud?
14 ‘Clouds screen Him, so that He does not see, and
He moves about the circuit of the shamayim.’
15 Do you observe the old way which wicked men
have trod,
16 who were cut down before their time, whose
foundations were swept away by a flood?
17 They said to Ĕl, ‘Turn aside from us!’ And what did
Ĕl Shaddai do to them?
18 Yet He filled their houses with the good! But the
counsel of the wicked has been far from me.
19 The righteous see it and are glad, and the innocent
mock at them.
20 ‘Truly, our adversaries are cut off, and fire has
consumed their excess.’
21 Be of service to Him, and be at peace; thereby
beraḵah shall come to you.
22 Please accept the Torah from His mouth, and lay
up His words in your heart.
23 If you return to Ĕl Shaddai, you are built up. If you
remove unrighteousness far from your tents,
24 and lay gold in the dust, and the gold of Ophir
among the stones of the wadis,
25 then Ĕl Shaddai shall be your gold and your silver,
strength to you.
26 Then you shall certainly delight in Ĕl Shaddai, and
lift up your face to Eloah.
27 Make your prayer to Him, and He shall hear you,
and you shall pay your vows.
11

1825

IYOḆ

And whatever you decide on shall be established
for you, and light shine on your ways.
29 For they have made low, and you say, ‘Up!’ And
He saves the lowly of eyes.
30 Would He deliver one who is not innocent? So by
the cleanness of your hands you shall be delivered.”
28

23 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“Even today my complaint is bitter; my hand is
heavy on account of my groaning.
3 If only I knew where to find Him, I would come to
His dwelling!
4 I would present my case before Him, and fill my
mouth with proofs.
5 I would know the words which He would answer
me, and understand what He would say to me.
6 Would He contend with me in great power? No!
But He would pay attention to me.
7 There the upright might reason with Him, and I
would go safe forever from my Judge.
8 See, I go forward, but He is not; and backward, but
I do not perceive Him;
9 to the left where He is working, but I do not see;
He turns to the right, but I do not see.
10 For He knows the way that I take. When He has
tried me, I would come forth as gold.
11 My foot has held fast to His steps. I have guarded
His Way, and did not turn aside.
12 I have not strayed from the Command of His lips.
I have treasured the Words of His mouth more than
my portion.
13 But He is One, and who turns Him? And He does
whatever His being has desired.
14 For He completes my portion, and many like these
are with Him.
2

1826

JOB

Therefore I am troubled at His presence; I
consider, and I am afraid of Him.
16 For Ĕl has made me faint-hearted, and Ĕl Shaddai
has alarmed me;
17 because I was not cut off before darkness, and
from my face He has covered the thick darkness.
15

24 “Times are not hidden from Ĕl Shaddai, and why
have not those who know Him seen His days?
2 They remove landmarks; they rob and feed on
flocks;
3 they drive away the donkey of the fatherless; they
take the widow’s ox as a pledge;
4 they turn the needy out of the way; the poor of the
earth have hidden together.
5 See, as wild donkeys in the wilderness they go
about their tasks, eager seekers for prey; the desert
gives his bread for the children.
6 They reap his fodder in a field and they glean the
vineyard of the wicked.
7 They spend the night naked, without a garment,
and without covering in the cold.
8 They are wet with the showers of the hills, and
have embraced a rock for lack of shelter.
9 They snatch away the fatherless from the breast,
and take a pledge from the poor;
10 naked, they shall go about without a garment; and
hungry, they shall take away sheaves.
11 They press out oil within their walls; winepresses
they shall tread, yet suffer thirst.
12 Men groan in the city, and the beings of the
wounded cry out, and Eloah does not regard it as
foolish.
13 They have become rebels against the light; they
have not known His Ways nor remained in His paths.
1827

IYOḆ

The murderer rises at daylight, he slays the poor
and needy, and in the night he is as a thief.
15 And the eye of the adulterer watches for dusk,
saying, ‘No eye sees me.’ And he puts a covering on
the face.
16 In the dark he has broken into houses; by day they
shut themselves up; they have not known light.
17 For all of them morning is the same as the shadow
of death, when he discerns the extreme fears of the
shadow of death.
18 He is swift on the face of the waters; their portion
is cursed in the earth; he does not turn into the way
of vineyards.
19 Drought and heat snatch away snow waters - the
grave, sinners.
20 The womb forgets him, the worm feeds sweetly on
him; he is remembered no more, and wickedness is
broken like a tree;
21 treating evil the barren who does not bear, and
does no good for the widow.
22 But He draws the mighty away with His power - He
rises up, and no one is certain of life.
23 He gives him safety, and he leans on it; yet His
eyes are on their ways.
24 They are lifted up for a little while, then they are
gone, then they shall be brought low. Like all, they are
gathered up, and they are cut off like the heads of
grain.
25 And if it is not so, who proves me a liar, and makes
my word worthless?”
14

25 And Bildaḏ the Shuḥite answered and said,
“Rule and reverence belong to Him, making peace
in His high places.

2

1828

JOB

Is there any number to His armies? And on whom
does His light not rise?
4 So how could man be righteous before Ĕl? Or how
could he be flawless who is born of a woman?
5 See, even the moon does not shine, and the stars
have not been flawless in His eyes,
6 how much less man, a maggot, and a son of man,
a worm?”
3

26 And lyoḇ answered and said,
“How have you helped the powerless, saved an
arm not strong?
3 How have you given counsel to the unwise, or
declared sound advice to many?
4 With whom have you spoken words? And whose
spirit came from you?
5 The dead wait - those under the waters and those
inhabiting them.
6 The grave is naked before Him, and destruction
has no covering.
7 He stretched out the north over emptiness,
hanging the earth upon naught,
8 binding up waters in His thick clouds, and the
cloud is not torn under them,
9 covering the surface of His throne, spreading His
cloud over it.
10 He drew a limit on the surface of the waters, at the
boundary of light and darkness.
11 The columns of the shamayim tremble, and are
stunned at His reproof.
12 By His power He has calmed the sea, and by His
understanding He struck down Rahaḇ.
13 By His Ruaḥ He adorned the shamayim. His hand
whirled the fleeing serpent.
2

1829

IYOḆ

See, these are the fringes of His ways, and how
little a matter is heard of Him! And who understands
the thunder of His power?”

14

27 And lyoḇ again took up his discourse, and said,
“As Ĕl lives, who has turned aside my right-ruling,
and Ĕl Shaddai, who has made my life bitter,
3 as long as my breath is in me, and the spirit of
Eloah in my nostrils,
4 my lips do not speak unrighteousness, nor my
tongue utter deceit.
5 Far be it from me that I grant that you are right.
Until I die I would not turn aside my integrity from me.
6 My righteousness I hold fast, and I do not let it go.
My heart does not reproach me as long as I live.
7 Let my enemy be like the wicked, and he who rises
up against me like the unrighteous.
8 For what is the expectancy of the defiled one,
when He cuts off, when Eloah takes away his life?
9 Would Ĕl hear his cry when distress comes upon
him?
10 Would he delight himself in Ĕl Shaddai - call on
Eloah at all times?
11 Let me teach you by the hand of Ĕl, that which is
with Ĕl Shaddai I do not hide.
12 See, all of you have seen it. Why then are you
altogether vain?
13 This is the portion of a wicked man with Ĕl, and the
inheritance of cruel ones, which they receive from Ĕl
Shaddai:
14 If his children are increased, it is for the sword; and
his offspring shall not have enough to eat.
15 Those who remain of him are buried in death, and
their widows do not weep.
2

1830

JOB

Though he heaps up silver like dust, and lays up
garments like clay 17 he lays up, but the righteous puts it on, and the
innocent divides the silver.
18 He built his house like a moth, like a booth which
a watchman made.
19 He lies down, a rich man, but he is not gathered.
When he opens his eyes, it is no more!
20 Alarms overtake him like a flood; a storm wind
shall steal him away in the night.
21 The east wind takes him away, and he is gone; for
it sweeps him from his place.
22 And it hurls itself against him and does not spare;
he swiftly flees from its power.
23 It claps its hands at him, and it hisses him out of
his place.
16

28 “Indeed, there is a mine for silver, and a place
where gold is refined.
2 Iron is taken from the earth, and copper is smelted
from ore.
3 An end to darkness He has appointed, and to
every limit He is searching, to rocks in deepest
darkness.
4 He opens a shaft far away from people; they are
forgotten by feet; they hang far away from men; they
swing to and fro.
5 Earth, out of which grows food, is turned
underneath as by fire;
6 its stones are the place of sapphires, and it has
dust of gold.
7 No bird of prey knows the path, nor has the hawk’s
eye seen it.
8 The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor has the
fierce lion passed over it.
1831

IYOḆ

He puts his hand on the flint; He shall overturn the
mountains at the roots.
10 He cuts out channels in the rocks, and His eye
sees all that is precious.
11 He dams up the sources of the rivers; and He
brings to light what is hidden.
12 And wisdom - where is it found? And where is the
place of understanding?
13 Man does not know its value, and it is not found in
the land of the living.
14 The deep has said, ‘It is not in me,’ and the sea
has said, ‘It is not with me.’
15 Gold is not given for it, nor is silver weighed out as
its price.
16 It is not valued in the gold of Ophir, in precious
shoham or sapphire.
17 Gold or crystal are not to be compared with it, nor
is it exchanged for a vessel of fine gold.
18 No mention is made of coral or crystal, for the price
of wisdom is above rubies.
19 The topaz of Kush is not to be compared with it,
nor is it valued in clean gold.
20 And wisdom - from where does it come? And
where is the place of understanding?
21 It has been hidden from the eyes of all living, and
concealed from the birds of the shamayim.
22 Destruction and death have said, ‘With our ears
we have heard a report of it.’
23 Elohim has understood its way, and He has known
its place.
24 For He looks to the ends of the earth; sees all
under the shamayim,
25 making a weight for the wind, and measuring out
the waters by measure.
9

1832

JOB

When He made a law for the rain, and a way for
the lightning of thunder,
27 then He saw wisdom and declared it; He prepared
it and also searched it out.
28 And He said to man, ‘See, the reverence of HWHY,
that is wisdom, and to turn from evil is understanding.’
”
26

29 And lyoḇ again took up his discourse, and said,
“Oh, that I were as in months past, as in the days
when Eloah protected me;
3 when His lamp shone on my head, when I walked
in the dark by His light;
4 as I was in the days of my autumn, when the
intimacy of Eloah was on my tent;
5 when Ĕl Shaddai was still with me, when my
children were around me;
6 when my steps were bathed with cream and the
rock poured out rivers of oil for me.
7 When I went out to the gate by the city, to take my
seat in the open square,
8 the young men saw me and hid, and the aged rose
up, they stood;
9 rulers held back their words, and laid a hand on
their mouth;
10 the voice of leaders was hushed, and their tongue
clung to the roof of their mouth.
11 For when the ear heard, it baraḵ me, and when the
eye saw, it gave witness of me;
12 because I rescued the poor who cried out, and the
fatherless who had no helper.
13 The beraḵah of the perishing one would come
upon me, and I made the widow’s heart sing for joy.
14 I put on righteousness, and it robed me; RightRuling was my cloak and turban.
2

1833

IYOḆ

I was eyes to the blind, and I was feet to the lame.
16 I was a father to the poor, and I investigated the
case which I did not know.
17 And I broke the jaws of the perverse, and snatched
the prey from his teeth.
18 Then I thought I would die in my nest, and increase
my days as the sand,
19 my root reaching out to the waters, and dew lying
all night on my branch,
20 my esteem fresh within me, and my bow renewed
in my hand.
21 To me they listened, and they waited, and kept
silent at my counsel.
22 After my words they did not speak again, and my
speech settled on them.
23 And they waited for me like the rain, and they
opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.
24 I smiled at those who did not believe, and the light
of my face they did not dim.
25 I chose the way for them, and sat as chief, and I
dwelt like a sovereign in the army, like one who
comforts mourners.
15

30 “But now they laugh at me, those younger than I,
whose fathers I would have refused to put with my
sheep dogs.
2 Of what use to me is the strength of their hands,
since their manhood power has perished?
3 They are dried up from lack and hunger, they flee
to a parched land, formerly a waste and ruin.
4 They pluck salt herbs by the bushes, and broom
tree roots for their food.
5 They were driven out from the midst, they shouted
at them as at a thief,
1834

JOB

to dwell in the gullies of wadis, holes of the ground
and clefts.
7 Among the bushes they cry out, under the nettles
they huddled together 8 sons of fools, even sons without a name, they
have been whipped out of the land.
9 And now I have become their song, and I am a
byword to them.
10 They have loathed me, they have kept far from
me, and did not refrain from spitting in my face.
11 Because He has loosed my bowstring and afflicted
me, they have thrown off restraint in my presence.
12 At my right hand a brood rises; they pushed away
my feet, and they raise up against me their
destructive ways.
13 They have broken up my path, they gain by my
ruin; no one restrains them.
14 They come as a wide breach; rushing on me under
the ruins.
15 Destructions are turned upon me; they pursue my
life as the wind, and my welfare has passed like a
cloud.
16 And now my life pours itself out; days of affliction
seize me.
17 My bones have been pierced in me at night, and
my gnawings never lie down.
18 By great exertion is my garment changed - it girds
me as the collar of my coat,
19 throwing me into the mud, and I have become like
dust and ashes.
20 I cry out to You, but You do not answer me; I stand
up, and You understand me.
21 You have become cruel to me; with the power of
Your hand You oppose me.
6

1835

IYOḆ

You lift me up to the wind, making me to ride it;
and You melt me in a storm.
23 For I have known that You bring me to death, and
to the house appointed for all living.
24 Yet does not one in a heap of ruins stretch out his
hand, or in calamity cry out for help?
25 Did I not weep for him who was in trouble? Was
my being not grieved for the poor?
26 When I looked for good, then evil came to me. And
when I waited for light, darkness came.
27 My inward parts boiled and did not rest; days of
affliction went before me.
28 I went about blackened, but not by the sun; I stood
up in the assembly, I cried for help.
29 I became a brother of jackals, and a companion of
ostriches.
30 My skin became black upon me, and my bones
burned with heat.
31 So my lyre becomes mourning, and my flute the
sound of weeping.
22

31 “I have made a covenant with my eyes. How then
could I gaze at a maiden?
2 For what is the portion of Eloah from above, and
the inheritance of Ĕl Shaddai from on high?
3 Is it not calamity to the perverse, and strangeness
to the workers of wickedness?
4 Does He not see my ways, and number all my
steps?
5 If I have walked with falsehood, or if my foot has
hurried to deceit,
6 let Him weigh me in a right scale, and let Eloah
know my integrity.

1836

JOB

If my step turns from the Way, or my heart has
gone after my eyes, or if any spot has clung to my
hands,
8 let me sow, and another eat; and let my harvest
be rooted out.
9 If my heart has been enticed by a woman, or if I
have lurked at my neighbour’s door,
10 let my wife grind for another, and let others bow
down over her.
11 For that would be a wicked scheme, and a
punishable wickedness.
12 For that would be a fire that burns to destruction,
and take root among all my increase.
13 If I have refused the plea of my male servant or my
female servant when they complained against me,
14 then what should I do when Ĕl rises up? And when
He punishes, what should I answer Him?
15 Did not He who made me in the womb make him?
And did not One fashion us in the womb?
16 If I have withheld the poor from pleasure, or
caused the widow’s eyes to fail,
17 or eaten my piece of bread by myself, and the
fatherless did not eat of it 18 but from my youth he grew up with me as a father,
and from my mother’s womb I guided her 19 if I have seen anyone perish for lack of garments,
or a poor one without covering;
20 if his loins have not baraḵ me, and he warmed
himself with the fleece of my sheep;
21 if I have raised my hand against the fatherless,
when I saw I had help in the gate;
22 let my arm fall from my shoulder, and my arm be
broken from the bone.
23 For I am in dread of destruction from Ĕl, and from
His excellence I could not escape.
7

1837

IYOḆ

If I have put my trust in gold, or called fine gold my
refuge;
25 if I have rejoiced because my wealth was great,
and because my hand had gained much;
26 if I have looked at the sun when it shines, or the
moon moving in brightness,
27 so that my heart has been secretly enticed, and
my mouth has kissed my hand 28 that too is a punishable wickedness, for I would
have denied Ĕl above.
29 If I have rejoiced when he who hated me was
ruined, or lifted myself up when evil found him 30 also I have not allowed my mouth to sin by asking
for a curse on his life 31 if the men of my tent did not say, ‘Who is there that
has not been satisfied with his meat?’
32 The stranger did not have to spend the night in the
street, for I have opened my doors to the way.
33 If I have covered my transgressions like Aḏam, by
hiding my wickedness in my bosom,
34 then let me fear the great crowd, and dread the
scorn of clans, then I would be silent, and go out of
the door!
35 Who would give me a hearing? See, my signature,
let Ĕl Shaddai answer me, and let my accuser write
an account!
36 Would I not take it up on my shoulder, bind it on
me for a crown?
37 I would declare to Him the number of my steps - I
would approach Him like a prince.
38 If my land cries out against me, or its furrows weep
together;
39 if I have eaten its fruit without payment, or caused
its owners to die;
24

1838

JOB

let thistles grow instead of wheat, and useless
weed instead of barley.” The words of lyoḇ are ended.

40

32 Then these three men ceased to answer lyoḇ,
because he was righteous in his own eyes.
2 And the wrath of Elihu, son of Baraḵ’ĕl the Buzite,
of the clan of Ram, burned against lyoḇ. His wrath
burned because he declared himself right rather than
Elohim.
3 And against his three friends his wrath burned,
because they had found no answer, and pronounced
Elohim wicked.
4 And because they were years older than he, Elihu
had waited to speak to lyoḇ.
5 And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouth of these three men, his wrath burned.
6 And Elihu, son of Baraḵ’ĕl the Buzite, responded
and said, “I am young in years, and you are aged.
Therefore I was afraid to let you know my opinion.
7 I said, ‘Days should speak, and many years should
teach wisdom.’
8 But truly it is the spirit in man and the breath of Ĕl
Shaddai that gives him understanding.
9 The multitude are not wise, nor do the aged
understand right-ruling.
10 Therefore I have said, ‘Listen to me, let me also
make my opinion known to you.’
11 Look, I waited for your words, I listened to your
reasonings, while you searched out what to say.
12 And I paid close attention to you. But look, not one
of you proved lyoḇ wrong, nor answered his words.
13 Lest you say, ‘We have found wisdom’ - it is Ĕl that
drives him away, not man.
14 Now he has not ordered words against me, so I
would not answer him with your words.
1839

IYOḆ

They have broken down; they have not answered
again; words have departed from them.
16 And I have waited, but they do not speak, because
they have stood still, they answered no more.
17 Let me answer on my part; let me also make my
opinion known.
18 For I am filled with words; the spirit within me
presses me.
19 See, within me it is like wine not opened; it shall
burst like new wineskins.
20 Let me speak, so that I find relief; let me open my
lips and answer.
21 Please, let me not show partiality to anyone, nor
let me flatter any man.
22 For I do not know how to flatter, lest my Maker
should soon take me away!
15

33 “And yet, O lyoḇ, please hear my speech and
listen to all my words.
2 See, please! I shall open my mouth, my tongue
shall speak in my mouth.
3 My words are from the uprightness of my heart,
my lips shall speak knowledge clearly.
4 The Ruaḥ of Ĕl has made me, and the breath of Ĕl
Shaddai gives me ḥai.
5 If you are able, answer me, put yourself in order
before me, take your stand.
6 See, I am like you before Ĕl, I too have been
formed out of clay.
7 See, no fear of me should alarm you, nor should
pressure by me be heavy on you.
8 But you have spoken in my hearing, and the sound
of words I hear,
9 ‘I am clear, without transgression; I am innocent,
and I have no wickedness.
1840

JOB

See, He finds occasions against me, He counts
me as His enemy;
11 He puts my feet in the stocks, He watches all my
paths.’
12 See, in this you have not been righteous. Let me
answer you: Eloah is greater than man!
13 Why have you complained against Him? Because
He does not answer all His matters?
14 For Ĕl speaks once, or twice - one does not notice
it 15 in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep
sleep falls upon men, while slumbering on a bed,
16 then He opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction,
17 to turn man from works, and conceal pride from
man.
18 He keeps back his being from the pit, and his life
from passing away by the sword.
19 And he is reproved with pain on his bed, and with
unceasing distress in his bones,
20 so that his life loathes bread, and his being
desirable food.
21 His flesh wastes away, and his bones which were
not seen stick out.
22 And his being draws near the pit, and his life to the
destroyers.
23 If there is a messenger for him, a mediator, one
among a thousand, to show man His straightness,
24 then He shows favour to him, and says, ‘Release
him from going down to the pit, I have found an
atonement.
25 ‘Let his flesh become fresher than a child’s, let him
return to the days of his youth.’
10

1841

IYOḆ

He prays to Eloah, and He accepts him. And he
sees His face with joy, and He restores to man his
righteousness.
27 He sings to men and says, ‘I have sinned, and I
have perverted what was right, and it did not profit
me.’
28 He has redeemed my being from going down to
the pit, and my ḥai sees the light.
29 See, Ĕl does all these - twice, three times with a
man,
30 to bring back his being from the pit, to be
enlightened with the light of the living.
31 Pay attention, lyoḇ, listen to me, keep silent, and
let me speak.
32 If there are words, answer me; speak, for I desire
to declare you right.
33 If not, listen to me, keep silent, and let me teach
you wisdom.”
26

34 And Elihu responded and said,
“Hear my words, you wise men; give ear to me,
you who have knowledge.
3 For the ear tries words as the palate tastes food.
4 Let us choose what is right for us; let us know
among us what is good.
5 For lyoḇ has said, ‘I am righteous, but Ĕl has taken
away my right.
6 Would I lie concerning my right? My wound is
incurable - without transgression.’
7 What man is like lyoḇ, who drinks mocking like
water,
8 who goes in company with the workers of
wickedness, and walks with men of wickedness?
9 For he has said, ‘It does not profit a man that he
takes delight in Elohim.’
2

1842

JOB

Therefore, listen to me, you men of heart: far be it
from Ĕl to do wickedly, and from Ĕl Shaddai to commit
unrighteousness.
11 For He repays man’s work to him, and makes man
to find a reward according to his path.
12 The truth is, Ĕl does not do wickedly, and Ĕl
Shaddai does not twist right-ruling.
13 Who has assigned to Him the earth? And who has
laid out all the world?
14 If He applies His heart to him, should He gather to
Himself his spirit and his breath,
15 all flesh would expire together and man return to
dust.
16 If you understand, hear this! Give ear to the sound
of my words:
17 Should the one who hates right-ruling govern? Or
would you declare a most righteous one wicked?
18 Who shall say to a sovereign: ‘Beliya’al,’ to nobles:
‘Wicked one’? 19 who is not partial to princes, nor regards the rich
more than the poor? For they are all the work of His
hands.
20 In a moment they die, in the middle of the night;
the people are shaken and pass away; and the mighty
are taken away without a hand.
21 For His eyes are on the ways of man, and He sees
all his steps.
22 There is no darkness nor shadow of death where
the workers of wickedness hide themselves.
23 For He appoints a man no stated time to appear
before Ĕl in right-ruling.
24 He breaks in pieces the mighty, without inquiry,
and stands others in their place.
25 Truly, He knows their works, and He shall
overthrow in the night, and they are crushed.
10

1843

IYOḆ

As wicked ones He slaps them in the presence of
onlookers,
27 because they turned from following Him, and they
regarded not all His Ways,
28 so as to cause the cry of the poor to come to Him;
for He hears the cry of the afflicted.
29 And when He is silent, who would then cause
trouble? And when He hides His face, who then sees
Him, whether it is against a nation or a man alone?
30 So that a defiled one should not reign, lest the
people be ensnared.
31 For has anyone said to Ĕl, ‘I have taken away, I do
not act corruptly.
32 ‘Teach me what I do not see. If I have done
unrighteousness, I shall not do so again’?
33 Should He repay you because you have refused?
For you choose, and not I, therefore speak what you
know.
34 Let men of heart say to me, and a wise man who
listens to me:
35 ‘lyoḇ does not speak with knowledge, and his
words are without wisdom.’
36 Would that lyoḇ be tried to the end, since his
answers are like those of wicked men!
37 For he adds rebellion to his sin - he claps among
us, and multiplies his words against Ĕl.”
26

35 And Elihu responded and said,
“Do you think this is right? Do you say, ‘My
righteousness is more than that of Ĕl’?
3 For you say, ‘Of what use is it to you? What do I
gain more than if I had sinned?’
4 Let me answer you and your friends with you.
5 Look to the shamayim, and see. And consider the
clouds which are higher than you.
2

1844

JOB

If you sin, what would you do against Him? If your
transgressions are increased, what would you do to
Him?
7 If you are righteous, what do you give Him? Or
what does He receive from your hand?
8 Your wickedness is for a man like yourself, and
your righteousness for a son of man.
9 Because of the multitude of oppressions they cry
out; they cry out for help because of the arm of the
many.
10 And no one says, ‘Where is Eloah my Maker, who
gives songs in the night,
11 teaching us more than the beasts of the earth, and
makes us wiser than the birds of the shamayim?’
12 There they cry, but He answers not, because of
the pride of evil ones.
13 Only, it is false that Ĕl does not hear, and that Ĕl
Shaddai pays no attention to it.
14 Although you say you do not see Him, yet rightruling is before Him, and you wait for Him.
15 And now, is it for naught that His displeasure has
come? Yet He has not taken note of extreme
arrogance,
16 so lyoḇ opens his mouth in vain, he increases
words without knowledge.”
6

36 Then Elihu continued and said,
“Bear with me a little, and let me show you there
is still more to say for Eloah.
3 I bring my knowledge from afar and ascribe
righteousness to my Maker.
4 For truly my words are not false; the One perfect
in knowledge is with you.
5 See, Ĕl is mighty, but rejects no one - mighty in
strength of heart.
2

1845

IYOḆ

He does not keep the wicked alive, but gives rightruling to the oppressed ones.
7 He does not withdraw His eyes from the righteous,
and sovereigns on the throne, and seats them
forever, and they are exalted.
8 And if they are bound in shackles, caught in the
cords of affliction,
9 then He reveals to them their work, and their
transgressions, that they behaved proudly.
10 And He opens their ear for discipline, and
commands that they turn back from wickedness.
11 If they obey and serve, they complete their days in
goodness, and their years in pleasantness.
12 But if they do not obey, they perish by the sword,
and die without knowledge.
13 But the defiled ones in heart become enraged - let
them not cry for help when He binds them.
14 Their being dies in youth, and their life among the
male prostitutes.
15 He rescues the afflicted one in his affliction, and
opens their ears in oppression.
16 And He also would have brought you out of
distress, into a broad place where there is no
restraint. And what is put on your table would be filled
with rich food.
17 But you are filled with the judgment of the wicked,
judgment and right-ruling take hold of you.
18 Because wrath would entice you to scoffing. And
do not let a large bribe turn you aside.
19 Would He value your riches? No, not precious ore,
nor all your strength!
20 Do not long for the night, when people go up in
their place.
21 Beware, do not turn to wickedness, for you have
chosen this rather than affliction.
6

1846

JOB

See, Ĕl is exalted by His power; who is a Teacher
like Him?
23 Who has appointed Him His way, or who has said,
‘You have worked unrighteousness’?
24 Remember to extol His work, of which men have
sung.
25 All men have seen it, man looks on it from afar.
26 See, Ĕl is great, beyond our understanding, and
we do not know the number of His years.
27 For He draws up drops of water, which distil as
rain from the mist,
28 which the clouds drop down - pour down in
showers on man.
29 Also, who understands the spreading of clouds,
the crashing from His booth?
30 See, He has spread his light upon it, and He has
covered the depths of the sea.
31 For by these He judges the peoples; He gives
plenty of food.
32 He has covered His hands with lightning, and
commands it to strike.
33 Its noise declares concerning Him, also the cattle,
as to what is coming up.
22

37 “At this too my heart trembles, and leaps from its
place.
2 Listen, listen to the trembling of His voice, and the
sound that comes from His mouth.
3 He lets it loose under all the shamayim, and His
lightning to the ends of the earth.
4 After it a voice roars. He thunders with the voice of
His excellency, and He does not hold them back
when His voice is heard.
5 Ĕl thunders wondrously with His voice; doing great
deeds, which we do not understand.
1847

IYOḆ

For He says to the snow, ‘Be on the earth,’ also to
the gentle rain and the heavy rain of His strength.
7 He seals up the hand of every man, for all men to
know His work.
8 Then the beast goes into its lair, and they stay in
their dens.
9 From the room of the south comes the whirlwind,
and cold from the scattering winds of the north.
10 By the breath of Ĕl ice is given, and the expanse
of water becomes solid.
11 He also loads the thick clouds with moisture; He
scatters His bright clouds.
12 And they swirl about, being turned by His
guidance, to do whatever He commands them on the
face of the earthly world.
13 He causes it to come, whether as a rod, or for His
land, or for kindness.
14 Listen to this, O lyoḇ, stand still and consider the
wonders of Ĕl.
15 Do you know when Eloah placed them, and
caused the lightning of His cloud to shine?
16 Do you know the balancing of the clouds, the
wonders of the One perfect in knowledge?
17 Why are your garments hot, when the earth is
stilled from the south?
18 Did you, with Him, spread out the clouds, strong
as a hard mirror?
19 Teach us what we should say to Him; we do not
put in order because of darkness.
20 Should He be told that I would speak? Would any
man ask to be swallowed up?
21 And now, they shall not look on the light that is
bright behind the clouds, when the wind has passed
and cleared them.
6

1848

JOB

From the golden north it comes - with Eloah is
awesome excellency.
23 The Almighty, we have not found Him out, He is
exalted in power and right-ruling and great in
righteousness - He does not oppress.
24 Therefore men revere Him. He does not regard
any who are wise of heart.”
22

38 Then HWHY answered lyoḇ out of the whirlwind,
and said,
2 “Who is this who darkens counsel by words
without knowledge?
3 Now gird up your loins like a man, and I ask you,
and you answer Me.
4 Where were you when I laid the foundations of the
earth? Declare, if you have understanding.
5 Who appointed its measurements, if you know? Or
who stretched the line upon it?
6 Upon what were its foundations sunk? Or who laid
its corner-stone,
7 when the morning stars sang together, and all the
sons of Elohim shouted for joy?
8 Or enclosed the sea with doors, when it burst forth
and came from the womb;
9 when I made the clouds its garment, and thick
darkness its swaddling band;
10 and assigned for it My law, and put bars and
doors;
11 and said, ‘This far you have come, but no farther,
and here your proud waves stop?’
12 Have you ever commanded the morning, and
caused the dawn to know its place,
13 to take hold of the ends of the earth, and the
wicked be shaken out of it?
1849

IYOḆ

It is changed like clay under a seal, and they stand
out like a garment.
15 And their light is withheld from the wicked, and the
arm lifted up is broken.
16 Have you come to the sources of the sea? Or have
you walked about in the recesses of the deep?
17 Were the gates of death revealed to you? Or have
you seen the gates of the shadow of death?
18 Have you understood the breadth of the earth?
Declare, if you know it all.
19 Where is the way to the dwelling of light? And
darkness, where is its place,
20 that you should take it to its boundary, and know
the paths to its home?
21 Do you know? For you would have been born
then, and the number of your days been many!
22 Have you entered into the storehouses of snow, or
have you seen the storehouses of hail,
23 which I have kept for the time of distress, for the
day of fighting and battle?
24 Where is the way that light is divided, or the east
wind scattered over the earth?
25 Who has cleft a channel for the overflowing water,
or a way for the thunderclaps,
26 to make rain fall on land where no one is, a
wilderness in which there is no man;
27 to satisfy the wild and waste places, and to make
the seeds of grass to sprout?
28 Does the rain have a father? Or who has brought
forth the drops of dew?
29 From whose womb comes the ice? And who gave
birth to the frost of the shamayim?
30 The waters harden like stone, and the surface of
the deep is frozen.
14

1850

JOB

Do you bind the bands of Kimah, or loosen the
cords of Kesil?
32 Do you bring out the constellations in its season?
Or do you lead the Bear with its sons?
33 Do you know the laws of the shamayim? Or do you
apply their rule over the earth?
34 Do you lift up your voice to the clouds, so that
floods of water cover you?
35 Do you send out lightnings, and they go and say
to you, ‘Here we are!’?
36 Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who
has given understanding to the heart?
37 Who has wisdom to count the clouds, or to tip over
the pitchers of the shamayim,
38 when the dust hardens in clumps, and the clods
cling together?
39 Do you hunt the prey for the lion, or satisfy the
appetite of the young lions,
40 when they crouch in dens, sit in the cover of their
hiding place?
41 Who provides food for the raven, when its young
ones cry to Ĕl, wander about without food?
31

39 “Do you know the time when the wild mountain
goats bear young? Or do you observe when the deer
gives birth?
2 Do you number the months they complete? Or do
you know the time when they bear young?
3 They bow down, they bring forth their young, their
labour pains are ended.
4 Their young ones are thriving, they grow up in the
field. They shall leave and shall not return to them.
5 Who let the wild donkey free? Who loosed the
bonds of the wild donkey,
1851

IYOḆ

whose home I have made the desert, and the salt
land his dwelling?
7 He laughs at the commotion of the city; he does
not hear the shouts of the driver.
8 The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he
searches for all that is green.
9 Would the wild ox be pleased to serve you? Or
spend the night by your feeding trough?
10 If you bind the wild ox in the furrow with ropes,
would he plough the valleys behind you?
11 Would you rely on his great strength? Or would
you leave your labour to him?
12 Would you trust him to bring home your grain, and
gather it to your threshing-floor?
13 The wings of the ostrich flap joyously, but they are
not the pinions and plumage of a stork.
14 She leaves her eggs on the ground, and warms
them in the dust;
15 and she forgets that a foot might crush them, or a
wild beast tread on them.
16 She treats her young harshly, as if not hers; her
toil is in vain, without fear,
17 because Eloah has made her forget wisdom, and
did not endow her with understanding.
18 When she lifts herself on high, she laughs at the
horse and its rider.
19 Have you given the horse strength? Have you
covered his neck with a mane?
20 Would you make him leap like a locust? His
splendid snorting is frightening.
21 He paws in the valley, and rejoices in strength. He
gallops into the clash of arms.
22 He laughs at fear, and is not frightened; nor does
he turn back from the sword.
6

1852

JOB

The quiver rattles against him, the glittering spear
and lance.
24 He eats up the ground with fierceness and rage,
and he does not stand still when the ram’s horn
sounds.
25 At the blast of the ram’s horn he says, ‘Aha!’ And
from afar he smells the battle, the thunder of
commanders and shouting.
26 Does the hawk fly by your wisdom, spreading its
wings toward the south?
27 Does the eagle mount up at your command, and
make its nest on high?
28 It dwells on the rock, and lodges on the crag of the
rock and the stronghold.
29 From there it searches out the prey, its eyes see it
from afar.
30 And its young ones suck up blood. And where the
slain are, there it is!”
23

40 And HWHY answered lyoḇ, and said,
“Should a reprover contend with Ĕl Shaddai? Let
him who reproves Eloah answer it.”
3 And lyoḇ answered HWHY and said,
4 “See, I am insignificant, what would I answer You?
I lay my hand over my mouth.
5 Once I have spoken; but I have no answer - and
twice, but I say no more.”
6 Then HWHY answered lyoḇ out of the whirlwind,
and said,
7 “Now gird up your loins like a man; I ask you, and
you answer Me.
8 Would you also put aside My judgment? Would
you pronounce Me wicked, and you be declared
righteous?
2

1853

IYOḆ

Or do you have an arm like Ĕl? Or do you thunder
with a voice like His?
10 Deck yourself, please, with excellency and
grandeur, and put on esteem and splendour.
11 Scatter abroad the rage of your wrath, and look on
everyone who is proud and bring him low.
12 Look on everyone who is proud, humble him. And
tread down the wicked in their place.
13 Hide them in the dust together, bind their faces in
obscurity.
14 Then even I would confess to you that your own
right hand saves you.
15 See now, Behĕmoth, which I made along with you
- he eats grass like an ox.
16 See now, his strength is in his loins, and his power
is in his stomach muscles.
17 He bends his tail like a cedar; the sinews of his
thighs are knit together.
18 His bones are like tubes of bronze, his ribs like
bars of iron.
19 He is the beginning of the ways of Ĕl. His Maker
brings near His sword.
20 For the mountains yield food for him, and all the
beasts of the field play there.
21 He lies under the slender trees, under cover of
reed and swamp.
22 The slender trees cover him with their shade; the
willows by the stream surround him.
23 See, if a river rages, he is not alarmed; he feels
safe, even if the Yardĕn gushes into his mouth.
24 Before his eyes, shall he be caught, with snares?
Or nose pierced?
9

41 “Would you draw out Liwiathan with a hook, or
snare his tongue with a line which you lower?
1854

JOB

Would you put a cord through his nose, or pierce
his jaw with a hook?
3 Would he keep on pleading with you? Would he
speak softly to you?
4 Would he make a covenant with you to be taken
as a servant forever?
5 Would you play with him as with a bird? Or leash
him for your young girls?
6 Would partners bargain over him? Would they
divide him among the merchants?
7 Fill his skin with harpoons? Or his head with
fishing spears?
8 Put your hand on him - think of the struggle! Do
not do it again!
9 See, any expectation of him is disappointed - he is
laid low even at the sight of him!
10 No one is so foolhardy to wake him up. Who then
is able to stand against Me?
11 Who has given to Me first, that I should repay him
- under all the shamayim that is Mine?
12 I would not keep silent concerning his limbs, or his
mighty power, or his fair frame.
13 Who shall take off the surface of his skin? Who
approaches him with a double bridle?
14 Who shall open the doors of his face, with his
frightening teeth all around?
15 Rows of scales are his pride - closed up, a binding
seal.
16 One to the other they fit closely, not even a breath
enters between them.
17 They are joined one to another, they stick together
and are not separated.
18 His sneezings flash forth light, and his eyes are
like the eyelids of the morning.
2

1855

IYOḆ

Out of his mouth go firebrands - sparks of fire
shoot out.
20 Out of his nostrils comes smoke, like a boiling pot
or kettle.
21 His breath lights coals on fire, and a flame goes
out of his mouth.
22 Strength dwells in his neck, and fear leaps before
him.
23 The folds of his flesh cling together. They are firm
on him, immovable.
24 His heart is as hard as stone, even as hard as the
lower millstone.
25 When he raises himself up, the mighty are afraid.
Because of his crashings they are bewildered.
26 No sword that reaches him prevails, spear, dart,
or lance.
27 He reckons iron as straw, bronze as rotten wood.
28 The arrow does not make him flee, sling-stones
become like stubble to him.
29 Clubs are reckoned as straw, he laughs at the
rattle of a lance.
30 His undersides are like sharp potsherds. He
sprawls on the mud like a threshing-sledge.
31 He makes the deep boil like a pot, he makes the
sea like a pot of ointment.
32 He leaves a shining path behind him. One would
think the deep to be grey-haired.
33 No one on earth is like him - one made without
fear.
34 He sees all that is haughty. He is sovereign over
all the sons of pride.”
19

42 And lyoḇ answered HWHY and said,
“You know that You are able to do all, and that no
purpose is withheld from You.

2

1856

JOB

Who is this that hides counsel without knowledge?
Therefore I declared but I did not understand,
wonders beyond me, which I did not know.
4 Listen, please, and let me speak. I ask You, then
would You make it known to me?’
5 I have heard of You by the hearing of the ear, but
now my eye sees You.
6 Therefore I recant, and repent in dust and ashes.”
7 And it came to be, after HWHY had spoken these
words to lyoḇ, that HWHY said to Eliphaz the Tĕmanite,
“My wrath has burned against you and your two
friends, for you have not spoken of Me what is right,
as did My servant lyoḇ.
8 And now, take seven bulls and seven rams, and
go to My servant lyoḇ, and offer up a burnt offering for
yourselves. And let My servant lyoḇ pray for you - for
I accept him - lest I punish you; because you have not
spoken of Me what is right, as did My servant lyoḇ.”
9 So Eliphaz the Tĕmanite and Bildaḏ the Shuḥite,
Tsophar the Na’amathite went and did as HWHY
commanded them. And HWHY accepted the face of
lyoḇ.
10 And HWHY turned the captivity of lyoḇ when he
prayed for his friends. And HWHY gave lyoḇ twice as
much as he had before.
11 And all his brothers, and all his sisters, and all
those who had been his friends before, came to him
and ate food with him in his house. And they
sympathised with him and comforted him for all the
evil that HWHY had brought upon him. And they each
gave him a qesitah and each one a ring of gold.
12 And HWHY baraḵ the latter days of lyoḇ more than
his beginning; for he had fourteen thousand sheep,
and six thousand camels, and one thousand yoke of
oxen, and one thousand female donkeys.
3

1857

IYOḆ

And he had seven sons and three daughters.
14 And he called the name of the first Yemimah, and
the name of the second Qetsi’ah, and the name of the
third Qeren ha’Puḵ.
15 And in all the land were found no women so pretty
as the daughters of lyoḇ. And their father gave them
an inheritance among their brothers.
16 And after this lyoḇ lived one hundred and forty
years, and saw his children and grandchildren for four
generations.
17 And lyoḇ died, old and satisfied with days.
13

1858

SONG OF SONGS

SHIR HA’SHIRIM
‫ שיר השירים‬mYRYvh RYv

1 The song of songs, which is Shelomoh’s.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,
For your loves are better than wine.
3 For fragrance your oils are good.
Your name is oil poured forth, therefore the maidens
love you.
4 Draw me! We run after you.
The sovereign has brought me into his inner rooms.
We exult and rejoice in you.
We praise your loves more than wine.
Rightly do they love you.
5 I am dark, but lovely,
O daughters of Yerushalayim,
Like the tents of Qĕḏar,
Like the curtains of Shelomoh.
6 Do not look upon me, because I am dark,
Because the sun has tanned me.
My mother’s sons were displeased with me.
They made me the keeper of the vineyards,
My own vineyard I have not kept.
7 Make known to me, O you whom my being loves,
Where you pasture,
Where you rest them at noon.
For why should I be as one who is veiled
Beside the flocks of your companions?
8 If you do not know, O fairest among women,
Go in the footsteps of the flock,
And feed your little goats beside the shepherds’
dwellings.
9 I have compared you, my love,
To my filly among Pharaoh’s chariots.
2

1859

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

Your cheeks are pretty with ornaments,
Your neck with strings of beads.
11 Let us make you ornaments of gold
With studs of silver.
12 While the sovereign is at his table,
My nard shall give its fragrance.
13 My beloved is a bundle of myrrh to me,
Lying between my breasts.
14 My beloved is to me a cluster of henna blooms
In the vineyards of Ĕyn Geḏi.
15 See, you are lovely, my love!
See, you are lovely!
Your eyes are as doves.
16 See, you are handsome, my beloved!
Even pleasant!
Also our bed is green.
17 The beams of our houses are cedar,
Our rafters are of fir.
10

2 I am the rose of Sharon,
The lily of the valleys.
2 Like a lily among thorns,
So is my love among the daughters.
3 Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,
So is my beloved among the sons.
I delighted in his shade and sat down,
And his fruit was sweet to my taste.
4 He brought me to the house of wine,
And his banner over me was love.
5 “Strengthen me with raisin cakes,
Refresh me with apples,
For I am faint with love.”
6 His left hand is under my head,
And his right hand embraces me.
1860

SONG OF SONGS

I have put you under oath,
O daughters of Yerushalayim,
By the gazelles or by the does of the field,
Do not stir up nor awaken love until it pleases.
8 The voice of my beloved!
See, he is coming,
Leaping on the mountains,
Skipping on the hills.
9 My beloved is like a gazelle or like a young stag.
See, he is standing behind our wall,
Looking through the windows,
Peering through the lattice.
10 My beloved responded and said to me,
“Rise up, my love,
My lovely one, and come away.
11 “For look, the winter is past,
The rain is over, gone.
12 “The flowers have appeared in the earth;
The time of singing has come,
And the voice of the turtledove
Is heard in our land.
13 “The fig tree has ripened her figs,
And the vines with the tender grapes have given a
good fragrance.
Rise up, my love,
My lovely one, and come away!
14 “O my dove, in the clefts of the rock,
In the covering of the cliff,
Let me see your appearance,
Let me hear your voice;
For your voice is sweet,
And your appearance is lovely.”
15 Catch the foxes for us,
The little foxes that spoil the vines,
And our vines are in blossom.
7

1861

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

My beloved is mine, and I am his.
He feeds among the lilies.
17 Until the day breaks and the shadows have fled,
Turn, my beloved,
And be like a gazelle or a young stag
On the mountains of Bether.
16

3 On my bed at night
I sought the beloved of my being;
I sought him, but I did not find him.
2 “Come, let me arise, and go about the city,
In the streets and in the broad places
I seek the beloved of my being.”
I sought him, but I did not find him.
3 The watchmen who go about the city found me,
to whom I said,
“Have you seen the beloved of my being?”
4 Scarcely had I passed by them,
When I found the beloved of my being.
I held him and would not let him go,
Until I had brought him to the house of my mother,
And into the room of her who conceived me.
5 I have put you under oath,
O daughters of Yerushalayim,
By the gazelles or by the does of the field,
Do not stir up nor awaken love until it pleases.
6 Who is this coming out of the wilderness
Like columns of smoke,
Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
7 From all the merchant’s fragrant powders?
See, it is Shelomoh’s couch Sixty mighty men are around it,
Of the mighty men of Yisra’ĕl,
8 All of them holding swords,
Skilled in battle,
1862

SONG OF SONGS

Each one has his sword on his thigh
Because of fear in the night.
9 Sovereign Shelomoh made himself
A palanquin of the wood of Leḇanon;
10 He made its posts of silver,
Its support of gold, its seat of purple,
Within it was decked with love
By the daughters of Yerushalayim.
11 Go forth, O daughters of Tsiyon,
And see Sovereign Shelomoh with the crown
With which his mother crowned him on the day of his
wedding,
And on the day of his gladness of heart.

4 See, you are lovely, my love!
See, you are lovely!
Your eyes are as doves behind your veil.
Your hair is like a flock of goats,
Going down from Mount Gil’aḏ.
2 Your teeth are like a shorn flock
Which have come up from the washing,
All of them bear twins,
And not one loses her young.
3 Your lips are like a cord of scarlet,
And your speech is lovely.
Your cheeks behind your veil
Are like a piece of pomegranate.
4 Your neck is like the tower of Dawiḏ
Built for an armoury,
On which hang a thousand shields,
All the armour of mighty men.
5 Your two breasts are like two fawns,
Twins of a gazelle,
Pasturing among the lilies.
1863

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

Until the day breaks
And the shadows have fled,
I shall go my way to the mountain of myrrh,
And to the hill of frankincense.
7 You are all lovely, my love,
And not a blemish is on you.
8 Come with me from Leḇanon,
My bride, with me from Leḇanon.
Look from the top of Amanah,
From the top of Shenir and Ḥermon,
From the dens of lions,
From the mountains of the leopards.
9 You have put heart into me,
My sister, my bride;
You have put heart into me
With one look from your eyes,
With one bead of your necklace.
10 How sweet have been your loves,
My sister, my bride!
How much better than wine are your loves,
And the fragrance of your perfumes than all spices!
11 Your lips, O my bride,
Drip as the honeycomb;
Honey and milk are under your tongue.
And the fragrance of your garments
Is like the fragrance of Leḇanon.
12 A garden locked is my sister, my bride,
A fountain locked, a spring sealed up.
13 Your plants are an orchard of pomegranates,
With pleasant fruits,
With henna, nard,
14 Nard and saffron,
Calamus and cinnamon,
With all trees of frankincense,
6

1864

SONG OF SONGS

Myrrh and aloes,
With all the chief spices;
15 A garden spring,
A well of living waters,
And streams from Leḇanon.
16 Awake, O north wind,
And come, O south!
Blow upon my garden,
Let its spices flow out.
Let my beloved come to his garden
And eat its pleasant fruits.

5 I have come to my garden,
My sister, my bride;
I have plucked my myrrh with my spice;
I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey;
I have drunk my wine with my milk.
Eat, O friends!
Drink, and drink deeply,
O beloved ones!
2 I was sleeping,
But my heart was awake The voice of my beloved! He knocks,
“Open for me, my sister,
My love, my dove, my perfect one;
For my head is drenched with dew,
My locks with the drops of the night.”
3 I have taken off my robe,
Should I put it on?
I have washed my feet,
Should I dirty them?
4 My beloved put his hand by the latch,
And my feelings were deeply moved for him.
5 I rose to open for my beloved,
And my hands dripped with myrrh,
1865

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

My fingers with flowing myrrh,
On the handles of the lock.
6 I opened for my beloved,
But my beloved had turned away, gone.
My being went out when he spoke.
I sought him, but I could not find him;
I called him, but he gave me no answer.
7 The watchmen found me,
Who went about the city.
They struck me, they bruised me;
The keepers of the walls
Lifted my veil from me.
8 I have put you under oath,
O daughters of Yerushalayim,
If you find my beloved,
That you inform him
That I am faint with love!
9 What kind of a beloved is your beloved,
O fairest among women?
What kind of a beloved is your beloved,
That you have put us under oath?
10 My beloved is dazzling and tanned,
Chief among ten thousand.
11 His head is refined gold;
His locks are wavy,
Black as a raven.
12 His eyes are like doves
By streams of waters,
Washed with milk,
And fitly placed.
13 His cheeks are like a bed of spices,
A raised bed of scented plants.
His lips are lilies,
Dripping, flowing myrrh.
1866

SONG OF SONGS

His hands are rods of gold
Filled with beryl.
His body is carved ivory
Covered with sapphires.
15 His legs are columns of marble
Founded on sockets of fine gold.
His appearance is like Leḇanon,
Choice as the cedars.
16 His mouth is most sweet,
And he is altogether lovely.
This is my beloved, and this is my friend,
O daughters of Yerushalayim!
14

6 “Where has your beloved gone,
O fairest among women?
Where has your beloved turned aside?
Let us seek him with you.”
2 My beloved went down to his garden,
To the beds of spices,
To feed in the gardens,
And to gather lilies.
3 I am my beloved’s,
And my beloved is mine.
He feeds among the lilies.
4 O my love, you are as lovely as Tirtsah,
Lovely as Yerushalayim,
Awesome as an army with banners!
5 Turn your eyes away from me,
Because they overcome me.
Your hair is like a flock of goats
That have hopped down from Gil’aḏ.
6 Your teeth are like a flock of sheep
That have come up from the washing;
All of them bear twins,
And not one among them has lost her young.
1867

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

Your cheeks behind your veil
Are like a piece of pomegranate.
8 There are sixty sovereignesses
And eighty concubines,
And innumerable maidens.
9 My dove, my perfect one,
Is the only one, the only one of her mother,
The choice of the one who bore her.
The daughters saw, and called her baruḵ,
Sovereignesses and concubines,
And they praised her.
10 Who is she who shines forth as the morning
Lovely as the moon,
Clear as the sun,
Awesome as an army with banners?
11 I went down to the garden of nuts
To see the budding of the wadi,
To see whether the vine had budded
And the pomegranates had bloomed.
12 I did not know,
My desire made me
As the chariots of my noble people.
13 Return, return,
O Shulammite;
Return, return,
And let us look upon you!
Why should you look upon the Shulammite,
As it were the dance of two armies?
7

7 How lovely are your feet in sandals,
O daughter of a noble!
The curves of your thighs are like ornaments,
The work of a craftsman’s hands.
2 Your navel is a rounded bowl
Let it not lack mixed wine.
1868

SONG OF SONGS

Your body is a heap of wheat,
Hedged about with lilies.
3 Your two breasts are like two fawns,
Twins of a gazelle.
4 Your neck is like an ivory tower,
Your eyes, pools in Ḥeshbon
By the gate of Bath Rabbim.
Your nose is like the tower of Leḇanon
Looking to Dammeseq.
5 Your head upon you is like Mount Karmel,
And the hair of your head like purple;
The sovereign is held captive, by the ringlets.
6 How lovely and how pleasant you are,
O love, in delights!
7 This stature of yours compares to a palm tree,
And your breasts to clusters.
8 I said, “Let me go up to the palm tree,
Let me take hold of its tips.”
And please, let your breasts be like clusters of the
vine,
And the fragrance of your breath like apples,
9 And your palate like the best wine,
Going down smoothly for my beloved,
Flowing gently, slumbering lips.
10 I am my beloved’s,
And his desire is toward me.
11 Come, my beloved,
Let us go forth to the field;
Let us stay in the villages.
12 Let us get up early to the vineyards;
Let us see whether the vine has budded,
The grape blossoms have opened,
The pomegranates have bloomed.
There I give you my loves.
1869

SHIR HA’SHIRIM

The love-apples have given fragrance,
And at our gates are all pleasantries,
New and old,
Which I have laid up for you, my beloved.

13

8 Who would make you a brother to me,
Who nursed at my mother’s breasts?
Should I find you outside,
I would kiss you;
I would not be despised.
2 I would lead you,
I would bring you into the house of my mother,
She who has taught me.
I would give you spiced wine to drink,
Of the juice of my pomegranate.
3 His left hand is under my head,
And his right hand embraces me.
4 I have put you under oath,
O daughters of Yerushalayim,
Do not stir up or awake
Love until it pleases.
5 Who is this coming up from the wilderness,
Leaning upon her beloved?
Under the apple tree I awakened you.
There your mother was in labour with you;
There she was in labour, gave birth to you.
6 Put me as a seal upon your heart,
As a seal upon your arm;
For love is as strong as death,
Jealousy as cruel as the grave;
Its flames are flames of fire,
A flame of Yah!
7 Many waters are unable to extinguish love,
And floods do not wash it away.
1870

SONG OF SONGS

If one would give all the wealth of his house for love,
It would be utterly scorned.
8 We have a little sister,
And she has no breasts.
What do we do for our sister
In the day when she is spoken for?
9 If she is a wall,
We build upon her a battlement of silver.
And if she is a door,
We would enclose her with boards of cedar.
10 I am a wall,
And my breasts like towers;
So I became in his eyes
As one who found peace.
11 Shelomoh had a vineyard
In Ba’al Hamon;
He let out the vineyard to keepers;
Each one was to bring for its fruit
A thousand pieces of silver.
12 My own vineyard is before me.
O Shelomoh, a thousand belongs to you,
And two hundred to those who keep its fruit.
13 You who sit in the gardens,
The companions listen for your voice;
Let me hear it!
14 Hurry, my beloved,
And be like a gazelle or a young stag
On the mountains of spices.

1871

RUTH

RUTH
‫ רות‬tWR

1 And it came to be, in the days when the rulers ruled,
that there was a scarcity of food in the land. And a man
from Bĕyth Leḥem, Yahuḏah, went to sojourn in the
fields of Mo’aḇ, he and his wife and his two sons.
2 And the name of the man was Elimeleḵ, and the
name of his wife was Na’omi, and the names of his
two sons were Maḥlon and Kilyon - Ephrathites of
Bĕyth Leḥem, Yahuḏah. And they went to the fields
of Mo’aḇ and came to be there.
3 And Elimeleḵ, husband of Na’omi, died. And she
was left with her two sons.
4 And they took wives of the women of Mo’aḇ, the
name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the
other Ruth. And they dwelt there about ten years.
5 And Maḥlon and Kilyon also died, both of them, so
the woman was bereaved of her two sons and of her
husband.
6 And she rose up, with her daughters-in-law, and
returned from the fields of Mo’aḇ, for she had heard
in the fields of Mo’aḇ that HWHY had visited His people
in giving them bread.
7 And she left the place where she was, and her two
daughters-in-law with her. And they went on the way
to return to the land of Yahuḏah.
8 And Na’omi said to her two daughters-in-law, “Go,
return each to her mother’s house. HWHY show
kindness to you, as you have shown to the dead and
to me.
9 “HWHY grant that you find rest, each in the house
of her husband.” Then she kissed them, and they
lifted up their voices and wept.
1872

RUTH

And they said to her, “No, we shall go back with
you to your people.”
11 But Na’omi said, “Go back, my daughters, why go
with me? Have I still sons in my womb, that they
should become your husbands?
12 “Go back, my daughters, go your way, for I am too
old to have a husband. If I should say I have
expectancy, even if I should have a husband tonight
and should also bear sons,
13 would you wait for them till they were grown?
Would you shut yourselves up, not to have a
husband? No, my daughters, for it is much more bitter
for me than for you, because the hand of HWHY has
gone out against me!”
14 And they lifted up their voices and wept again. And
Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clung to
her.
15 And she said, “Look, your sister-in-law has gone
back to her people and to her mighty ones. Go back,
follow your sister-in-law.”
16 But Ruth said, “Do not urge me to leave you, or to
go back from following after you. For wherever you
go, I go; and wherever you stop over, I stop over. Your
people is my people, and your Elohim is my Elohim.
17 “Where you die, I die, and there I shall be buried.
HWHY do so to me, and more also - for death itself
parts you and me.”
18 And when she saw that she was strengthening
herself to go with her, she ceased to speak to her.
19 And both of them went until they came to Bĕyth
Leḥem. And it came to be, when they had come to
Bĕyth Leḥem, that all the city was moved because of
them, and they said, “Is this Na’omi?”
20 And she said to them, “Do not call me Na’omi, call
me Mara, for Ĕl Shaddai has dealt very bitterly with
me.
10

1873

RUTH

“I went out filled, and HWHY has brought me back
empty. Why do you call me Na’omi, since HWHY has
witnessed against me, and Ĕl Shaddai has done evil
to me?”
22 Thus Na’omi returned, and Ruth the Mo’aḇitess
her daughter-in-law with her, who returned from the
fields of Mo’aḇ, and they came to Bĕyth Leḥem at the
beginning of barley harvest.
21

2 And Na’omi had a relative on her husband’s side,
a man of great wealth, of the clan of Elimeleḵ, and his
name was Bo’az.
2 And Ruth, the Mo’aḇitess, said to Na’omi, “Please
let me go to the field, and glean heads of grain after
him in whose eyes I find favour.” So she said to her,
“Go, my daughter.”
3 And she left, and went and gleaned in the field
after the reapers. As it turned out, she came to the
part of the field belonging to Bo’az, the near relative
of Elimeleḵ.
4 And see, Bo’az had come from Bĕyth Leḥem, and
said to the reapers, “HWHY be with you!” And they
answered him, “HWHY baraḵ you!”
5 And Bo’az said to his servant who was appointed
over the reapers, “Whose young woman is this?”
6 So the servant who was appointed over the
reapers answered and said, “It is the young Mo’aḇite
woman who came back with Na’omi from the fields of
Mo’aḇ,
7 and she said, ‘Please let me glean, and gather
among the sheaves behind the reapers.’ And she
came and has remained from morning until now - she
sat a little in the house.”
8 And Bo’az said to Ruth, “You have heard, have
you not, my daughter? Do not go to glean in another
1874

RUTH

field, nor go from here, but stay close to my young
women.
9 “Let your eyes be on the field which they reap, and
you shall go after them. Have I not commanded the
young men not to touch you? And when you are
thirsty, go to the vessels and drink from what the
young men have drawn.”
10 And she fell on her face, bowed down to the
ground, and said to him, “Why have I found favour in
your eyes, that you should take notice of me, seeing
I am a foreigner?”
11 And Bo’az answered and said to her, “I have been
told all that you have done for your mother-in-law
since the death of your husband, and how you have
left your father and your mother and the land of your
birth, and have come to a people whom you did not
know before.
12 “HWHY repay your work, and your reward is
complete from HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, under whose
wings you have come to seek refuge.”
13 And she said, “Let me find favour in your eyes, my
master, because you have comforted me, and have
spoken to the heart of your female servant, though I
am not like one of your female servants.”
14 And Bo’az said to her, “Come here at mealtime.
Then you shall eat of the bread and dip your piece of
bread in the vinegar.” And she sat beside the reapers,
and he passed roasted grain to her. And she ate and
was satisfied, and had left over.
15 And she rose up to glean, and Bo’az commanded
his young men, saying, “Let her glean even among
the sheaves, and do not embarrass her.
16 “Rather, draw out from the bundles for her, and
leave it for her to glean, and do not restrain her.”

1875

RUTH

And she gleaned in the field until evening, and
beat out that which she had gleaned, and it was about
an ĕphah of barley.
18 And she took it up and went into the city, and her
mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. And she
brought out and gave to her what she had left over
after she was satisfied.
19 Then her mother-in-law asked her, “Where have
you gleaned today? And where did you work? Baruḵ
be the one who took notice of you.” And she told her
mother-in-law with whom she had worked, and said,
“The name of the man I worked today with is Bo’az.”
20 And Na’omi said to her daughter-in-law, “Baruḵ be
he of HWHY, who has not forsaken His kindness to the
living and the dead!” And Na’omi said to her, “The
man is a relative of ours, one of our redeemers.”
21 And Ruth the Mo’aḇitess said, “He also said to me,
‘Stay close to my young people until they have
completed all my harvest.’ ”
22 And Na’omi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, “It is
good, my daughter, that you go out with his young
women, and that they do not meet you in any other
field.”
23 And she stayed close by the young women of
Bo’az to glean, till the completion of barley harvest
and wheat harvest, but she dwelt with her mother-inlaw.
17

3 And Na’omi her mother-in-law said to her, “My
daughter, should I not seek rest for you, so that it is
well with you?
2 “And now, is not Bo’az, with whose young women
you have been, our relative? See, he is winnowing
barley tonight at the threshing-floor.
1876

RUTH

“And, you shall bathe and anoint yourself, and put
your garments on and go down to the threshing-floor.
Do not make yourself known to the man until he has
finished eating and drinking.
4 “And it shall be, when he lies down, that you shall
notice the place where he lies, and shall go in and
uncover his feet, and lie down. And let him make
known to you what you should do.”
5 And she said to her, “All that you say to me, I do.”
6 And she went down to the threshing-floor and did
according to all that her mother-in-law instructed her.
7 And Bo’az ate and drank, and his heart was glad,
and he went to lie down at the end of the heap of
grain. And she came softly and uncovered his feet,
and lay down.
8 And it came to be at midnight that the man was
startled, and turned himself, and saw a woman lying
at his feet!
9 And he said, “Who are you?” And she answered,
“I am Ruth, your female servant. Now you shall
spread your covering over your female servant - for
you are a redeemer.”
10 And he said, “Baruḵ are you of HWHY, my
daughter! For you have shown more kindness at the
end than at the beginning, not to go after young men,
whether poor or rich.
11 “And now, my daughter, do not fear. All that you
say I do for you, for all the people of my town know
that you are a capable woman.
12 “And now, it is true that I am your redeemer.
However, there is a redeemer nearer than I.
13 “Stop over tonight, and in the morning it shall be
that if he redeems you, good - let him do it. But if he
is not pleased to redeem you, then I shall redeem
you, as HWHY lives! Lie down until morning.”
3

1877

RUTH

And she lay at his feet until morning, and she
arose before one could recognise another. And he
said, “Let it not be known that the woman came to the
threshing-floor.”
15 And he said, “Bring the shawl that is on you and
hold it.” So she held it and he measured six measures
of barley, and laid it on her. And she went into the city.
16 And when she came to her mother-in-law, she
said, “Is that you, my daughter?” And she explained
to her all that the man had done for her.
17 And she said, “He gave me these six measures of
barley, for he said to me, ‘Do not go empty-handed to
your mother-in-law.’ ”
18 And she said, “Wait, my daughter, until you know
how the matter falls, for the man is not going to rest
until he has completed the matter this day.”
14

4 And Bo’az went up to the gate and sat down there.
And see, the redeemer of whom Bo’az had spoken
came by. And Bo’az said, “Turn aside, So-and-so, sit
down here.” And he turned aside and sat down.
2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and
said, “Sit down here.” So they sat down.
3 He then said to the redeemer, “Na’omi, who has
come back from the fields of Mo’aḇ, sold the piece of
land which belonged to our brother Elimeleḵ.
4 “And I thought that I should disclose it to you,
saying, ‘Buy it back in the presence of the inhabitants
and the elders of my people. If you do redeem it,
redeem it. But if you do not redeem it, inform me, so
that I know. For there is no one but you to redeem it,
and I am next after you.’ ” And he said, “I redeem it.”
5 And Bo’az said, “On the day you buy the field from
the hand of Na’omi, you shall also acquire Ruth the
1878

RUTH

Mo’aḇitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name
of the dead on his inheritance.”
6 And the redeemer said, “I am not able to redeem
it for myself, lest I ruin my own inheritance. Redeem
my right of redemption for yourself, for I am not able
to redeem it.”
7 And this was formerly done in Yisra’ĕl concerning
redeeming and exchanging, to confirm every word:
one man took off his sandal and gave it to the other,
and this was a witness in Yisra’ĕl.
8 So the redeemer said to Bo’az, “Buy it for
yourself.” Then he took off his sandal.
9 And Bo’az said to the elders and to all the people,
“You are witnesses this day that I have bought all that
was Elimeleḵ’s, and all that was Kilyon’s and
Maḥlon’s, from the hand of Na’omi.
10 “And also, Ruth the Mo’aḇitess, the wife of
Maḥlon, I have acquired as my wife, to raise up the
name of the dead on his inheritance, so that the name
of the dead should not be cut off from among his
brothers and from the gate of his place. You are
witnesses today.”
11 And all the people who were at the gate, and the
elders, said, “Witnesses! HWHY make the woman who
is coming to your house as Raḥĕl and as Lĕ’ah, the
two who built the house of Yisra’ĕl. And prove your
worth in Ephrathah and proclaim the Name in Bĕyth
Leḥem.
12 “And let your house be like the house of Perets,
whom Tamar bore to Yahuḏah, of the seed which
HWHY gives you from this young woman.”
13 And Bo’az took Ruth and she became his wife.
And he went in to her, and HWHY granted her
conception, and she bore a son.

1879

RUTH

And the women said to Na’omi, “Baruḵ be HWHY,
who has not left you this day without a redeemer. And
let His Name be proclaimed in Yisra’ĕl!
15 “And he shall be to you a restorer of life and a
sustainer of your old age. For your daughter-in-law,
who loves you, who is better to you than seven sons,
has borne him.”
16 And Na’omi took the child and laid him on her
bosom, and became a nurse to him.
17 And the women, her neighbours, gave him a
name, saying, “There is a son born to Na’omi.” And
they called his name Oḇĕḏ. He was the father of
Yishai, the father of Dawiḏ.
18 And this is the genealogy of Perets: Perets
brought forth Ḥetsron.
19 And Ḥetsron brought forth Ram, and Ram brought
forth Amminaḏaḇ.
20 And Amminaḏaḇ brought forth Naḥshon, and
Naḥshon brought forth Salmon.
21 And Salmon brought forth Bo’az, and Bo’az
brought forth Oḇĕḏ.
22 And Oḇĕḏ brought forth Yishai, and Yishai brought
forth Dawiḏ.
14

1880

LAMENTATIONS

ĔYḴAH
‫ איכה‬hKYA

1 ‫א‬,� How alone she sits,
The city once great with people!
Like a widow she has become,
One great among the nations!
A princess among provinces has become a slave!
2 ‫ב‬, B She weeps bitterly at night,
And her tears are upon her cheeks.
Among all her lovers there is no comforter for her.
All her friends have betrayed her,
They have become her enemies.
3 ‫ ג‬,� Yahuḏah has gone into exile,
Because of affliction and because of harsh labour.
She has dwelt among gentiles,
She has found no rest.
All her pursuers have overtaken her
Between narrow places.
4 ‫ד‬,𐤃 The ways to Tsiyon mourn
For no one comes to the Appointed Times.
All her gates are deserted,
Her kohenim sigh, her maidens are afflicted,
And she has bitterness.
5 ‫ ה‬, h Her adversaries have become chief,
Her enemies have become at ease.
For HWHY has afflicted her
Because of her many transgressions.
Her children have gone into captivity before the
enemy.
6 ‫ ו‬, W And all the splendour has departed
From the daughter of Tsiyon.
Her rulers have become like a buck,
1881

ĔYḴAH

They have found no pasture,
And they go powerless before the pursuer.
7 ‫ ז‬, z In the days of her affliction and wandering,
Yerushalayim remembered all her pleasantries
She had in the days of old.
When her people fell into the hand of the enemy,
With no one to help her,
The adversaries saw her,
They mocked at her destruction.
8 ‫ ח‬, X Yerushalayim has sinned greatly,
Therefore she has become defiled.
All who esteemed her despised her
Because they have seen her nakedness.
She herself has sighed and turned away.
9 ‫ ט‬, j Her uncleanness is in her skirts.
She did not keep in mind her latter end,
And has gone down appallingly,
There was no one to comfort her.
“See, O HWHY, my affliction,
For the enemy has made himself great!”
10 ‫ י‬, Y The adversary has spread his hand
Over all her pleasantries;
Indeed, she has seen:
The gentiles have entered her Miqdash,
Those whom You commanded not to enter Your
assembly.
11 ‫כ‬, K All her people are sighing, seeking bread.
They have given their pleasantries
For food, to bring back life.
“See, O HWHY, and look,
For I have become despised.”
12 ‫ ל‬, L “Is it naught to you,
All you who pass by?
Look and see if there is any pain like my pain,
Which has been brought on me,
1882

LAMENTATIONS

Which HWHY has inflicted on me
In the day of His burning displeasure.
13 ‫ מ‬, m “From above He has sent fire into my bones,
And it overpowered them;
He has spread a net for my feet and turned me
back;
He has laid me waste and faint all the day.
14 ‫ נ‬, ! “The yoke of my transgressions
Has been bound by His hand,
Woven together and thrust upon my neck.
He has made my strength stumble,
HWHY has given me into hands
Which I am unable to withstand.
15 ‫ ס‬, s “HWHY has trodden down all my strong men
in my midst,
He has called an appointed time
Against me to crush my young men.
HWHY has trodden down as in a winepress
The maiden daughter of Yahuḏah.
16 ‫ ע‬, [ “This is why I weep.
My eye, my eye is running down with water,
Because the comforter,
Who could bring back my life,
Has been far from me.
My children are stunned,
For the enemy has prevailed.”
17 ‫ פ‬,ּ p Tsiyon spreads out her hands,
There is no comforter for her.
HWHY has commanded concerning Ya’aqoḇ,
His neighbours are his adversaries.
Yerushalayim has become an uncleanness among
them.
18 ‫ צ‬, C HWHY is righteous, for I rebelled against His
mouth.
Hear now, all peoples, and see my pain.
1883

ĔYḴAH

My maidens and my young men have gone into
captivity.
19 ‫ ק‬,q I called for my lovers, but they deceived me.
My kohenim and my elders breathed their last in the
city,
While they sought food to bring back their life.
20 ‫ ר‬,R “See, O HWHY, that l am in distress.
My inward parts are boiling up,
My heart is overturned within me,
For I have been very rebellious.
From without the sword has bereaved,
At home it is like death.
21 ‫ש‬, v “They have heard that I sighed,
With no one to comfort me.
All my enemies have heard of my calamity,
They have rejoiced that You have done it.
You shall bring on the day that You have
announced,
So let them become like me.
22 ‫ת‬, t “Let all their evil come before You,
And do to them as You have done to me
For all my transgressions.
For my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.”

2 ‫א‬,� How HWHY in His displeasure
Has covered the daughter of Tsiyon with a cloud!
He has cast down from the shamayim to the earth
The comeliness of Yisra’ĕl,
And has not remembered His footstool in the day of
His displeasure.
2 ‫ ב‬, B HWHY has swallowed up, without
compassion,
All the pastures of Ya’aqoḇ.
In His wrath He has thrown down
The strongholds of the daughter of Yahuḏah.
1884

LAMENTATIONS

He has brought them down to the ground.
He has profaned the reign and its rulers.
3 ‫ ג‬,� In the heat of displeasure
He has cut off every horn of Yisra’ĕl.
He has withdrawn His right hand from before the
enemy.
And He burns against Ya’aqoḇ
Like a flaming fire, consuming all around.
4 ‫ ד‬,𐤃 He has bent His bow like an enemy.
He has appointed His right hand as an adversary.
And He slays all who delighted the eye.
In the tent of the daughter of Tsiyon,
He has poured out His wrath like fire.
5 ‫ ה‬, h HWHY has been like an enemy.
He has swallowed up Yisra’ĕl,
He has swallowed up all her palaces,
He has destroyed her strongholds.
And He increases mourning and lamentation
In the daughter of Yahuḏah.
6 ‫ ו‬, W He has demolished His booth like a garden,
He has destroyed His place of meeting.
HWHY has made the Appointed Times and
Shabbathoth
To be forgotten in Tsiyon,
And despises sovereign and kohĕn
In His raging displeasure.
7 ‫ ז‬, z HWHY has cast off His altar,
He has rejected His Miqdash,
He has delivered the walls of her palaces
Into the hand of the enemy.
They have made a noise in the House of HWHY
As on the day of an Appointed Time.
8 ‫ ח‬, X HWHY has planned to destroy
The wall of the daughter of Tsiyon.
He has stretched out a line.
1885

ĔYḴAH

He has not turned back His hand from destroying.
And He has made the rampart and wall to lament;
Together they have languished.
9 ‫ ט‬, j Her gates have sunk into the ground.
He has destroyed and broken her bars.
Her sovereign and her rulers are among the
gentiles.
The Torah is no more,
And her neḇi’im have found no vision from HWHY.
10 ‫ י‬, Y The elders of the daughter of Tsiyon
Sit on the ground, are silent.
They have thrown dust on their heads,
They have girded themselves with sackcloth.
The maidens of Yerushalayim
Have let their heads hang to the ground.
11 ‫כ‬, K My eyes are spent with tears,
My inward parts ferment,
My bile has been poured on the ground
Because of the destruction of the daughter of my
people,
As children and the infants languish
In the streets of the city.
12 ‫ ל‬, L They say to their mothers,
“Where is grain and wine?”
As they languish like the wounded
In the streets of the city,
As their life is poured out in their mothers’ bosom.
13 ‫ מ‬, m How shall I admonish you,
To what shall I compare you,
O daughter of Yerushalayim?
To what shall I liken you to comfort you,
O maiden daughter of Tsiyon?
For your breach is as great as the sea.
Who shall heal you?
1886

LAMENTATIONS

‫ נ‬, ! Your neḇi’im have seen
Falsehood and folly for you,
And have not shown you your wickedness,
To turn back your captivity.
But their visions for you
Are false and misleading messages.
15 ‫ ס‬, s All who pass by have clapped their hands at
you.
They have whistled,
And they shake their heads
At the daughter of Yerushalayim,
“Is this the city that is called
‘The perfection of lovelineness,
The joy of all the earth’?”
16 ‫ פ‬,ּ p All your enemies have opened
Their mouth against you;
They have whistled and they gnash their teeth.
They say, “We have swallowed her up!
This is certainly the day we waited for;
We have found it, we have seen it.”
17 ‫ ע‬, [ HWHY has done what He planned,
He has filled His word
Which He commanded in days of old.
He has torn down, without compassion,
And He has let your enemy rejoice over you.
He has exalted the horn of your adversaries.
18 ‫ צ‬, C Their heart cried out to HWHY,
“O wall of the daughter of Tsiyon,
Let tears run down like a river day and night.
Give yourself no respite,
Let your eyes have no rest.
19 ‫ ק‬,q “Arise, cry out in the night,
At the beginning of the watches,
Pour out your heart like water
Before the face of HWHY.
14

1887

ĔYḴAH

Lift your hands toward Him
For the life of your young children,
Who languish from hunger
At the head of every street.
20 ‫ ר‬,R “See, O HWHY, and look attentively
To whom have You done thus.
Should the women eat their offspring,
Infants of a tophaḥ?
Should the kohĕn and naḇi be slain
In the Miqdash of HWHY?
21 ‫ש‬, v “Young and old lie on the ground in the
streets.
My maidens and my young men have fallen by the
sword.
You have slain them in the day of Your displeasure,
You have slaughtered without compassion.
22 ‫ת‬, t “Would You proclaim, as in a day of
appointed time,
The fears that surround me?
And no one escaped or survived
In the day of the displeasure of HWHY.
Those whom I have nursed and brought up,
My enemy has destroyed.”

3 ‫א‬,� I am the man who has seen affliction
By the rod of His wrath.
2 He has led me and made me walk
In darkness and not light.
3 Indeed, He has turned back,
He has turned His hand against me all the day.
4 ‫ ב‬, B He has worn out my flesh and my skin,
He has broken my bones.
5 He has piled up against me,
And surrounded me with bitterness and hardship.
1888

LAMENTATIONS

He has made me dwell in dark places
Like the dead of old.
7 ‫ ג‬,� He has hedged me in, and I do not go out,
He has made my chain heavy.
8 Also, when I cry and shout,
He shuts out my prayer.
9 He has blocked my ways with hewn stone,
He has made my paths crooked.
10 ‫ד‬,𐤃 He is to me like a bear lying in wait,
A lion in hiding.
11 He has turned aside my ways
And torn me in pieces,
He has laid me waste.
12 He has bent His bow
And stood me up as a target for the arrow.
13 ‫ ה‬, h He made the arrows of
His quiver pierce my kidneys.
14 I have been a mockery to all my people,
Their song all the day.
15 He has filled me with bitterness,
He drenched me with wormwood.
16 ‫ ו‬, W And He has broken my teeth with gravel,
He has covered me with ashes.
17 And You have removed my being far from peace,
I have forgotten goodness.
18 And I said, “My strength and my expectancy
Have perished from HWHY.”
19 ‫ ז‬, z Remember my affliction and my anguish,
The wormwood and the gall.
20 Your being indeed remembers
And bows down upon me.
21 This I recall to my mind, therefore I wait:
22 ‫ ח‬, X The kindnesses of HWHY!
For we have not been consumed,
For His compassions have not ended.
6

1889

ĔYḴAH

They are new every morning,
Great is Your trustworthiness.
24 “HWHY is my Portion,” says my being,
“Therefore I wait for Him!”
25 ‫ ט‬, j HWHY is good to those waiting for Him,
To the being who seeks Him.
26 It is good - both to wait and to be silent,
For the deliverance of HWHY.
27 It is good for a man to bear a yoke in his youth.
28 ‫ י‬, Y Let him sit alone and be silent,
Because He has laid it on him.
29 Let him put his mouth in the dust,
There might yet be expectancy.
30 Let him give his cheek
To the one who smites him He is filled with reproach.
31 ‫כ‬, K For HWHY does not cast off forever.
32 For though He afflicted,
Yet He shall show compassion
According to the greatness of His kindnesses.
33 For He has not afflicted from His heart,
Nor does He grieve the children of men.
34 ‫ ל‬, L To crush under His feet
All the prisoners of the earth,
35 To turn aside the right-ruling of man
Before the face of the Most High,
36 Or pervert a man in his cause This HWHY does not approve.
37 ‫ מ‬, m Who was it that spoke,
And it came to be!
Has HWHY not commanded it?
38 Do not the evils and the good
Come out of the mouth of the Most High?
39 What? Should mankind complain,
A living man, because of his sins?
23

1890

LAMENTATIONS

‫ נ‬, ! Let us search and examine our ways,
And turn back to HWHY.
41 Let us lift our hearts and hands
To Ĕl in the shamayim:
42 We, we have transgressed and rebelled.
You, You have not forgiven.
43 ‫ ס‬, s You have wrapped Yourself
With displeasure and pursued us.
You have slain,
You have not shown compassion.
44 You have wrapped Yourself
With a cloud, so that prayer does not pass through.
45 You make us as scum and refuse
In the midst of the peoples.
46 ‫ פ‬,ּ p All our enemies have opened their mouth
against us.
47 Fear and a snare have come upon us,
Shame and ruin.
48 Streams of water run down my eyes
For the ruin of the daughter of my people.
49 ‫ ע‬, [ My eyes flow out and do not cease,
Without stopping,
50 Until HWHY looks down and sees from the
shamayim.
51 My eyes pain my being
Because of all the daughters of my city.
52 ‫ צ‬, C My enemies hunted me down
Like a bird, without cause.
53 They have cut off my life in the pit,
And they threw stones at me.
54 Waters flowed over my head;
I said, “I am cut off!”
55 ‫ ק‬,q I called on Your Name,
O HWHY, from the lowest pit.
40

1891

ĔYḴAH

You have heard my voice,
Do not hide Your ear from my groaning,
From my outcry!
57 You drew near on the day I called on You;
You said, “Do not fear!”
58 ‫ ר‬,R O HWHY, You pleaded the case for my being;
You have redeemed my life.
59 O HWHY, You have seen my oppression;
Judge my case.
60 You have seen all their vengeance,
All their plans against me.
61 ‫ש‬, v You have heard their reproach,
O HWHY, all their plans against me,
62 The lips of those rising against me,
And their scheming against me all the day.
63 Look at their sitting down and their rising up;
I am their song.
64 ‫ת‬, t Repay them, O HWHY,
According to the work of their hands.
65 Give them a veiled heart,
Your curse upon them!
66 Pursue and destroy them in displeasure,
From under the shamayim of HWHY.
56

4 ‫א‬,� How dim the gold has become,
The fine gold changed!
The stone of the Miqdash
Are scattered at the head of every street.
2 ‫ ב‬, B The precious sons of Tsiyon
Who were weighed against fine gold,
How they have been reckoned as clay pots,
The work of the hands of the potter!
3 ‫ ג‬,� Even jackals have presented their breasts,
They have nursed their young.
1892

LAMENTATIONS

The daughter of my people has become as cruel,
As ostriches in the wilderness.
4 ‫ד‬,𐤃The tongue of the infant has clung
To the roof of its mouth for thirst;
Children asked for bread,
No one breaks it for them.
5 ‫ ה‬, h Those who ate delicacies
Have been laid waste in the streets;
Those who were brought up in scarlet
Have embraced dunghills.
6 ‫ ו‬, W And the wickedness of the daughter of my
people
Is greater than the sin of Seḏom,
Which was overthrown in a moment,
And no hands were wrung over her!
7 ‫ ז‬, z Her Nazirites were brighter than snow
And whiter than milk;
More ruddy in body than rubies,
Their cut like sapphire.
8 ‫ ח‬, X Their appearance has become blacker than
soot;
They have become unrecognised in the streets;
Their skin has shrivelled on their bones,
It has become dry, it has become as wood.
9 ‫ ט‬, j Better off were those pierced by the sword
Than those pierced by hunger;
For these pine away,
Pierced through for lack of the fruits of the field.
10 ‫ י‬, Y The hands of the compassionate women
Have boiled their own children;
They became food for them
In the destruction of the daughter of my people.
11 ‫כ‬, K HWHY has completed His wrath,
He has poured out His burning displeasure.
1893

ĔYḴAH

And He kindled a fire in Tsiyon,
And it consumed her foundations.
12 ‫ ל‬, L The sovereigns of the earth did not believe,
Nor any of the inhabitants of the world,
That an adversary and enemy
Would enter the gates of Yerushalayim.
13 ‫ מ‬, m It was because of the sins of her neḇi’im,
The wickednesses of her kohenim,
Who shed in her midst the blood of the righteous.
14 ‫ נ‬, ! They staggered, blind, in the streets;
They have defiled themselves with blood,
So that no one was able to touch their garments.
15 ‫ ס‬, s They shouted at them,
“Away! Unclean! Away! Away! Touch not!”
When they fled and staggered,
They said among the gentiles,
“They shall stay no longer.”
16 ‫ פ‬,ּ p The face of HWHY scattered them.
He no longer regards them.
They showed no respect for the kohenim
Nor favour to the elders.
17 ‫ ע‬, [ While we exist, our eyes are consumed,
Watching vainly for our help.
In our watchtower we watched for a nation
That could not save.
18 ‫ צ‬, C They have hunted our steps
From going in our streets.
Our end was near,
Our days were completed,
For our end had come.
19 ‫ ק‬,q Our pursuers were swifter
Than the eagles of the shamayim.
They came hotly after us on the mountains
And lay in way for us in the wilderness.
1894

LAMENTATIONS

‫ ר‬,R The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of
HWHY,
Was caught in their pits,
In whose shadow we had thought
To live among the gentiles.
21 ‫ש‬, v Rejoice and be glad,
O daughter of Eḏom,
You who dwell in the land of Uts!
The cup is to pass over to you too,
So that you become drunk and make yourself
naked.
22 ‫ת‬, t Your wickedness has been completed,
O daughter of Tsiyon.
He no longer prolongs your exile.
He shall punish your wickedness,
O daughter of Eḏom,
He shall uncover your sins!
20

5 Remember, O HWHY, what has come upon us.
Look, and see our reproach!
2 Our inheritance has been turned over to
strangers,
And our houses to foreigners.
3 We have become orphans, fatherless,
Our mothers are like widows.
4 We had to pay for our drinking water,
And our wood comes at a price.
5 We have been pursued close onto our neck,
We have laboured and had no rest.
6 To Mitsrayim we have given a hand;
To Ashshur, to be satisfied with bread.
7 Our fathers sinned, they are no more.
We have borne their wickednesses.
8 Servants have ruled over us;
There is no one to deliver from their hand.
1895

ĔYḴAH

With our lives we bring in our bread,
Because of the sword of the wilderness.
10 Our skin as become as hot as an oven,
Because of the burning heat of scarcity of food.
11 They have humbled the women in Tsiyon,
The maidens of the cities of Yahuḏah.
12 Rulers were hung up by their hands,
And elders were not respected.
13 They have taken young men to grind,
And youths stumbled under wood.
14 Elders have ceased from the gate,
Young men from their song.
15 The joy of our heart has ceased,
Our dancing has turned into mourning.
16 The crown has fallen from our head.
Woe to us, for we have sinned!
17 Because of this our heart has been sick,
Because of these our eyes have become dim,
18 Because of Mount Tsiyon which is laid waste;
Foxes have gone roaming in it.
19 You, O HWHY, remain forever,
Your throne from generation to generation.
20 Why do You forget us forever,
Forsake us for length of days?
21 Turn us back to You, O HWHY,
And let us turn back,
Renew our days as of old.
22 For have You completely rejected us?
You have been wroth with us, exceedingly!
9

1896

ECCLESIASTES

QOHELETH
‫ קהלת‬tLhq

1 The words of Qoheleth, son of Dawiḏ, sovereign in
Yerushalayim.
2 “Futility! Futility!” says Qoheleth. “Futility, futility,
all is futile!”
3 What does man gain from all his labour in which
he toils under the sun?
4 A generation passes away, and a generation
comes, but the earth stands forever.
5 The sun also rises, and the sun goes, and hurries
back to the place where it arose.
6 Going to the south, and turning round to the north,
turning, turning, and on its rounds the wind returns.
7 All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea never
overflows. To the place from which the rivers come,
there they return again.
8 All matters are wearisome, no one is able to speak
of it. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear
filled with hearing.
9 What has been is what shall be, what has been
done is what shall be done, and there is none new
under the sun.
10 Is there a matter of which it is said, “See, this is
new”? It was here already, long ago.
11 There is no remembrance of former ones, nor is
there any remembrance of those that are to come by
those who come later on.
12 I, Qoheleth, was sovereign over Yisra’ĕl in
Yerushalayim.
13 And I applied my heart to seek and search out by
wisdom concerning all that has been done under the
1897

QOHELETH

shamayim; this evil task Elohim has given to the sons
of man, to be humbled by it.
14 I have seen all the works that are done under the
sun. And see, all was futile and feeding on wind.
15 The crooked could not be straightened, and what
is lacking could not be counted.
16 So I spoke to my heart, saying, “See, I have
attained greatness, and have gained more wisdom
than all who wore before me in Yerushalayim. And my
heart has soon much wisdom and knowledge.”
17 And I applied my heart to know wisdom - and to
know madness and folly. I know that this too is
feeding on wind.
18 For in much wisdom is much grief and he who
increases knowledge increases suffering.

2 I said in my heart, “Come now, let me try you with
rejoicing and find out what is good.” But see, that too
was futile.
2 I said of laughter, “It is madness,” and of rejoicing,
“What does it do?”
3 I searched in my heart how to stimulate my body
with wine, while guiding my heart with wisdom, and
how to lay hold on folly, until I could see what was
good for the sons of men to do under the shamayim
all the days of their lives.
4 I made my works great, I built myself houses, and
I planted vineyards for myself.
5 I made gardens and parks for myself, and I planted
all kinds of fruit trees in them.
6 I made pools of water for myself, to water from
them a plantation of growing trees.
7 I bought male and female servants, and I came to
have sons of the household. Also, I had greater
1898

ECCLESIASTES

possessions of herds and flocks than all who were
before Yerushalayim.
8 I also gathered for myself silver and gold and the
treasures of sovereigns and of the provinces. I
provided male and female singers for myself, and the
pleasures of men - a woman and women.
9 Thus I became great and increased more than all
who were before me in Yerushalayim. Also my
wisdom remained with me.
10 And all that my eyes desired I did not keep from
them. I did not withhold my heart from any pleasure,
for my heart rejoiced in all my labour. And this was
my portion from all my labour.
11 But when I looked on all the works that my hands
had done and on the labour in which I had toiled, see,
all was futile and feeding on wind, and there was no
gain under the sun.
12 And I turned myself to look at wisdom, and
madness, and folly. For what would the man do who
comes after the sovereign but what already has been
done?
13 Then I saw that wisdom is better than folly, as light
is better than darkness.
14 The wise one’s eyes are in his head, but the fool
walks in darkness. And I also knew that one event
befalls them all.
15 And I said in my heart, “As the event of the fool,
even so it befalls me, and why was I then more wise?”
Then I said in my heart, “This also is futile.”
16 For there is no more lasting remembrance of the
wise than of the fool, since in the days to come all is
forgotten. And how does a wise man die? With the
fool!

1899

QOHELETH

And I hated life because the work that was done
under the sun was evil on me, for all is futile and
feeding on wind.
18 And I hated all my labour in which I had toiled
under the sun, because I leave it to a man who would
come after me.
19 And who knows whether he is wise or foolish? Yet
he shall rule over all my labour in which I toiled and in
which I have shown myself wise under the sun. That
too is futile.
20 So I turned my heart and despaired of all the
labour in which I had toiled under the sun.
21 For a man might labour with wisdom, knowledge,
and skill; yet he leaves his heritage to a man who has
not laboured for it. That too is futile and a great evil.
22 For what does a man get for all his labour and
strain of his heart with which he has toiled under the
sun?
23 For all his days are sufferings, and his work
grievous; even in the night his heart takes no rest.
That too is futile.
24 A man could do no better but to eat and drink, and
enjoy himself in his labour! That too, I saw, was from
the hand of Elohim.
25 For who eats or enjoyment without Him?
26 For He gives wisdom and knowledge and joy to a
man who is good in His eyes. But to the sinner He
gives the task of gathering and collecting, to give to
the good before Elohim. That too is futile and feeding
on wind.
17

3 To all there is an appointed time, even a time for
every pursuit under the shamayim:
2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant,
and a time to uproot;
1900

ECCLESIASTES

a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break
down, and a time to build up;
4 a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to
mourn, and a time to dance;
5 a time to throw away stones, and a time to gather
stones; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing;
6 a time to seek, and a time to lose; a time to keep,
and a time to throw away;
7 a time to tear, and a time to sew; a time to be
silent, and a time to speak;
8 a time to love, and a time to hate; a time for battle,
and a time for peace.
9 What does the worker gain from his toil?
10 I have seen the task Elohim has given to the sons
of men to be humbled by it.
11 He has made it all, pretty in its time. Even the ages
He has put in their hearts, except that no one finds
out the work that Elohim does from beginning to end.
12 I know that there is no good for them but to rejoice,
and to do good in their lives,
13 and also that every man should eat and drink and
enjoy the good of all his labour, it is a gift of Elohim.
14 I know that whatever Elohim does is forever. There
is no adding to it, and there is no taking from it. Elohim
does it, that men should reverence before Him.
15 Whatever is, has already been and what shall be,
has been before. But Elohim seeks out what has been
pursued.
16 Then again I saw under the sun: In the place of
Right-Ruling, wickedness was there. And in the place
of righteousness, wickedness was there.
17 I said in my heart, “Elohim judges the righteous
and the wicked, for there is a time for every matter
and for every work.”
3

1901

QOHELETH

I said in my heart, “Concerning the matter of the
sons of men, Elohim examines them, to see if they
indeed are beasts.”
19 For the event of the sons of men is also the event
of beasts - one event befalls them: as one dies, so
dies the other. Indeed, they all have one breath - man
has no advantage over beasts. For all is futile.
20 All are going to one place - all came from the dust,
and all return to dust.
21 Who knows the spirit of the sons of men, which
goes upward, and the spirit of the beast, which goes
down to the earth?
22 So I saw that man could do no better but to rejoice
in his own works, for that is his portion. For who would
bring him to see what shall be after him?
18

4 Then I looked again at all the oppression that is
done under the sun: And see! The tears of the
oppressed, but they have no comforter; and power on
the side of their oppressors, but they have no
comforter.
2 Therefore I commended the dead who were
already dead, more than the living who are still alive.
3 And better than both is he who has never existed,
who has not seen the evil work that is done under the
sun.
4 And I saw that all the toil and skill of the work bring
envy between man and his neighbour. That too is
futile and feeding on wind.
5 The fool folds his hands and consumes his own
flesh.
6 Better is a hand filled with rest than both hands
filled with toil and feeding on wind.
7 Then I looked again at futility under the sun:
1902

ECCLESIASTES

There is one, without a second, who has neither
son nor brother. And there is no end to all his labours.
His eye also is not satisfied with riches. “And for
whom am I toiling and depriving myself of good?”
That too is futility, and an evil task.
9 Two are better than one, because they have a
good reward for their labour.
10 For if they fall, one lifts his companion up. But woe
to him who is alone when he falls, for he has no one
to help him up.
11 Also, if two lie down together, they keep warm; but
how does one keep warm?
12 Although one might be overpowered, two
withstand him. And a threefold cord is not readily
broken.
13 A poor and wise youth is better than an old and
foolish sovereign who no longer knows how to take
warning.
14 For he comes out of prison to be sovereign,
although in his reign he was born poor.
15 I have seen all the living who walk under the sun;
they were with the second youth who stands in his
place.
16 There was no end of all the people; all who came
before them. But the ones who come afterward do not
rejoice in him. For that too is futile and feeding on
wind.
8

5 Guard your steps when you go to the House of
Elohim. And draw near to listen rather than to give the
slaughtering of fools, for they do not know that they do
evil.
2 Do not be hasty with your mouth, and let not your
heart hurry to bring forth a word before Elohim. For
1903

QOHELETH

Elohim is in the shamayim, and you on earth,
therefore let your words be few.
3 For a dream comes through the greatness of the
task, and a fool’s voice is known by his many words.
4 When you make a vow to Elohim, do not delay to
pay it, for He takes no pleasure in fools. Pay that
which you have vowed.
5 It is better not to vow than to vow and not pay.
6 Do not allow your mouth to cause your flesh to sin,
nor say before the messenger of Elohim that it was a
mistake. Why should Elohim be wroth at your voice
and destroy the work of your hands?
7 For in much dreaming and many words there is
futility. But revere Elohim.
8 If you see the oppression of the poor, and denial
of right-ruling and righteousness in a province, do not
be astonished at the matter. For a higher than the
high is guarding, and there are higher ones over
them.
9 And the increase of the land is for all. The
sovereign himself is served from the field.
10 He who loves silver is not satisfied with silver; nor
he who loves wealthy increase. That too is futile.
11 With the increase of goods, there is an increase of
those consuming them. What advantage then is there
to their owners, but to look on?
12 Sweet is the sleep of a labourer whether he eats
little or much, but the plenty of the rich does not let
him sleep.
13 There is a sickly evil I have seen under the sun:
riches kept for their owner, for his evil.
14 But those riches perish through evil use. And he
brings forth a son, and there is naught in his hand.

1904

ECCLESIASTES

As he came naked from his mother’s womb, so he
returns, to go as he came. And from his labour which
goes into his hand he takes none whatsoever.
16 And this too is a grievous evil - exactly as he came,
so he goes. And what gain has he since he toiled for
the wind?
17 All his days he also eats in darkness, and with
much sorrow and sickness and wrath.
18 See what I have seen: It is good and pleasant for
one to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his
labour in which he toils under the sun all the days of
his life which Elohim gives him, for it is his portion.
19 Further, when Elohim has given any man riches
and wealth, and permitted him to enjoy them, and to
receive his portion and rejoice in his labour, this is a
gift of Elohim.
20 Though it not be much, let him remember the days
of his life, because Elohim bears witness by the
gladness of his heart.
15

6 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun,
and it is great among men:
2 A man to whom Elohim has given riches and
wealth and esteem, so that his being lacks none at all
of what he desires, but Elohim does not permit him to
eat of it, and a foreigner consumes it. This is futile,
and it is an evil disease.
3 If a man brings forth a hundred and lives many
years, so that the days of his years are many, but his
being is not satisfied with goodness, or indeed he has
no burial, I say that a premature birth is better than
he,
4 for it comes in futility and goes away in darkness,
and in darkness its name is covered;
1905

QOHELETH

even the sun it has not seen - it has more rest than
that man.
6 And though he lives a thousand years twice over,
yet he shall not see goodness. Do not all go to one
place?
7 All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the
appetite is not satisfied.
8 For what advantage has the wise over the fool?
What does the poor have who knows how to walk
before the living?
9 What the eyes see is better than what the desire
goes after. That too is futile and feeding on wind.
10 Whatever shall be has already been named, and
it is known that he is son of man. And he is unable to
contend with Him who is mightier than he.
11 The more words, the more futility - what is the
advantage to man?
12 For who knows what is good for man in life, all the
days of his futile life, which he passes like a shadow?
For who declares to man what shall be after him,
under the sun?
5

7 A name is better than precious oil, and the day of
death than the day of one’s birth.
2 It is better to go to the house of mourning than to
go to the house of feasting, for that is the end of all
men. And the living take it to heart.
3 Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness
of the face the heart becomes better.
4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,
but the heart of fools is in the house of rejoicing.
5 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise than for
man to hear the song of fools.
6 For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the
laughter of a fool. That too is futile.
1906

ECCLESIASTES

For oppression makes a wise one mad, and a
bribe destroys the heart.
8 The end of a matter is better than its beginning.
The patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
9 Do not be hasty in your spirit to be provoked, for
wrath rests in the bosom of fools.
10 Do not say, “Why were the former days better than
these?” For it is not wise of you to have asked about
this.
11 Wisdom is good with an inheritance, and an
advantage to those who see the sun.
12 For wisdom protects as silver protects, but the
advantage of knowledge is that wisdom gives ḥai to
those who have it.
13 See the work of Elohim: For who is able to make
straight what He has made crooked?
14 Be glad in the day of prosperity, but in the evil day
take note that Elohim has also appointed the one as
well as the other, so that man should not uncover
whatever is after him.
15 I have seen it all in my days of futility: There is a
righteous one perishing in his righteousness, and
there is a wicked one living long in his evil.
16 Do not be overrighteous, neither be overwise why destroy yourself?
17 Do not be increasingly wicked, and do not be a fool
- why die before your time?
18 It is good that you should take hold of this, and
also not withhold your hand from the other. For he
who reveres Elohim comes forth with all of them.
19 Wisdom makes the wise strong, more than ten
rulers that are in the city.
20 For there is not a righteous man on earth who
does good and does not sin.
7

1907

QOHELETH

Also do not take to heart all the words they speak,
lest you hear your servant cursing you.
22 For you know in your heart that many times you
have cursed others.
23 All this I have proved by wisdom. I said, “I am
wise,” but it was far from me.
24 That which is, is far off and exceedingly deep who can find it?
25 I have turned round, even my heart, to know and
to search, and to seek out wisdom and a conclusion,
to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness
and madness.
26 And I found more bitter than death, the woman
whose heart is snares and nets, whose hands are
shackles. He who pleases Elohim escapes from her,
but the sinner is captured by her.
27 “See, this I have found,” says Qoheleth, “One by
one, to find a conclusion,
28 which my being still seeks but I have not found: I
have found one man among a thousand, but a woman
among all these I have not found.
29 Truly, this only I have found: that Elohim made
man straight, but they have sought out many
devices.”
21

8 Who is like a wise one? And who knows the
meaning of a matter? A man’s wisdom makes his face
shine, and the hardness of his face is changed.
2 I guard the sovereign’s command because of the
oath before Elohim.
3 Do not be in a hurry to go from his presence. Do
not take a stand in an evil matter, for he does
whatever he pleases.
4 Where the word of a sovereign is, there is power.
And who says to him, “What are you doing?”
1908

ECCLESIASTES

He who guards the Command knows no evil
matter. And the heart of the wise discerns both time
and right-ruling,
6 Because for every matter there is a time and rightruling, though the trouble of man is heavy upon him.
7 For he does not know what shall be; so who
declares to him when it shall be?
8 No one has power over the spirit to retain the spirit,
and no one has power in the day of death. There is
no discharge in battle, and wickedness does not
release those who are given to it.
9 All this I have seen; I applied my heart to every
work that is done under the sun: There is a time in
which a man rules over a man for his evil.
10 And so I saw the wicked buried, and they came
and went from the place of qodeshah, and they were
forgotten in the city where they had so done. That too
is futile.
11 Because the sentence against an evil deed is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of
men is filled in them to do evil.
12 Although a sinner is doing evil a hundred times,
and is prolonged, yet I know that there is good to
those who revere Elohim, who reverence before Him.
13 But it shall not be well with the wicked, nor would
he prolong his days as a shadow, because he does
not reverence before Elohim.
14 There is a futility which has been done on earth,
that there are righteous ones who get according to the
deeds of the wicked. And there are wicked ones who
get according to the deeds of the righteous. I said that
this too is futile.
15 Therefore I praised enjoyment, because there is
no good to man except to eat, and to drink, and to
rejoice - and it remains with him in his labour for the
5

1909

QOHELETH

days of his life which Elohim has given him under the
sun.
16 When I gave my heart to know wisdom and to see
the task which has been done on earth, even though
one sees no sleep day or night,
17 then I saw all the work of Elohim, that man is
unable to find out the work that has been done under
the sun. For though a man labours to seek, yet he
does not find it. And even though a wise one claims
to know, he is unable to find it.

9 For all this I took to heart, even to search out all this:
that the righteous and the wise and their deeds are in
the hand of Elohim. No man knows whether love or
hatred awaits him.
2 It is the same for all: One event to the righteous
and to the wicked; to the good, and to the clean, and
to the unclean; and to the one slaughtering and to the
one not slaughtering. As is the good one, so is the
sinner; the one swearing as the one fearing an oath.
3 This is an evil in all that is done under the sun:
there is one event to all. Truly the hearts of the sons
of men are filled with evil, and madness is in their
hearts while they live, and then - to the dead!
4 But for him who is joined to all the living there is
trust, for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
5 For the living know that they shall die, but the dead
know naught, nor do they have any more reward, for
their remembrance is forgotten.
6 Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy
have now perished; and they no longer have a share
in all that is done under the sun.
7 Go, eat your bread with joy, and drink your wine
with a glad heart; for Elohim has already approved
your works.
1910

ECCLESIASTES

Let your garments be white at all times, and let
your head lack no oil.
9 See life with the wife whom you love all the days
of your futile life which He has given you under the
sun, all your days of futility. For that is your share in
life, and in your toil which you have laboured under
the sun.
10 All that your hand finds to do, do it with your might;
for there is no work or planning or knowledge or
wisdom in the grave where you are going.
11 I again saw under the sun that the race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the mighty, nor even bread
to the wise, nor even riches to men of understanding,
nor even favour to men of knowledge - for time and
chance meets with them all.
12 For even man does not know his time. Like fish
taken in an evil net, and like birds caught in a snare,
so the sons of men are snared in an evil time, when it
comes down on them suddenly.
13 Also this I saw as wisdom under the sun, and it is
great to me:
14 A little city, and few men in it, and a great
sovereign came against it, and besieged it, and built
huge siege-works against it.
15 And there was found in it a poor wise man, and by
his wisdom he delivered the city, yet no one
remembered that poor man.
16 And I said, “Wisdom is better than might. But the
wisdom of the poor man is despised, and his words
are not heard.”
17 The words of the wise, spoken calmly, should be
heard rather than the shout of a ruler of fools.
18 Wisdom is better than weapons of conflict, but one
sinner destroys much good.
8

1911

QOHELETH

10 Dead flies make the perfumer’s ointment stink,
ferment; a little folly outweighs wisdom, esteem.
2 A wise man’s heart is at his right hand, but a fool’s
heart at his left.
3 And also, when a fool walks along the way, his
heart is lacking, and he shows everyone that he is a
fool.
4 If the spirit of the ruler rises against you, do not
leave your post, for calmness lays to rest great faults.
5 There is an evil I have seen under the sun, as a
mistake coming from the ruler:
6 Folly is put in many heights, while the rich sit in a
humble place.
7 I have seen servants on horses - and rulers
walking on the ground like servants.
8 He who digs a pit falls into it, and whoever breaks
through a wall is bitten by a snake.
9 He who quarries stones is hurt by them. He who
splits wood is endangered by it.
10 If an iron tool is blunt, and one does not sharpen
the edge, then he needs more strength, and wisdom
is advantageous to make right.
11 If the snake bites without enchantment, then ‘the
master of the tongue’ is no better!
12 Words of a wise man’s mouth show favour, but the
lips of a fool swallow him up;
13 the beginning of the words of his mouth is
foolishness, and the end of his talk is wicked
madness.
14 And a fool increases words; a man knows not what
shall come to be; and who declares to him what shall
be after him?
15 The labour of fools wearies them, because not one
knows how to go to the city!
1912

ECCLESIASTES

Woe to you, O land, when your sovereign is a
youth, and your rulers feast in the morning!
17 Baruḵ are you, O land, when your sovereign is the
son of nobles, and your rulers feast in due season for strength and not for drunkenness!
18 Because of laziness the framework tumbles, and
through idleness of hands the house leaks.
19 A feast is made for laughter, and wine gladdens
life; and the silver answers all.
20 Do not curse the sovereign, even in your thought;
do not curse the rich, even in your bedroom; for a bird
of the shamayim conveys the voice, and a bird in flight
makes the matter known.
16

11 Send out your bread on the face of the waters,
for after many days you shall find it.
2 Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for you
do not know what evil might be on the earth.
3 If the clouds are filled with rain, they empty
themselves upon the earth. And if a tree falls to the
south or the north, in the place where the tree falls,
there it is.
4 He who watches the wind does not sow, and he
who looks at the clouds does not reap.
5 As you do not know what is the way of the wind,
or how the bones grow in the womb of her who is with
child, so you do not know the works of Elohim who
makes all.
6 Sow your seed in the morning, and until evening
do not let your hand rest; since you do not know which
prosper, this or that, or whether both alike are good.
7 Sweet also is the light, and good for the eyes to
see the sun;

1913

QOHELETH

But if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in
them all. But let him remember the days of darkness,
for they are many. All that is coming is futility.
9 Rejoice, O young man, in your youth, and let your
heart gladden you in the days of your youth. And walk
in the ways of your heart, and in the sight of your
eyes, but know that for all these Elohim brings you
into right-ruling.
10 Therefore remove wrath from your heart, and put
away evil from your flesh, for youth and dawn of life
are futility.
8

12 Remember also your Creator in the days of your
youth, before the evil days come, and the years draw
near when you say, “I have no pleasure in them”:
2 Before the sun and the light, the moon and the
stars, are darkened, and the clouds return after the
rain;
3 in the day when the guards of the house tremble,
and the strong men shall bow down; when the
grinders shall cease because they are few, and those
that look through the windows shall become dim;
4 and the doors shall be shut in the streets, and the
sound of grinding is low; and one rises up at the
sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song are
bowed down;
5 furthermore, they are afraid of what is high, and of
low places in the way; and the almond tree blossoms,
and the grasshopper becomes a burden, and desire
perishes. For man is going to his everlasting home,
and the mourners shall go about the streets.
6 Before the silver cord is loosed, or the golden bowl
is broken, or the jar shattered at the fountain, or the
wheel broken at the well,
1914

ECCLESIASTES

and the dust returns to the earth as it was, and the
spirit returns to Elohim who gave it.
8 “Futility! Futility!” said the Qoheleth, “All is futile.”
9 And besides being wise, Qoheleth also taught the
people knowledge and he listened and sought out laid in order many proverbs.
10 Qoheleth sought to find out words of delight, and
words of truth, rightly written.
11 The words of the wise are like goads, and as nails
driven by the masters of collections - they were given
by one Shepherd.
12 And besides these, my son, be warned - the
making of many books has no end, and much study
is a wearying of the flesh.
13 Let us hear the conclusion of the entire matter:
Revere Elohim and guard His Commands, for this is
to all mankind!
14 For Elohim shall bring every work into right-ruling,
including all that is hidden, whether good or whether
evil.
7

1915

ESTHER

HAḎASSAH
‫ הדסה‬hsdh

1 And it came to be in the days of Aḥashwĕrosh - he
is the Aḥashwĕrosh who reigned from Hodu to Kush,
a hundred and twenty-seven provinces 2 in those days, when Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh sat
on the throne of his reign, which was in the citadel of
Shushan,
3 that in the third year of his reign he made a feast
for all his officials and servants. The power of Paras
and Maḏai, the nobles and the princes of the
provinces were before him,
4 when he showed the riches of his esteemed reign
and the splendour of his excellent greatness for many
days, a hundred and eighty days.
5 And when these days were completed, the
sovereign made a feast lasting seven days for all the
people who were present in the citadel of Shushan,
from great to small, in the courtyard of the garden of
the sovereign’s palace.
6 White and blue tapestries were fastened with
cords of fine linen and purple on silver rods and
marble columns - the couches were of gold and silver
on a mosaic pavement of alabaster, marble, motherof-pearl, and black marble.
7 And they served drinks in golden vessels, the
vessels being different from one another, with much
royal wine, according to the hand of the sovereign.
8 And drinking was according to the law, no one was
compelled, for so the sovereign had ordered all the
officers of his house, that they should do according to
each one’s pleasure.
1916

HAḎASSAH

Sovereigness Washti also made a feast for the
women in the royal palace which Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh owned.
10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the
sovereign was glad with wine, he ordered Mehuman,
Biztha, Ḥarḇona, Biḡtha, and Aḇaḡtha, Zĕthar, and
Karkas, the seven eunuchs who were in attendance
in the presence of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh,
11 to
bring Sovereigness Washti before the
sovereign, with her royal crown, in order to show her
loveliness to the people and the officials, for she was
lovely to look upon.
12 But Sovereigness Washti refused to come at the
sovereign’s command brought by his eunuchs. And
the sovereign was very wroth, and his rage burned
within him.
13 So the sovereign said to the wise men who
understood the times - for in this way the sovereign’s
matter was before all who knew law and right-ruling,
14 and who were close to him: Karshena, Shĕthar,
Aḏmatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, Memuḵan, the
seven princes of Paras and Maḏai, who saw the
sovereign’s face, who sat first in the reign:
15 “According to law, what is to be done to
Sovereigness Washti, because she did not perform
the command of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh, through
the eunuchs?”
16 And Memuḵan answered before the sovereign
and the princes, “Sovereigness Washti has
misbehaved not only toward the sovereign, but also
toward all the princes, and all the people who are in
all the provinces of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh.
17 “For the matter of the sovereigness shall go forth
to all women, to make their husbands despised in
their eyes, when they say, ‘Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh
9

1917

ESTHER

commanded Sovereigness Washti to be brought in
before him, but she did not come.’
18 “And this day the princesses of Paras and Maḏai
shall say to all the sovereign’s officials that they have
heard of the matter of the sovereigness - with plenty
of scorn and wrath.
19 “If it pleases the sovereign, let a royal decree go
out from him, and let it be recorded in the laws of the
Parasians and the Maḏites, so that it does not pass
away, that Washti shall come no more before
Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh. And let the sovereign give
her royal position to another who is better than she.
20 “And the sovereign’s decree which he makes shall
be proclaimed throughout all his rule, great as it is,
and all the wives give esteem to their husbands, both
great and small.”
21 And the word was good in the eyes of the
sovereign and the princes, and the sovereign did
according to the word of Memuḵan.
22 So he sent letters to all the sovereign’s provinces,
to each province in its own writing, and to every
people in their own language, that each man should
be master in his own house and speak in the
language of his people.

2 After these events, when the wrath of Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh had ceased, he remembered Washti,
what she had done, and what had been decreed
against her.
2 Then the sovereign’s servants who attended him
said, “Let lovely young maidens be sought for the
sovereign,
3 and let the sovereign appoint officers in all the
provinces of his reign, and let them gather all the
lovely young maidens to the citadel of Shushan, into
1918

HAḎASSAH

the women’s quarters, under the hand of Hĕḡai the
sovereign’s eunuch, guardian of the women, to give
their preparations.
4 “And let the young woman who pleases the
sovereign be sovereigness instead of Washti.” And
the word pleased the sovereign, and he did so.
5 In the citadel of Shushan there was a certain man,
a Yahuḏi whose name was Mordeḵai son of Ya’ir, son
of Shim’i, son of Qish, a Binyamite,
6 who had been exiled from Yerushalayim with the
captives who had been exiled with Yeḵonyah
sovereign of Yahuḏah, whom Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the
sovereign of Baḇel had exiled.
7 And it came to be that he was raising Haḏassah,
that is Estĕr, his uncle’s daughter, for she had neither
father nor mother. The young woman was lovely and
of good appearance. And when her father and mother
died, Mordeḵai took her as his own daughter.
8 And it came to be, when the sovereign’s command
and decree were heard, and when many young
women were gathered at the citadel of Shushan, into
the hand of Hĕḡai, that Estĕr, too, was taken to the
sovereign’s palace, into the hand of Hĕḡai, guardian
of the women.
9 And the young woman pleased him, and she
received kindness from him. So he hastened to give
her preparations and her portions, and gave her
seven choice female servants from the sovereign’s
palace. And he moved her and her female servants
to the best in the house of the women.
10 Estĕr had not made known her people or her
relatives, for Mordeḵai had commanded her not to
make it known.

1919

ESTHER

And every day Mordeḵai walked about in front of
the courtyard of the women’s quarters, to learn of
Estĕr’s welfare and what is done to her.
12 Now when the turn of each young woman came to
go in to Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh after she had
completed twelve months according to the
regulations for the women - for the days of their
preparation were completed as follows: six months
with oil of myrrh, and six months with perfumes and
with the preparations of women 13 thus prepared, the young woman went to the
sovereign, and whatever she asked for was given to
take with her from the house of the women to the
sovereign’s palace.
14 In the evening she went, and in the morning she
returned to the second house of the women, into the
hand of Sha’ashgaz, the sovereign’s eunuch,
guardian of the concubines. She would not come in
to the sovereign again unless the sovereign delighted
in her and called for her by name.
15 And when the turn came for Estĕr, the daughter of
Aḇiḥayil the uncle of Mordeḵai, who had taken her as
his daughter, to come in to the sovereign, she sought
no matter but what Hĕḡai the sovereign’s eunuch,
guardian of the women, advised. And Estĕr found
favour in the eyes of all who saw her.
16 And Estĕr was taken to Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh,
into his royal palace, in the tenth month, which is the
month of Tĕḇĕth, in the seventh year of his reign.
17 And the sovereign loved Estĕr more than all the
women, and she found favour and kindness in his
eyes more than all the maidens. And he put the royal
crown upon her head and made her sovereigness
instead of Washti.
11

1920

HAḎASSAH

And the sovereign made a great feast, the Feast
of Estĕr, for all his officials and servants. And he
proclaimed a release in the provinces and gave gifts
according to the means of a sovereign.
19 And when maidens were assembled a second
time, Mordeḵai sat within the sovereign’s gate.
20 Estĕr had not made known her relatives and her
people, as Mordeḵai commanded her, for Estĕr
obeyed the command of Mordeḵai as when she was
being raised by him.
21 In those days, while Mordeḵai sat within the
sovereign’s gate, two of the sovereign’s eunuchs,
Biḡthan and Teresh, doorkeepers, were wroth and
sought to lay hands on Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh.
22 And the matter became known to Mordeḵai, who
informed Sovereigness Estĕr, and Estĕr spoke to the
sovereign in Mordeḵai’s name.
23 And when the matter was searched into, it was
confirmed, and both were hanged on a timber. And it
was written in the book of the annals in the presence
of the sovereign.
18

3 After these events Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh
promoted Haman, son of Hammeḏatha the Aḡaḡite,
and exalted him and seated him higher than all the
princes with him.
2 And all the sovereign’s servants who were in the
sovereign’s gate bowed and did obeisance to Haman,
for so the sovereign had commanded concerning him.
But Mordeḵai would not bow or do obeisance.
3 And the sovereign’s servants who were in the
sovereign’s gate said to Mordeḵai, “Why do you
disobey the sovereign’s command?”
4 And it came to be, when they spoke to him daily
and he would not listen to them, that they told Haman,
1921

ESTHER

to see whether the words of Mordeḵai would stand for he had told them that he was Yahuḏi.
5 And when Haman saw that Mordeḵai did not bow
or do obeisance, Haman was filled with wrath.
6 But it was despicable in his eyes to lay hands on
Mordeḵai alone, for they had informed him of the
people of Mordeḵai. Therefore Haman sought to
destroy all the Yahuḏim who were throughout all the
reign of Aḥashwĕrosh, the people of Mordeḵai.
7 In the first month, which is the month of Nisan, in
the twelfth year of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh, someone
cast Pur - that is, the lot - before Haman from day to
day, and from month to month, until it fell on the
twelfth month, which is the month of Aḏar.
8 Haman then told Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh, “There
is a certain people scattered and dispersed among
the people in all the provinces of your reign, whose
Laws are different from all people, and they do not do
the sovereign’s laws. Therefore it is not in the
sovereign’s interest to let them remain.
9 “If it pleases the sovereign, let a decree be written
to destroy them, and let me pay ten thousand kiḵars
of silver into the hands of those who do the work, to
bring it into the sovereign’s treasuries.”
10 And the sovereign took his signet ring from his
hand and gave it to Haman, son of Hammeḏatha the
Aḡaḡite, the enemy of the Yahuḏim.
11 And the sovereign said to Haman, “The silver and
the people are given to you, to do with them as seems
good to you.”
12 And the sovereign’s scribes were called on the
thirteenth day of the first month, and a decree was
written according to all that Haman commanded - to
the viceroys of the sovereign, and to the governors
who were over each province, and to the officials of
1922

HAḎASSAH

all people, to every province according to its writing,
and to every people in their language. It was written
in the name of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh, and sealed
with the sovereign’s signet ring.
13 And the letters were sent by the runners into all
the sovereign’s provinces, to cut off, to slay, and to
destroy all the Yahuḏim, both young and old, little
children and women, in one day, on the thirteenth day
of the twelfth month, which is the month of Aḏar, and
to plunder their possessions.
14 A copy of the writing, to be made law in every
province, was published for all people, to be ready for
that day.
15 The
runners went out, hastened by the
sovereign’s command, and the decree was given out
in the citadel of Shushan. The sovereign and Haman
then sat down to drink, but the city of Shushan was in
confusion.

4 And Mordeḵai learned of all that had been done,
and Mordeḵai tore his garments and put on sackcloth
and ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and
cried out with a loud and bitter cry.
2 And he went up to the front of the sovereign’s gate,
for no one might enter the sovereign’s gate wearing
sackcloth.
3 And in every province where the sovereign’s
command and decree came, there was great
mourning among the Yahuḏim, and fasting, and
weeping, and wailing. And many lay in sackcloth and
ashes.
4 And Estĕr’s young women and eunuchs came and
told her, and the sovereigness was deeply pained,
and sent garments to Mordeḵai to wear, and to take
away his sackcloth from him, but he refused.
1923

ESTHER

And Estĕr called Hathaḵ, one of the sovereign’s
eunuchs whom he had appointed to attend her, and
she gave him a command concerning Mordeḵai, to
learn what and why this was.
6 And Hathaḵ went out to Mordeḵai, to an open
space of the city, in front of the sovereign’s gate.
7 And Mordeḵai told him all that befell him, and all
about the silver that Haman promised to pay into the
sovereign’s treasuries to destroy the Yahuḏim.
8 And he gave him a copy of the written decree to
destroy them, which was given at Shushan, to show
it to Estĕr and explain it to her, and to command her
to go in to the sovereign to make supplication to him,
and plead before him for her people.
9 And Hathaḵ came and told Estĕr the words of
Mordeḵai.
10 And Estĕr spoke to Hathaḵ, and gave him a
command for Mordeḵai,
11 All the sovereign’s servants and the people of the
sovereign’s provinces know that any man or woman
who goes into the inner court to the sovereign, who
has not been called, he has but one law: to be put to
death, except the one to whom the sovereign holds
out the golden sceptre, who then shall live. But I have
not been called to come in to the sovereign these
thirty days.”
12 And they declared to Mordeḵai the words of Estĕr.
13 And Mordeḵai commanded them to answer Estĕr,
“Do not think within yourself to escape in the
sovereign’s palace any more than all the other
Yahuḏim.
14 “For if you keep entirely silent at this time, relief
and deliverance shall arise for the Yahuḏim from
another place, while you and your father’s house
5

1924

HAḎASSAH

perish. And who knows whether you have come to the
reign for such a time as this?”
15 And Estĕr commanded to reply to Mordeḵai,
16 “Go, gather all the Yahuḏim who are present in
Shushan, and fast for me, and do not eat or drink for
three days, night or day. I too, and my young women
shall fast in the same way, then I shall go to the
sovereign, which is against the law. And if I shall
perish, I shall perish!”
17 Mordeḵai then went away and did according to all
that Estĕr commanded him.

5 And it came to be on the third day that Estĕr put on
royal apparel and stood in the inner court of the
sovereign’s palace, in front of the sovereign’s house,
while the sovereign sat on his royal throne in the royal
house, opposite the entrance of the house.
2 And it came to be, when the sovereign saw
Sovereigness Estĕr standing in the court, that she
found favour in his eyes, and the sovereign held out
to Estĕr the golden sceptre which was in his hand.
And Estĕr went near and touched the top of the
sceptre.
3 And the sovereign said to her, “What is it,
Sovereigness Estĕr, and what is your request? Up to
half my reign, and it is given to you!”
4 And Estĕr answered, “If it pleases the sovereign,
let the sovereign and Haman come today to the feast
which I have prepared for him.”
5 And the sovereign said, “Get Haman at once, to
do as Estĕr has said.” Then the sovereign and Haman
went to the feast which Estĕr had prepared.
6 And the sovereign said to Estĕr at the feast of
wine, “What is your petition? And it is given you. And
1925

ESTHER

what is your request? Up to half my reign, and it is
done!”
7 And Estĕr answered and said, “My petition and
request is this:
8 “If I have found favour in the eyes of the sovereign,
and if it pleases the sovereign to give my petition and
perform my request, then let the sovereign and
Haman come to the feast which I make for them, and
tomorrow I shall do according to the word of the
sovereign.”
9 And Haman went out that day rejoicing and with a
glad heart. But when Haman saw Mordeḵai in the
sovereign’s gate, and that he did not stand or tremble
before him, he was filled with wrath against Mordeḵai.
10 But Haman held himself in, and came to his house,
and he sent and called for his loved ones and Zeresh
his wife.
11 And Haman recounted to them the esteem of his
wealth, and his many sons, and all in which the
sovereign had promoted him, and how he had exalted
him above the officials and servants of the sovereign.
12 And Haman said, “Besides Estĕr the sovereigness
let no one but me come in with the sovereign to the
feast which she prepared. And tomorrow too I am
invited by her, along with the sovereign.
13 “But all this does not suit me, as long as I see
Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi sitting at the sovereign’s gate.”
14 So his wife Zeresh and all his loved ones said to
him, “Let a timber be made, fifty ammah high, and in
the morning speak to the sovereign that Mordeḵai be
hanged on it. And go with the sovereign to the feast,
rejoicing.” And the word pleased Haman, and he had
the timber made.

1926

HAḎASSAH

6 On that night the sleep of the sovereign fled, and he
commanded to bring, the book of the records of the
annals. And they were read before the sovereign.
2 And it was found written that Mordeḵai had told of
Biḡthana and Teresh, two of the sovereign’s eunuchs,
the doorkeepers who had sought to lay hands on
Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh.
3 Then the sovereign said, “What has been done in
value or in greatness to Mordeḵai for this?” And the
sovereign’s servants who attended him said, “Naught
has been done for him.”
4 And the sovereign said, “Who is in the court?” Now
Haman had come into the outer court of the
sovereign’s palace to speak to the sovereign to hang
Mordeḵai on the timber that he had prepared for him.
5 And the sovereign’s servants said to him, “Look,
Haman is standing in the court.” And the sovereign
said, “Let him come in.”
6 And when Haman came in, the sovereign asked
him, “What is to be done for the man whom the
sovereign delights to value?” Now Haman thought in
his heart, “Whom would the sovereign delight to value
more than me?”
7 And Haman answered the sovereign, “For the
man whom the sovereign delights to value,
8 let a royal robe be brought which the sovereign
has worn, and a horse on which the sovereign has
ridden, one with a royal crest placed on its head.
9 “And let this robe and horse be given into the hand
of one of the sovereign’s most noble princes. Let
them dress the man whom the sovereign delights to
value. And make him ride on horseback through the
city square, and proclaim before him, ‘Thus it is done
to the man whom the sovereign delights to value!’ ”
1927

ESTHER

And the sovereign said to Haman, “Hurry, take the
robe and the horse, as you have spoken, and do so
for Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi who sits in the sovereign’s
gate. Let no word fail of all that you have spoken.”
11 And Haman took the robe and the horse, and
robed Mordeḵai and led him on horseback through
the city square, and proclaimed before him, “Thus it
is done to the man the sovereign delights to value.”
12 Then Mordeḵai went back to the sovereign’s gate.
But Haman hurried to his house, mourning and with
covered head.
13 And when Haman related to his wife Zeresh and
all his loved ones all that had befallen him, his wise
men and his wife Zeresh said to him, “If Mordeḵai,
before whom you have begun to fall, is from the seed
of the Yahuḏim, you are not going to prevail against
him but certainly fall before him.”
14 While they were still speaking with him, the
sovereign’s eunuchs came, and hurried to bring
Haman to the feast which Estĕr had prepared.
10

7 And the sovereign and Haman came in, to drink with
Sovereigness Estĕr.
2 And again on the second day, at the feast of wine,
the sovereign said to Estĕr, “What is your petition,
Sovereigness Estĕr? And it is given to you. And what
is your request? Up to half my reign, and it is done!”
3 And Sovereigness Estĕr answered and said, “If I
have found favour in your eyes, O sovereign, and if it
pleases the sovereign, let my life be given me at my
petition, and my people at my request.
4 “For we have been sold, my people and I, to be cut
off, to be slain, and to be destroyed. And if we had
been sold as male and female slaves, I would have
1928

HAḎASSAH

kept silent, although the adversary could not make up
for the sovereign’s loss.”
5 Then
Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh
asked
Sovereigness Estĕr, “Who is he, and where is he,
who filled his heart to do so?”
6 And Estĕr said, “The adversary and enemy is this
evil Haman!” Then Haman was afraid before the
sovereign and sovereigness.
7 And the sovereign, arising in his wrath from the
feast of wine, went into the palace garden. And
Haman remained before Sovereigness Estĕr,
pleading for his life, for he saw that evil had been
decided against him by the sovereign.
8 And when the sovereign returned from the palace
garden to the place of the feast of wine, Haman was
falling on the couch where Estĕr was. Then the
sovereign said, “Also to ravish the sovereigness while
I am in the house?” As the word left the sovereign’s
mouth, they covered Haman’s face.
9 And Ḥarḇonah, one of the eunuchs, said to the
sovereign, “Also, see the timber, fifty ammah high,
which Haman made for Mordeḵai, who spoke good
on behalf of the sovereign, is standing at the house of
Haman.” And the sovereign said, “Hang him on it!”
10 And they hanged Haman on the timber that he had
prepared for Mordeḵai, and the sovereign’s wrath
abated.

8 On that day Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh gave to
Sovereigness Estĕr the house of Haman, the
adversary of the Yahuḏim. And Mordeḵai came before
the sovereign, for Estĕr had explained what he was to
her.
2 And the sovereign took off his signet ring, which
he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordeḵai.
1929

ESTHER

And Estĕr appointed Mordeḵai over the house of
Haman.
3 And Estĕr spoke to the sovereign again, and fell
down at his feet and begged him with tears to put an
end to the evil of Haman the Aḡaḡite, and his plot
which he had plotted against the Yahuḏim.
4 And the sovereign held out the golden sceptre
toward Estĕr. And Estĕr arose and stood before the
sovereign,
5 and said, “If it pleases the sovereign, and if I have
found favour in his sight and the matter is right before
the sovereign and I am pleasing in his eyes, let it be
written to bring back the letters, the plot by Haman,
son of Hammeḏatha the Aḡaḡite, which he wrote to
destroy the Yahuḏim who are in all the sovereign’s
provinces.
6 “For how could I bear to see the evil coming to my
people? Or how could I bear to see the destruction of
my relatives?”
7 And
Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh
said
to
Sovereigness Estĕr and Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi, “Look,
I have given Estĕr the house of Haman, and they
have hanged him on the timber because he laid his
hand on the Yahuḏim.
8 “Now you write on behalf of the Yahuḏim, as it
pleases you, in the sovereign’s name, and seal it with
the sovereign’s signet ring. For a letter which is
written in the sovereign’s name and sealed with the
sovereign’s signet ring no one turns back.”
9 So the sovereign’s scribes were called at that time,
in the third month, which is the month of Siwan, on
the twenty-third day. And it was written, according to
all that Mordeḵai commanded to the Yahuḏim, and to
the viceroys, and the governors, and the princes of
the provinces from Hodu to Kush, a hundred and
1930

HAḎASSAH

twenty-seven provinces, to every province in its own
writing, to every people in their own language, and to
the Yahuḏim in their own writing, and in their own
language.
10 And he wrote in the name of Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh, and sealed it with the sovereign’s
signet ring, and sent letters by runners on horseback,
riding on royal horses bred from speedy mares:
11 That the sovereign has granted to the Yahuḏim
who were in every city to be assembled and stand for
their lives - to cut off, to slay, and to destroy all the
power of the people or province that would distress
them, little children and women, and to plunder their
possessions,
12 on one day in all the provinces of Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth
month, which is the month of Aḏar.
13 The copy of the writing to be made law in every
province was announced to all the peoples, so that
the Yahuḏim would be ready on that day to be
avenged on their enemies.
14 The runners, riding on royal horses, went out,
hastened and pressed on by the sovereign’s
command. And the decree was given out in the
citadel of Shushan.
15 And Mordeḵai went out from the presence of the
sovereign wearing royal garments of blue and white,
with a great crown of gold and a garment of fine linen
and purple. And the city of Shushan rejoiced and was
glad.
16 For the Yahuḏim there was light and gladness and
joy and value.
17 And in every province and in every city where the
sovereign’s command and decree came, the
Yahuḏim had joy and gladness, a feast and a good
1931

ESTHER

day. And many of the people of the land were
becoming Yahuḏim, for the fear of the Yahuḏim had
fallen upon them.

9 And in the twelfth month, that is, the month of Aḏar,
on the thirteenth day, when the sovereign’s command
and his decree came to be done, on the day that the
enemies of the Yahuḏim had waited to overpower
them, it turned around, so that the Yahuḏim
overpowered those who hated them.
2 The Yahuḏim assembled in their cities, throughout
all the provinces of Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh to lay
hands on those who sought their evil. And no one
stood against them, because fear of them fell upon all
people.
3 And all the officials of the provinces, and the
viceroys, and the governors, and all those doing the
sovereign’s work, helped the Yahuḏim, because the
fear of Mordeḵai fell upon them.
4 For Mordeḵai was great in the palace of the
sovereign, and his report spread into all the
provinces, for this man Mordeḵai became greater and
greater.
5 And the Yahuḏim smote all their enemies with the
stroke of the sword, with slaughter and destruction,
and did what they pleased to those who hated them.
6 And in the citadel of Shushan the Yahuḏim slew
and destroyed five hundred men.
7 And they slew Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and
Aspatha,
8 and Poratha, and Aḏalya, and Ariḏatha,
9 and Parmashta, and Arisai, and Ariḏai, and
Wayezatha,

1932

HAḎASSAH

the ten sons of Haman son of Hammeḏatha, the
enemy of the Yahuḏim. But they did not lay a hand on
the plunder.
11 On that day the number of those who were slain in
the citadel of Shushan came before the sovereign.
12 And the sovereign said to Sovereigness Estĕr,
“The Yahuḏim have slain and destroyed five hundred
men in the citadel of Shushan, and the ten sons of
Haman. What have they done, in the rest of the
sovereign’s provinces? And what is your petition?
And it is given to you. And what is your further
request? And it is done.”
13 And Estĕr said, “If it pleases the sovereign, let it
be given to the Yahuḏim who are in Shushan to do
again tomorrow according to today’s decree, and let
Haman’s ten sons be hanged on the timber.”
14 And the sovereign commanded this to be done.
And the decree was given in Shushan, and they
hanged Haman’s ten sons.
15 And the Yahuḏim who were in Shushan also
assembled on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar
and they slew three hundred men at Shushan. But
they did not lay a hand on the plunder.
16 And the rest of the Yahuḏim in the sovereign’s
provinces assembled and stood for their lives, and to
get rest from their enemies, and to slay seventy-five
thousand of their enemies. But they did not lay a hand
on the plunder.
17 On the thirteenth day of the month of Aḏar, and on
the fourteenth day of the month they rested and made
it a day of feasting and gladness.
18 But the Yahuḏim who were at Shushan assembled
on the thirteenth, as well as on the fourteenth. And on
the fifteenth of the month they rested, and made it a
day of feasting and gladness.
10

1933

ESTHER

Therefore the Yahuḏim of the villages who dwelt
in the unwalled towns were making the fourteenth day
of the month of Aḏar a good day of gladness and
feasting, and for sending portions to one another.
20 And Mordeḵai wrote these matters and sent letters
to all the Yahuḏim who were in all the provinces of
Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh, both near and far,
21 to establish among them, to observe the
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month of Aḏar,
yearly,
22 as the days on which the Yahuḏim had rest from
their enemies, as the month which was turned from
sorrow to joy for them, and from mourning to a good
day, that they should make them days of feasting and
joy, of sending portions to one another and gifts to the
poor.
23 And the Yahuḏim undertook to do as they had
begun, and as Mordeḵai had written to them,
24 because Haman, son of Hammeḏatha the
Aḡaḡite, adversary of all the Yahuḏim, had plotted
against the Yahuḏim to destroy them, and had cast
Pur - that is, the lot - to crush them and to destroy
them.
25 But when she came before the sovereign, he
commanded by letter that his evil plot which Haman
had plotted against the Yahuḏim should return on his
own head, and that he and his sons should be
impaled on the stake.
26 Therefore they called these days Purim, after the
name Pur. Therefore, because of all the words of this
letter, what they had seen concerning this matter, and
what had come upon them,
27 the Yahuḏim established and imposed it upon
themselves and upon their seed and all who should
join them, that without fail they should observe these
19

1934

HAḎASSAH

two days every year, according to their writing and at
their appointed time,
28 and that these days should be remembered and
observed throughout every generation, every clan,
every province, and every city, and that these days of
Purim should not fail from among the Yahuḏim, and
that the remembrance of them should not cease from
their seed.
29 And Sovereigness Estĕr, daughter of Aḇiḥayil,
with Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi, wrote with all authority to
confirm this second letter about Purim.
30 And Mordeḵai sent letters to all the Yahuḏim, to
the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the reign
of Aḥashwĕrosh, words of peace and truth,
31 to establish these days of Purim at their appointed
times, as Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi and Sovereigness
Estĕr had established for them, and as they had
established for themselves and their seed concerning
matters of their fastings and lamenting.
32 And the decree of Estĕr established these matters
of Purim, and it was written in the book.

10 And Sovereign Aḥashwĕrosh laid compulsory
labour on the land and the islands of the sea.
2 And all the acts of his power and his might, and
the exact account of the greatness of Mordeḵai, with
which the sovereign made him great, are they not
written in the book of the annals of the sovereigns of
Maḏai and Paras?
3 For Mordeḵai the Yahuḏi was second to Sovereign
Aḥashwĕrosh, and great among the Yahuḏim and
pleasing to his many brothers, seeking the good of his
people and speaking peace to all his seed.

1935

EZRA

EZRA
‫ עזרא‬ARz[

1 And in the first year of Koresh sovereign of Paras,
that the word of HWHY by the mouth of Yirmeyahu
might be accomplished, HWHY stirred up the spirit of
Koresh sovereign of Paras, to proclaim throughout all
his reign, and also in writing, saying,
2 “Thus said Koresh sovereign of Paras, ‘HWHY
Elohim of the shamayim has given me all the reigns
of the earth. And He has commanded me to build Him
a House in Yerushalayim which is in Yahuḏah.
3 Who is among you of all His people? His Elohim
be with him! And let him go up to Yerushalayim, which
is in Yahuḏah, and build the House of HWHY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl - He is Elohim - which is in Yerushalayim.
4 And whoever is left from all the places where he
sojourns, let the men of his place help him with silver
and gold, with goods and livestock, besides the
voluntary offerings for the House of Elohim which is
in Yerushalayim.’ ”
5 And the heads of the fathers of Yahuḏah and
Binyamin, and the kohenim and the Lĕwites, with all
those whose spirits Elohim had stirred, rose up to go
up and build the House of HWHY which is in
Yerushalayim.
6 And all those round about them strengthened their
hands with objects of silver and gold, with goods and
livestock, and with valuables, besides all that was
voluntarily offered.
7 And Sovereign Koresh brought out the utensils of
the House of HWHY, which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had
taken from Yerushalayim and put in the house of his
mighty ones,
1936

EZRA

and Koresh sovereign of Paras brought them out
by the hand of Mithreḏath the treasurer, and counted
them out to Shĕshbatstsar the leader of Yahuḏah.
9 And these were their number: thirty gold dishes,
one thousand silver dishes, twenty-nine knives,
10 thirty gold basins, next, four hundred and ten silver
basins, one thousand other utensils.
11 All the utensils of gold and silver were five
thousand four hundred. Shĕshbatstsar took all of
them with the exiles who were brought from Baḇel to
Yerushalayim.
8

2 And these are the sons of the province who came
back from the captivity of the exiles, whom
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel had exiled to
Baḇel, and who returned to Yerushalayim and
Yahuḏah, each to his own city,
2 who came with Zerubbaḇel: Yĕshua, Neḥemyah,
Serayah, Re’ĕlayah, Mordeḵai, Bilshan, Mispar,
Biḡwai, Reḥum, Ba’anah. The number of the men of
the people of Yisra’ĕl:
3 sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred and
seventy-two;
4 sons of Shephatyah, three hundred and seventytwo;
5 sons of Araḥ, seven hundred and seventy-five;
6 sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ, of the sons of Yĕshua and
Yoaḇ, two thousand eight hundred and twelve;
7 sons of Ĕylam, one thousand two hundred and
fifty-four;
8 sons of Zattu, nine hundred and forty-five;
9 sons of Zakkai, seven hundred and sixty;
10 sons of Bani, six hundred and forty-two;
11 sons of Bĕḇai, six hundred and twenty-three;
12 sons of Azgaḏ, one thousand two hundred and
twenty-two;
13 sons of Aḏoniqam, six hundred and sixty-six;
1937

EZRA

sons of Biḡwai, two thousand and fifty-six;
15 sons of Aḏin, four hundred and fifty-four;
16 sons of Atĕr of Ḥizqiyah, ninety-eight;
17 sons of Bĕtsai, three hundred and twenty-three;
18 sons of Yorah, one hundred and twelve;
19 sons of Ḥashum, two hundred and twenty-three;
20 sons of Gibbar, ninety-five;
21 sons of Bĕyth Leḥem, one hundred and twentythree;
22 men of Netophah, fifty-six;
23 men of Anathoth, one hundred and twenty-eight;
24 sons of Azmaweth, forty-two;
25 sons of Qiryath Arim, Kephirah, and Be’ĕroth,
seven hundred and forty-three;
26 sons of Ramah and Geḇa, six hundred and
twenty-one;
27 men of Miḵmas, one hundred and twenty-two;
28 men of Bĕyth Ĕl and Ai, two hundred and twentythree;
29 sons of Neḇo, fifty-two;
30 sons of Maḡbish, one hundred and fifty-six;
31 sons of the other Ĕylam, one thousand two
hundred and fifty-four;
32 sons of Ḥarim, three hundred and twenty;
33 sons of Loḏ, Ḥaḏiḏ, and Ono, seven hundred and
twenty-five;
34 sons of Yeriḥo, three hundred and forty-five;
35 sons of Sena’ah, three thousand six hundred and
thirty.
36 The kohenim: sons of Yeḏayah, of the house of
Yĕshua, nine hundred and seventy-three;
37 sons of Immĕr, one thousand and fifty-two;
38 sons of Pashḥur, one thousand two hundred and
forty-seven;
39 sons of Ḥarim, one thousand and seventeen.
40 The Lĕwites: sons of Yĕshua and Qaḏmi’ĕl, of the
sons of Hoḏawyah, seventy-four.
14

1938

EZRA

The singers: sons of Asaph, one hundred and
twenty-eight.
42 Sons of the gatekeepers: sons of Shallum, sons of
Atĕr, sons of Talmon, sons of Aqquḇ, sons of Ḥatita,
sons of Shoḇai, one hundred and thirty-nine in all.
43 The Nethinim: sons of Tsiḥa, sons of Ḥasupha,
sons of Tabba’oth,
44 sons of Qĕros, sons of Si’aha, sons of Paḏon,
45 sons of Leḇanah, sons of Ḥaḡaḇah, sons of
Aqquḇ,
46 sons of Ḥaḡaḇ, sons of Shamlai, sons of Ḥanan,
47 sons of Giddĕl, sons of Gaḥar, sons of Re’ayah,
48 sons of Retsin, sons of Neqoḏa, sons of Gazzam,
49 sons of Uzza, sons of Pasĕaḥ, sons of Bĕsai,
50 sons of Asnah, sons of Me’unim, sons of
Nephusim,
51 sons of Baqbuq, sons of Ḥaqupha, sons of Ḥarḥur,
52 sons of Batsluth, sons of Meḥiḏa, sons of Ḥarsha,
53 sons of Barqos, sons of Sisera, sons of Tĕmaḥ,
54 sons of Netsiyaḥ, sons of Ḥatipha.
55 Sons of Shelomoh’s servants: sons of Sotai, sons
of Sophereth, sons of Peruḏa,
56 sons of Ya’ala, sons of Darqon, sons of Giddĕl,
57 sons of Shephatyah, sons of Ḥattil, sons of
Poḵereth of Tseḇayim, sons of Ami.
58 All the Nethinim and the children of Shelomoh’s
servants were three hundred and ninety-two.
59 And these were those who came up from Tĕl
Melaḥ, Tĕl Ḥarsha, Kerub, Addan, Immĕr; but they
were unable to show their father’s house, and their
seed, whether they were of Yisra’ĕl:
60 sons of Delayah, sons of Toḇiyah, sons of
Neqoḏa, six hundred and fifty-two;
61 and of the sons of the kohenim: sons of Ḥaḇayah,
sons of Qots, sons of Barzillai, who took a wife of the
daughters of Barzillai the Gil’aḏite, and was called by
their name.
41

1939

EZRA

These sought their register of those who were
counted by genealogy, but they were not found, so
they were as defiled from the kehunnah.
63 And the governor said to them that they should not
eat of the most qodesh gifts until there stood up a
kohĕn with the Urim and Tummim.
64 The entire assembly was forty-two thousand three
hundred and sixty,
65 besides their male and female servants - these
were seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven.
They also had two hundred men and women singers.
66 Their horses were seven hundred and thirty-six,
their mules two hundred and forty-five,
67 their camels four hundred and thirty-five, donkeys
six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
68 And some of the heads of the fathers’ houses,
when they came to the House of HWHY which is in
Yerushalayim, offered voluntarily for the House of
Elohim, to establish it in its place.
69 They gave according to their ability to the treasury
for the work sixty-one thousand gold draḵmas, and
five thousand minas of silver, and one hundred
garments of kohenim.
70 And the kohenim and the Lĕwites, and some of the
people, and the singers, and the gatekeepers, and
the Nethinim, dwelt in their cities, and all Yisra’ĕl in
their cities.
62

3 Now when the seventh month came, and the
children of Yisra’ĕl were in the cities, the people
gathered as one man to Yerushalayim.
2 And Yĕshua son of Yotsaḏaq and his brothers the
kohenim, and Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl and his
brothers, arose and built the altar of the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, to offer burnt offerings on it, as it is written in
the Torah of Mosheh, the man of Elohim.
1940

EZRA

So they put the altar on its stands, being afraid of
the peoples of the lands. And they offered burnt
offerings on it to HWHY, both the morning and evening
burnt offerings.
4 And they performed the Festival of Sukkoth, as it
is written, and the daily burnt offerings by number,
according to the Right-Ruling for each day,
5 and afterward the continual burnt offering, and
those for New Moons and for all the Appointed Times
of HWHY that were qodesh, also for everyone who
volunteered a voluntary offering to HWHY.
6 From the first day of the seventh month they
began to offer burnt offerings to HWHY. But the
foundation of the Hĕyḵal of HWHY had not been laid.
7 And they gave silver to the stonemasons and the
carpenters, and food, and drink, and oil to the people
of Tsiḏon and Tsor to bring cedar logs from Leḇanon
to the sea at Yapho, according to the permission
which they had from Koresh sovereign of Paras.
8 And in the second month of the second year of
their coming to the House of Elohim, to Yerushalayim,
Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl and Yĕshua son of
Yotsaḏaq, and the rest of their brothers the kohenim
and the Lĕwites, and all those who had come out of
the captivity to Yerushalayim, began, and they
appointed the Lĕwites from twenty years old and
above to oversee the work of the House of HWHY.
9 And Yĕshua stood up, his sons and his brothers,
Qaḏmi’ĕl with his sons, the sons of Yahuḏah together,
to oversee those working on the House of Elohim: the
sons of Ḥĕnaḏaḏ with their sons and their brothers
the Lĕwites.
10 And when the builders laid the foundation of the
Hĕyḵal of HWHY, they appointed the kohenim in their
robes, with trumpets, and the Lĕwites, the sons of
Asaph, with cymbals, to praise HWHY, after the order
of Dawiḏ sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
3

1941

EZRA

And they responded by praising and giving thanks
to HWHY, “For He is good, for His kindness towards
Yisra’ĕl is forever.” And all the people shouted with a
great shout, when they praised HWHY, because the
foundation of the House of HWHY was laid.
12 And many of the kohenim and Lĕwites and heads
of the fathers, the old men who had seen the first
House, wept with a loud voice when the foundation of
this House was laid before their eyes, and many
shouted aloud for joy,
13 and the people could not distinguish the noise of
the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the
people, for the people shouted with a loud shout, and
the sound was heard far away.
11

4 And when the adversaries of Yahuḏah and
Binyamin heard that the sons of the exile were building
the Hĕyḵal of HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
2 they came to Zerubbaḇel and the heads of the
fathers and said to them, “Let us build with you, for
we seek your Elohim as you do. And we have
slaughtered to Him since the days of Ĕsarḥaddon
sovereign of Ashshur, who brought us here.”
3 But Zerubbaḇel and Yĕshua and the rest of the
heads of the fathers of Yisra’ĕl said to them, “It is not
for you and for us to build a House for our Elohim, but
we alone build to HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, as
Sovereign Koresh the sovereign of Paras has
commanded us.”
4 And it came to be that the people of the land were
weakening the hands of the people of Yahuḏah and
troubling them in their building,
5 and hiring counsellors against them to thwart their
plans all the days of Koresh sovereign of Paras, even
until the reign of Dareyawesh sovereign of Paras.

1942

EZRA

And in the reign of Aḥashwĕrosh, in the beginning
of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the
inhabitants of Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim.
7 And in the days of Artaḥshashta, Bishlam,
Mithreḏath, Taḇe’ĕl, and the rest of their companions
wrote to Artaḥshashta sovereign of Paras. And the
letter was written in Aramaic, and translated Aramaic.
8 Reḥum the governor and Shimshai the scribe
wrote a letter against Yerushalayim to Sovereign
Artaḥshashta thus:
9 Reḥum the governor, and Shimshai the scribe,
and the rest of their companions - the judges, and the
emissaries, the consuls, the officials, the people of
Ereḵ and of Baḇel and of Shushan, the Dehawites,
the Ĕylamites,
10 and the rest of the nations whom the great and
noble Osnappar took into exile and settled in the cities
of Shomeron and the rest beyond the River. And now,
11 this is a copy of the letter that they sent him, to
Sovereign Artaḥshashta from your servants the men
beyond the River. And now,
12 let it be known to the sovereign that the Yahuḏim
who came up from you have come to us at
Yerushalayim, and are building the rebellious and evil
city, and are completing its walls and repairing the
foundations.
13 Now let it now be known to the sovereign that, if
this city is built and the walls completed, they are not
going to pay tax, excise, or toll, and cause the
revenue of the sovereign to suffer loss.
14 Now, because we have eaten salt from the palace,
it was not fitting for us to see the sovereign’s shame.
Therefore we have sent and informed the sovereign,
15 so that search be made in the book of the records
of your fathers, and you find in the book of the
records, and know, that this city is a rebellious city,
and causing loss to sovereigns and provinces. And
6

1943

EZRA

revolt was stirred up in it since days of old, for which
cause this city was destroyed.
16 We inform the sovereign that if this city is rebuilt
and its walls are completed, then you have no portion
beyond the River.
17 The sovereign sent a message: To Reḥum the
governor, and Shimshai the scribe, to the rest of their
companions who dwell in Shomeron, and the rest
beyond the River: Peace! And now,
18 the letter you sent to us has been plainly read
before me.
19 And I made the decree, and a search has been
made, and it was found that this city in days of old has
lifted up itself against sovereigns, and that rebellion
and revolt have been made in it.
20 And
mighty sovereigns have been over
Yerushalayim, who have ruled over all beyond the
River. And tax, excise, and toll were paid to them.
21 Now, make a decree to make these men cease,
and that this city be not built until the command is
given by me.
22 And beware of negligence to do this. Why should
damage increase to the hurt of the sovereigns?
23 Now when the copy of the letter of Sovereign
Artaḥshashta was read before Reḥum, and Shimshai
the scribe, and their companions, they went up in a
hurry to Yerushalayim against the Yahuḏim, and
made them cease by might and power.
24 Then the work of the House of Elah which is at
Yerushalayim ceased, and it ceased until the second
year of the reign of Dareyawesh sovereign of Paras.

5 Then the neḇi’im, Ḥaggai the naḇi and Zeḵaryah
son of Iddo, naḇu to the Yahuḏim who were in
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, in the Name of the Elah
of Yisra’ĕl upon them.
1944

EZRA

Then Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl and Yĕshua
son of Yotsaḏaq rose up and began to build the
House of Elah which is in Yerushalayim. And the
neḇi’im of Elah were with them, helping them.
3 At that time Tattenai the governor beyond the
River and Shethar-Bozenai and their companions
came to them and said this to them, “Who has made
you a decree to build this House and to complete this
wall?”
4 Then we told them what the names were of the
men who were building this building.
5 And the eye of their Elah was upon the elders of
the Yahuḏim, so that they could not make them cease
until the matter went to Dareyawesh. And then they
sent back a letter concerning this.
6 This is a copy of the letter that Tattenai, governor
beyond the River, had sent, and Shethar-Bozenai,
and his companions the officials beyond the River, to
Dareyawesh the sovereign.
7 They sent a letter to him, and this was written in it:
To Dareyawesh the sovereign: All peace.
8 Let it be known to the sovereign that we went into
the province of Yahuḏah, to the House of the great
Elah, which is being built with heavy stones, and
timber is being laid in the walls. And this work goes
on speedily and is baruḵ in their hands.
9 Then we asked those elders, saying this to them,
“Who made you a decree to build this House and to
complete these walls?”
10 And we also asked them their names, in order to
inform you, so we could write the names of the men
at their head.
11 And this is the answer they gave us, saying, “We
are the servants of the Elah of shamayim and earth,
and we are rebuilding the House that was built many
years ago, which a great sovereign of Yisra’ĕl built
and completed.
2

1945

EZRA

“But because our fathers provoked the Elah of
shamayim, He gave them into the hand of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel, the Kasdite,
who destroyed this House and exiled the people to
Baḇel.
13 “But in the first year of Koresh sovereign of Baḇel,
Koresh the sovereign made a decree to build this
House of Elah.
14 “And also, the gold and silver utensils of the House
of Elah, which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar had taken from the
Hĕyḵal that was in Yerushalayim and brought to the
temple of Baḇel, those Sovereign Koresh took from
the temple of Baḇel and they were given to one
named Shĕshbatstsar, whom he had made governor,
15 and said to him, ‘Take these utensils go, deposit
them in the Hĕyḵal in Yerushalayim, and let the
House of Elah be built on its place.’
16 “Then the same Shĕshbatstsar came, laid the
foundation of the House of Elah which is in
Yerushalayim, and since that time even until now it
has been in building, and it is not completed.”
17 And now, if it seems good to the sovereign, let a
search be made in the sovereign’s treasure-house,
which is there in Baḇel, whether it is so that a decree
was made by Sovereign Koresh to build this House of
Elah at Yerushalayim, and let the sovereign send us
his decision concerning this.
12

6 Then Dareyawesh the sovereign made a decree,
and a search was made in the house of the books
wherein also the treasures of Baḇel were kept.
2 And at Aḥmetha, in the palace which is in the
province of Maḏai, a scroll was found, and this was
written in it:
3 In the first year of Sovereign Koresh, Sovereign
Koresh made a decree concerning the House of Elah
in Yerushalayim, “Let the House be built in the place
1946

EZRA

where they brought offerings, and its foundations
strongly laid, its height sixty ammah, its width sixty
ammah,
4 three rows of heavy stones and one row of new
timber. Let the expenses be paid from the sovereign’s
house.
5 “And let the gold and silver utensils of the House
of Elah, which Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar took from the Hĕyḵal
which is in Yerushalayim and brought to Baḇel, be
returned and go to the Hĕyḵal which is in
Yerushalayim, to its place, and deposit them in the
House of Elah,”
6 Now, Tattenai, governor beyond the River, and
Shethar-Bozenai, and your companions the officials
beyond the River, stay away from there.
7 Leave the work of this House of Elah alone. Let
the governor of the Yahuḏim and the elders of the
Yahuḏim build this House of Elah on its place.
8 And I make a decree as to what you should do for
the elders of these Yahuḏim, for the building of this
House of Elah: Let the exact expense be paid to these
men from the sovereign’s resources, out of the taxes
beyond the River, so that they are not stopped.
9 And whatever they need - both young bulls and
rams, and lambs for the burnt offerings of the Elah of
shamayim, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the
request of the kohenim who are in Yerushalayim - let
it be given them day by day without fail,
10 so that they bring pleasing offerings to the Elah of
shamayim, and pray for the life of the sovereign and
his sons.
11 And I make a decree that whoever changes this
word, let a timber be pulled from his house, and let
him be impaled, hanged on it. And let his house be
made a dunghill because of this.
12 And Elah, who has caused His Name to dwell
there overthrows any sovereign or people who put
1947

EZRA

their hand to change, to destroy this House of Elah
which is in Yerushalayim! I Dareyawesh make the
decree - let it be done promptly.
13 Then Tattenai, governor beyond the River,
Shethar-Bozenai, and their companions promptly did
according to what Dareyawesh the sovereign had
sent.
14 And the elders of the Yahuḏim were building, and
they were baraḵ through the naḇa of Ḥaggai the naḇi
and Zeḵaryah son of Iddo. And they built and finished
it, according to the decree of the Elah of Yisra’ĕl, and
according to the decree of Koresh, and Dareyawesh,
and Artaḥshashta sovereign of Paras.
15 And this House was completed on the third day of
the month of Aḏar, which was in the sixth year of the
reign of Sovereign Dareyawesh.
16 Then the children of Yisra’ĕl, the kohenim and the
Lĕwites and the rest of the sons of the exile, did the
dedication of this House of Elah with joy,
17 and offered at the dedication of this House of Elah
one hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred
lambs, and as a sin offering for all Yisra’ĕl twelve
male goats, according to the number of the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl.
18 And they appointed the kohenim to their divisions
and the Lĕwites to their divisions, over the service of
Elah in Yerushalayim, as it is written in the Book of
Mosheh.
19 And the sons of the exile performed the Pesaḥ on
the fourteenth day of the first month,
20 for the kohenim and the Lĕwites had cleansed
themselves - all of them were clean. And they
slaughtered the Pesaḥ for all the sons of the exile,
and for their brothers the kohenim, and for
themselves.
21 And the children of Yisra’ĕl who had returned from
the exile ate together with all who had separated
1948

EZRA

themselves from the uncleanness of the gentiles of
the land in order to seek HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
22 And they performed the Festival of Matstsoth
seven days with joy, for HWHY caused them to rejoice,
and turned the heart of the sovereign of Ashshur
toward them, to strengthen their hands in the work of
the House of Elohim, the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.

7 And after these events, in the reign of Artaḥshashta
sovereign of Paras, Ezra son of Serayah, son of
Azaryahu, son of Ḥilqiyahu,
2 son of Shallum, son of Tsaḏoq, son of Aḥituḇ,
3 son of Amaryah, son of Azaryahu, son of
Merayoth,
4 son of Zeraḥyah, son of Uzzi, son of Buqqi,
5 son of Aḇishua, son of Pineḥas, son of El’azar, son
of Aharon the chief kohĕn 6 this Ezra came up from Baḇel. And he was a
scribe, skilled in the Torah of Mosheh, which HWHY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl had given. And the sovereign gave
him all he asked, according to the hand of HWHY his
Elohim upon him.
7 And some of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and the
kohenim, and the Lĕwites, and the singers, and the
gatekeepers, and the Nethinim came up to
Yerushalayim in the seventh year of Sovereign
Artaḥshashta.
8 And he came to Yerushalayim in the fifth month,
which was in the seventh year of the sovereign.
9 For on the first of the first month he began to go
up from Baḇel, and on the first day of the fifth month
he came to Yerushalayim, according to the good
hand of his Elohim upon him.
10 For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Torah
of HWHY, and to do it, and to teach Laws and RightRulings in Yisra’ĕl.
1949

EZRA

And this is the copy of the letter that Sovereign
Artaḥshashta gave Ezra the kohĕn, the scribe, a
scribe in the Words of the Commands of HWHY, and
of His Laws to Yisra’ĕl:
12 Artaḥshashta, sovereign of sovereigns, to Ezra
the kohĕn, a perfect scribe of the Law of the Elah of
shamayim. And now,
13 I make a decree that all those of the people of
Yisra’ĕl and the kohenim and Lĕwites in my reign,
who volunteer to go up to Yerushalayim, go with you.
14 Since you are being sent by the sovereign and his
seven counsellors to inquire about Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, with regard to the Law of your Elah
which is in your hand;
15 and to bring the silver and gold which the
sovereign and his counsellors have voluntarily given
to the Elah of Yisra’ĕl, whose dwelling is in
Yerushalayim,
16 and all the silver and gold that you find in all the
province of Baḇel, along with the gift of the people
and the kohenim, voluntarily given for the House of
their Elah in Yerushalayim,
17 therefore, with this silver promptly buy bulls, rams,
lambs, with their grain offerings and their drink
offerings, and offer them on the altar of the House of
your Elah in Yerushalayim.
18 And whatever seems good to you and your
brothers to do with the rest of the silver and the gold,
do it according to the desire of your Elah.
19 And the utensils that are given to you for the
service of the House of your Elah, put back before the
Elah of Yerushalayim.
20 And the rest of the needs for the House of your
Elah, which falls to you to give, give from the
sovereign’s treasure-house.
21 And I, I Artaḥshashta the sovereign, do make a
decree to all the treasurers who are beyond the River,
11

1950

EZRA

that whatever Ezra the kohĕn, the scribe of the Law
of the Elah of shamayim, asks of you, let it be done
promptly,
22 up to one hundred kiḵars of silver, and up to one
hundred kors of wheat, and up to one hundred baths
of wine, and up to one hundred baths of oil, and salt
without reckoning.
23 Whatever is commanded by the Elah of
shamayim, let it be diligently done for the House of
the Elah of shamayim. For why should there be wrath
against the reign of the sovereign and his sons?
24 We further inform you that there is no authority to
impose tax, excise, or toll on any of the kohenim and
Lĕwites, singers, gatekeepers, Nethinim, and
servants of this House of Elah.
25 And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of your
Elah that is in your hand, appoint magistrates and
judges to judge all the people who are beyond the
River, all such as know the Laws of your Elah. And
teach those who do not know them.
26 And whoever does not do the Law of your Elah
and the law of the sovereign, let judgment be
promptly executed on him, whether it be death, or
banishment, or confiscation of goods, or
imprisonment.
27 Baruḵ be HWHY Elohim of our fathers, who has put
this in the sovereign’s heart, to embellish the House
of HWHY which is in Yerushalayim,
28 and has extended kindness to me before the
sovereign and his counsellors, and before all the
sovereign’s mighty princes. So I was strengthened,
as the hand of HWHY my Elohim was upon me. And I
gathered heads from Yisra’ĕl to go up with me.

8 These are the heads of their fathers, and this is the
genealogy of those who went up with me from Baḇel,
in the reign of Sovereign Artaḥshashta:
1951

EZRA

of the sons of Phineḥas, Gĕreshom; of the sons of
Ithamar, Dani’ĕl; of the sons of Dawiḏ, Ḥattush;
3 of the sons of Sheḵanyah, of the sons of Parosh,
Zeḵaryah, and registered with him were one hundred
and fifty males;
4 of the sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ, Elyaho’ĕynai son of
Zeḥaryah, and with him two hundred males;
5 of the sons of Sheḵanyah, son of Yaḥazi’ĕl, and
with him three hundred males;
6 and of the sons of Aḏin, Eḇeḏ son of Yahonathan,
and with him fifty males;
7 and of the sons of Ĕylam, Yeshayah son of
Athalyahu, and with him seventy males;
8 and of the sons of Shephatyah, Zeḇaḏyah son of
Miḵa’ĕl, and with him eighty males;
9 of the sons of Yo’aḇ, Oḇaḏyah son of Yeḥi’ĕl, and
with him two hundred and eighteen males;
10 and of the sons of Shelomith, the son of
Yosiphyah, and with him one hundred and sixty
males;
11 and of the sons of Bĕḇai, Zeḵaryah son of Bĕḇai,
and with him twenty-eight males;
12 and of the sons of Azgaḏ, Yoḥanan son of
Haqqatan, and with him one hundred and ten males;
13 and of the last sons of Aḏoniqam, whose names
are these; Eliphelet, Ye’i’ĕl, and Shemayah, and with
them sixty males;
14 and of the sons of Biḡwai, Uthai and Zabbuḏ, and
with them seventy males.
15 And I assembled them at the river that flows to
Ahawa, and we camped there three days. And I
looked among the people and the kohenim, and did
not find any of the sons of Lĕwi there.
16 Then I sent for Eli’ezer, for Ari’ĕl, for Shemayah,
and for Elnathan, and for Yariḇ, and for Elnathan, and
for Nathan, and for Zeḵaryah, and for Meshullam,
2

1952

EZRA

leaders - also for Yoyariḇ and Elnathan, men of
understanding.
17 And I gave them a command for Iddo the chief
man at the place Kasiphya, and put in their mouth
words to speak to Iddo and his brothers the Nethinim
at the place Kasiphya, to bring us servants for the
House of our Elohim.
18 Then, by the good hand of our Elohim upon us,
they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons
of Maḥli son of Lĕwi, son of Yisra’ĕl, and Shĕrĕḇyah,
with his sons and brothers, eighteen;
19 and Ḥashaḇyah, and with him Yeshayah of the
sons of Merari, his brothers and their sons, twenty;
20 and of the Nethinim, whom Dawiḏ and the leaders
had appointed for the service of the Lĕwites, two
hundred and twenty Nethinim, all of them designated
by name.
21 I then proclaimed a fast there, at the river of
Ahawa, to humble ourselves before our Elohim, to
seek from Him the right way for us and our little ones
and all our possessions,
22 for I was ashamed to ask of the sovereign a group
of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the
enemy on the way, because we had spoken to the
sovereign, saying, “The hand of our Elohim is upon
all those for good who seek Him, but His power and
His wrath are against all those who forsake Him.”
23 So we fasted and prayed to our Elohim for this,
and He answered our prayer.
24 And I separated twelve of the leaders of the
kohenim: Shĕrĕḇyah, Ḥashaḇyah, and ten of their
brothers with them;
25 and weighed out to them the silver, and the gold,
and the utensils, the contribution for the House of our
Elohim which the sovereign and his counsellors and
his heads, and all Yisra’ĕl who were there, had
presented.
1953

EZRA

Thus I weighed into their hand six hundred and
fifty kiḵars of silver, and silver objects of one hundred
kiḵars, one hundred kiḵars of gold,
27 and twenty gold basins of a thousand draḵmas,
and two utensils of fine polished bronze, precious as
gold.
28 And I said to them, “You are qodesh to HWHY, and
the objects are qodesh. And the silver and the gold
are a voluntary offering to HWHY Elohim of your
fathers.
29 “Watch and guard them until you weigh them
before the leaders of the kohenim and the Lĕwites
and heads of the fathers’ houses of Yisra’ĕl in
Yerushalayim, in the rooms of the House of HWHY.”“
30 So the kohenim and the Lĕwites took the weight of
the silver and the gold and the utensils, to bring them
to Yerushalayim to the House of our Elohim.
31 Then we departed from the Ahawa River on the
twelfth of the first month, to go to Yerushalayim. And
the hand of our Elohim was upon us, and He
delivered us from the hand of the enemy and from
ambush along the way.
32 And when we came to Yerushalayim, we dwelt
there three days.
33 And on the fourth day the silver and the gold and
the utensils were weighed in the House of our Elohim
by the hand of Merĕmoth son of Uriyah the kohĕn,
and with him was El’azar son of Pineḥas. And with
them were the Lĕwites, Yozaḇaḏ son of Yĕshua and
No’aḏyah son of Binnui,
34 with the number and weight of all. And all the
weight was written down at that time.
35 The sons of the exile, who had come from the
captivity, brought burnt offerings to the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl: twelve bulls for all Yisra’ĕl, ninety-six rams,
seventy-seven lambs, and twelve male goats as a sin
offering - all as a burnt offering to HWHY.
26

1954

EZRA

And they gave the sovereign’s orders to the
sovereign’s viceroys and the governors beyond the
River. And they lifted up the people and the House of
Elohim.

36

9 And when these had been done, the leaders came
to me, saying, “The people of Yisra’ĕl and the kohenim
and the Lĕwites have not separated themselves from
the peoples of the lands, as to their abominations, of
the Kena’anites, the Ḥittites, the Perizzites, the
Yeḇusites, the Ammonites, the Mo’aḇites, the
Mitsrites, and the Amorites,
2 for they have taken some of their daughters as
wives for themselves and their sons, so that the
qodesh seed is intermingled with the peoples of those
lands. And the hand of the leaders and rulers has
been foremost in this trespass.”
3 And when I heard this word, I tore my garment and
my robe, and plucked out some of the hair of my head
and beard, and sat down astonished.
4 Then all those who trembled at the words of the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl gathered to me, because of the
trespass of the exiles, and I sat astonished until the
evening offering.
5 And at the evening offering I rose from my
affliction. And having torn my garment and my robe, I
fell on my knees and spread out my hands to HWHY
my Elohim,
6 and said, “O my Elohim, I am too ashamed and
wounded to lift up my face to You, my Elohim, for our
wickednesses have risen higher than our heads, and
our guilt has grown up to the shamayim.
7 “Since the days of our fathers to this day we have
been very guilty, and for our wickednesses we, our
sovereigns, and our kohenim have been given into
the hand of the sovereigns of the lands, to the sword,
1955

EZRA

to captivity, and to plunder, and to shame of faces, as
it is this day.
8 “But now, for a short while, favour has been shown
from HWHY our Elohim, to leave us a remnant to
escape, and to give us a peg in His qodesh place, that
our Elohim might enlighten our eyes and give us a
little reviving in our bondage.
9 “For we were slaves, but in our bondage our
Elohim did not forsake us, and extended kindness to
us in the presence of the sovereigns of Paras, to
revive us, to raise up the House of our Elohim, to
restore its ruins, and to give us a wall in Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim.
10 “And now, O our Elohim, what do we say after
this? For we have forsaken Your Commands,
11 which You have commanded by Your servants the
neḇi’im, saying, ‘The land which you are going in to
possess is a land unclean through the uncleanness
of the peoples of the lands, by their abominations with
which they have filled it, from one end to another, by
their uncleanness.
12 ‘And now, do not give your daughters as wives for
their sons, nor take their daughters to your sons. And
do not seek their peace or wealth ever, so that you
are strong, and shall eat the good of the land, and
leave it as an inheritance to your children forever.’
13 “And after all that has come upon us for our evil
deeds and for our great guilt, since You our Elohim
have held back the rod upon our wickednesses, and
have given us such deliverance as this,
14 should we turn back, to break Your Commands,
and join in marriage with the people of these
abominations? Would You not be enraged with us
until You had consumed us, so that there would be no
remnant or survivor?
15 “O HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, You are righteous, for
we are left as a remnant, as it is this day. See, we are
1956

EZRA

before You, in our guilt, for there is no one to stand
before You concerning this!”

10 And while Ezra was praying, and while he was
confessing, weeping, and bowing down before the
House of Elohim, a very large assembly - men and
women and children - gathered unto him from Yisra’ĕl,
for the people wept very bitterly.
2 And Sheḵanyah son of Yeḥi’ĕl, one of the sons of
Olam, spoke up and said to Ezra, “We have
trespassed against our Elohim, and have taken
foreign women from the peoples of the land. And now
there is expectancy in Yisra’ĕl concerning this.
3 “Now then, let us make a covenant with our Elohim
to put away all these wives and those who have been
born to them, according to the counsel of HWHY and
of those who tremble at the Command of our Elohim.
And let it be done according to the Torah.
4 “Arise, for the matter is upon you, but we are with
you. Be strong and act.”
5 And Ezra rose, and made the leaders of the
kohenim, the Lĕwites, and all Yisra’ĕl, to swear to do
according to this word. And they swore.
6 Then Ezra rose up from before the House of
Elohim, and went into the room of Yahoḥanan son of
Elyashiḇ. And he went there - he ate no bread and
drank no water for he mourned because of the
trespass of the exiles.
7 And they passed a call throughout Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim to all the sons of the exile, to gather at
Yerushalayim,
8 and that whoever would not come within three
days, according to the counsel of the leaders and
elders, all his goods would be put under a ban, and
himself separated from the assembly of the exiles.
9 Then all the men of Yahuḏah and Binyamin
gathered at Yerushalayim within three days. It was
1957

EZRA

the ninth month, on the twentieth of the month. And
all the people sat in the open space of the House of
Elohim, trembling because of the matter and because
of showers of rain.
10 And Ezra the kohĕn stood up and said to them,
“You, you have trespassed and have taken foreign
women, adding to the guilt of Yisra’ĕl.
11 “And now, make confession to HWHY Elohim of
your fathers, and do His desire, and separate
yourselves from the peoples of the land, and from the
foreign women.”
12 And all the assembly answered and said with a
loud voice, “Right! It is upon us to do according to your
word.
13 “But the people are many, and it is the season of
showers of rain, and we are not able to stand outside.
And the work not of one or two days, for we have
greatly transgressed in this matter.
14 “Please, let the leaders of all the assembly stand.
And let all those in our cities who have taken foreign
women come at appointed times, together with the
elders and judges of their cities, until the burning
wrath of our Elohim is turned away from us in this
matter.”
15 Only Yahonathan son of Asah’ĕl and Yaḥzeyah
son of Tiqwah opposed this, and Meshullam and
Shabbethai the Lĕwite gave them support.
16 Then the sons of the exile did so. And Ezra the
kohĕn, with certain heads of the fathers, were
separated by the fathers, each of them by name. And
they sat down on the first day of the tenth month to
examine the matter.
17 And they finished with all the men who had taken
foreign women by the first day of the first month.
18 And among the sons of the kohenim who had
taken foreign women were found of the sons of
1958

EZRA

Yĕshua son of Yotsaḏaq, and his brothers:
Ma’asĕyah, and Eli’ezer, and Yariḇ, and Geḏalyahu.
19 And they gave their hand to put away their wives.
And being guilty, they presented a ram of the flock for
their guilt.
20 And of the sons of Immĕr: Ḥanani and Zeḇaḏyah;
21 and of the sons of Ḥarim: Ma’asĕyah, and Ĕliyahu,
and Shemayah, and Yeḥi’ĕl, and Uzziyah;
22 and of the sons of Pashḥur: Elyo’ĕynai,
Ma’asĕyahu, Yishma’ĕl, Nethan’ĕl, Yozaḇaḏ, and
El’asah.
23 And of the Lĕwites: Yozaḇaḏ, Shim’i, Qĕlayah - he
is Qelita - Pethaḥyah, Yahuḏah, and Eli’ezer.
24 And of the singers: Elyashiḇ. And of the
gatekeepers: Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.
25 And of Yisra’ĕl of the sons of Parosh: Ramyah,
and Yizziyah, and Malkiyah, and Miyamin, and
El’azar, and Malkiyah, and Benayah;
26 and of the sons of Ĕylam: Mattanyah, Zeḵaryah,
and Yeḥi’ĕl, and Aḇdi, and Yerĕmoth, and Ĕliyahu;
27 and of the sons of Zattu: Elyo’ĕynai, Elyashiḇ,
Mattanyah, and Yerĕmoth, and Zaḇaḏ, and Aziza;
28 and of the sons of Bĕḇai: Yahoḥanan, Ḥananyah,
Zabbai, and Athlai;
29 and of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluḵ, and
Aḏayah, Yashuḇ, and She’al, Ramoth;
30 and of the sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ: Aḏna, and Kelal,
Benayah, Ma’asĕyah, Mattanyah, Betsal’ĕl, and
Binnui, and Menashsheh;
31 and of the sons of Ḥarim: Eli’ezer, Yishshiyah,
Malkiyah, Shemayah, Shim’on,
32 Binyamin, Malluḵ, and Shemaryah;
33 of the sons of Ḥashum: Mattenai, Mattattah,
Zaḇaḏ, Eliphelet, Yerĕmai, Menashsheh, and Shim’i;
34 of the sons of Bani: Ma’aḏai, Amram, and U’ĕl,
35 Benayah, Bĕḏeyah, Keluhai,
36 Wanyah, Merĕmoth, Elyashiḇ,
1959

EZRA

Mattanyah, Mattenai, and Ya’asu,
38 and Bani, and Binnui, Shim’i,
39 and Shelemyah, and Nathan, and Aḏayah,
40 Maḵnaḏeḇai, Shashai, Sharai,
41 Azar’ĕl, and Shelemyahu, Shemaryah,
42 Shallum, Amaryah, and Yosĕph;
43 of the sons of Neḇo: Ye’i’ĕl, Mattithyah, Zaḇaḏ,
Zeḇina, Yaddu, and Yo’ĕl, Benayah.
44 All these had taken foreign women, and some of
them had women who had borne children.
37

1960

NEHEMIAH

NEḤEMYAH
‫ נחמיה‬hYmX!

1 The words of Neḥemyah son of Ḥaḵalyah. And it
came to be in the month of Kislĕw, in the twentieth
year, as I was in the citadel of Shushan,
2 that Ḥanani, one of my brothers, came with men
from Yahuḏah. And I asked them concerning the
Yahuḏim who had escaped, who had survived the
captivity, and concerning Yerushalayim.
3 And they said to me, “The remnant who are left of
the captivity in the province are there in great evil and
reproach. And the wall of Yerushalayim is broken
down, and its gates are burned with fire.”
4 And it came to be, when I heard these words, that
I sat down and wept, and mourned for many days.
And I was fasting and praying before the Elohim of
the shamayim,
5 and I said, “I pray, HWHY Elohim of the shamayim,
O great and awesome Ĕl, guarding the Covenant and
kindness with those who love You, and with those
guarding Your Commands,
6 please let Your ear be attentive and Your eyes
open, to hear the prayer of Your servant which I am
praying before You now, day and night, for the
children of Yisra’ĕl Your servants, and confess the
sins of the children of Yisra’ĕl which we have sinned
against You. Both my father’s house and I have
sinned.
7 “We have acted very corruptly against You, and
have not guarded the Commands, nor the Laws, nor
the Right-Rulings which You commanded Your
servant Mosheh.
1961

NEḤEMYAH

“Please remember the word that You commanded
Your servant Mosheh, saying, ‘If you trespass, I shall
scatter you among the peoples,
9 but if you shall turn back to Me, and guard My
Commands and do them, though you were cast out
to the end of the shamayim, I shall gather them from
there, and bring them to the place which I have
chosen, to make My Name dwell there.’
10 “And they are Your servants and Your people,
whom You have redeemed by Your great power, and
by Your strong hand.
11 “O HWHY, I pray, please let Your ear be attentive
to the prayer of Your servant, and to the prayer of
Your servants who delight to revere Your Name. And
let Your servant prosper this day, I pray, and grant
him compassion in the presence of this man.” For I
was cupbearer to the sovereign.
8

2 And it came to be in the month of Nisan, in the
twentieth year of Artaḥshashta the sovereign, when
wine was before him, that I took the wine and gave it
to the sovereign. And I had never been sad in his
presence.
2 And the sovereign said to me, “Why is your face
sad, since you are not sick? This is none else but
sorrow of heart.” Then I was very much afraid,
3 and said to the sovereign, “Let the sovereign live
forever! Why should my face not be sad, when the
city, the place of my fathers’ tombs, lies waste, and
its gates are burned with fire?”
4 And the sovereign said to me, “What are you
asking for?” Then I prayed to the Elohim of the
shamayim,
5 and said to the sovereign, “If it seems good to the
sovereign, and if your servant is pleasing before you,
1962

NEHEMIAH

I ask that you send me to Yahuḏah, to the city of my
fathers’ tombs, so that I build it.”
6 And the sovereign, with the sovereigness sitting
beside him, said to me, “How long would your journey
take? And when do you return?” So it seemed good
before the sovereign to send me. And I appointed him
a time.
7 And I said to the sovereign, “If it seems good to
the sovereign, let letters be given to me for the
governors beyond the River, that they should allow
me to pass through till I come to Yahuḏah,
8 and a letter to Asaph the keeper of the sovereign’s
forest, that he should give me timber to make beams
for the gates of the palace that belongs to the House,
and for the city wall, and for the house I would enter.”
And the sovereign gave them to me according to the
good hand of my Elohim upon me.
9 Then I came to the governors beyond the River,
and gave to them the letters of the sovereign. Now
the sovereign had sent commanders of the army and
horsemen with me.
10 And Sanballat the Ḥoronite and Toḇiyah the
Ammonite official heard of it, and to them it was evil,
a great evil that a man had come to seek good for the
children of Yisra’ĕl.
11 Then I came to Yerushalayim and was there three
days.
12 And I rose up in the night, I and a few men with
me, but informed no one what my Elohim had put in
my heart to do at Yerushalayim, nor was there any
beast with me, except the beast on which I rode.
13 And I went out by night through the Valley Gate to
the Jackals’ Fountain and the Dung Gate, and
examined the walls of Yerushalayim which were
1963

NEḤEMYAH

broken down and its gates which were burned with
fire.
14 And I went on to the Fountain Gate and to the
Sovereign’s Pool, but there was no room for the beast
that was under me to pass.
15 And I went up in the night by the wadi, and
examined the wall, and turned back, and entered by
the Valley Gate, and returned.
16 And the deputy rulers did not know where I had
gone nor what I had done. Nor had I yet informed the
Yahuḏim, or the kohenim, or the nobles, or the deputy
rulers, or the others who did the work.
17 Then I said to them, “You see the evil which we
are in, how Yerushalayim lies waste, and its gates are
burned with fire. Come and let us build the wall of
Yerushalayim, and let us no longer be a reproach.”
18 And I informed them of the hand of my Elohim
which had been good upon me, and also of the
sovereign’s words he had spoken to me. And they
said, “Let us rise up and we shall build.” So they made
their hands strong for good.
19 But when Sanballat the Ḥoronite heard, and
Toḇiyah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the
Araḇ, they mocked us and despised us, and said,
“What is this you are doing? Are you rebelling against
the sovereign?”
20 And I answered them, and said to them, “The
Elohim of the shamayim, He shall baraḵ us and let us,
His servants, rise and build, but you have no portion
or right or remembrance in Yerushalayim.”

3 And Elyashiḇ the kohĕn ha’gadol rose up with his
brothers the kohenim and built the Sheep Gate. They
qadosh it and stood up its doors, even as far as the
1964

NEHEMIAH

Tower of Mĕ’ah they qadosh it, as far as the Tower of
Ḥanane’ĕl.
2 And next to him the men of Yeriḥo built. And next
to them Zakkur son of Imri built.
3 And the sons of Hassena’ah built the Fish Gate,
who laid its beams and stood up its doors, its bolts
and bars.
4 And next to them Merĕmoth son of Uriyah, son of
Qots, made repairs. And next to them Meshullam son
of Bereḵyah, son of Meshĕyzaḇ’ĕl, made repairs. And
next to them Tsaḏoq son of Ba’ana made repairs.
5 And next to them the Teqowites made repairs, but
their nobles did not put their shoulders to the work of
their Aḏon.
6 And Yahoyaḏa son of Pasĕaḥ and Meshullam son
of Besoḏeyah repaired the Old Gate. They laid its
beams and stood up its doors, and its bolts and its
bars.
7 And next to them Melatyah the Giḇ’onite, and
Yaḏon the Mĕronothite, the men of Giḇ’on and
Mitspah, repaired the official seat of the governor
beyond the River.
8 Next to him Uzzi’ĕl son of Ḥarhayah, one of the
goldsmiths, made repairs. And next to him Ḥananyah,
one of the perfumers, made repairs. And they
restored Yerushalayim as far as the Broad Wall.
9 And next to them Rephayah son of Ḥur, ruler of
half the district of Yerushalayim, made repairs.
10 And next to them Yeḏayah son of Ḥarumaph made
repairs, even opposite his house. And next to him
Ḥattush son of Ḥashaḇneyah made repairs.
11 Malkiyah of Ḥarim and Ḥashshuḇ son of PaḥathMo’aḇ repaired another section, and the Tower of the
Ovens.
1965

NEḤEMYAH

And next to him Shallum son of Halloḥĕsh ruler of
half the district of Yerushalayim made repairs, he and
his daughters.
13 Ḥanun and the people of Zanowaḥ repaired the
Valley Gate. They built it, and stood up its doors, its
bolts and bars - and a thousand ammah of the wall as
far as the Dung Gate.
14 And the Dung Gate was repaired by Malkiyah son
of Rĕḵaḇ, ruler of the district of Bĕyth ha’Kkerem. He
built it and stood up its doors, its bolts and bars.
15 And the Fountain Gate was repaired by Shallun
son of Kol-Ḥozeh, ruler of the district of Mitspah. He
built it and covered it, and stood up its doors, its bolts
and bars - also the wall of the Pool of Shelaḥ by the
Sovereign’s Garden, as far as the stairs going down
from the City of Dawiḏ.
16 After him Neḥemyah son of Azbuq, ruler of half the
district of Bĕyth Tsur, made repairs as far as opposite
the tombs of Dawiḏ, and to the man-made pool, and
as far as the house of the mighty men.
17 After him the Lĕwites, Reḥum son of Bani, made
repairs. Next to him repaired Ḥashaḇyah, ruler of half
the district of Qe’ilah, for his district.
18 After him their brothers, Bawwai son of Ḥĕnaḏaḏ,
ruler of the other half of the district of Qe’ilah, made
repairs.
19 And next to him Ĕzer son of Yĕshua, the ruler of
Mitspah, repaired another section before the going up
to the armoury at the corner.
20 After him Baruḵ son of Zabbai eagerly repaired the
other section, from the buttress to the door of the
house of Elyashiḇ the kohĕn ha’gadol.
21 After him Merĕmoth son of Uriyah, son of Qots,
repaired another section, from the door of the house
of Elyashiḇ to the end of the house of Elyashiḇ.
12

1966

NEHEMIAH

And after him the kohenim, the men of the
neighbourhood, made repairs.
23 After him Binyamin and Ḥashshuḇ made repairs
opposite their house. After them Azaryahu son of
Ma’asĕyah, son of Ananyah, made repairs near his
house.
24 After him Binnui son of Ḥĕnaḏaḏ repaired another
section, from the house of Azaryahu to the angle,
even as far as the corner.
25 Palal son of Uzai, opposite the corner, and on the
tower which projects from the sovereign’s upper
house that was by the courtyard of the prison. After
him Peḏayah son of Parosh.
26 Now the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel as far as
opposite the Water Gate toward the east, and on the
projecting tower.
27 After him the Teqowites repaired another section,
opposite the great projecting tower, and as far as the
wall of Ophel.
28 Beyond the Horse Gate the kohenim made
repairs, each opposite his own house.
29 After them Tsaḏoq son of Immĕr made repairs
opposite his own house. After him Shemayah son of
Sheḵanyah, keeper of the East Gate, made repairs.
30 After him Ḥananyah son of Shelemyah, and
Ḥanun, the sixth son of Tsalaph, repaired another
section. After him Meshullam son of Bereḵyah made
repairs opposite his room.
31 After him Malkiyah, one of the goldsmiths, made
repairs as far as the house of the Nethinim and of the
merchants, opposite the Miphqaḏ Gate, and as far as
the going up of the corner.
32 And between the going up of the corner to the
Sheep Gate, the goldsmiths and the merchants made
repairs.
22

1967

NEḤEMYAH

4 And it came to be, when Sanballat heard that we
were rebuilding the wall, that he was wroth and highly
offended, and mocked the Yahuḏim.
2 And he spoke before his brothers and the army of
Shomeron, and said, “What are these feeble Yahuḏim
doing? Are they going to restore, slaughter, complete
it in a day? Are they going to bring to life the stones
from the heaps of rubbish which are burned?”
3 And Toḇiyah the Ammonite was beside him, and
he said, “Whatever they build, if a fox should climb on
it, he shall break down their stone wall.”
4 “Hear, O our Elohim, for we have become
despised. And turn back their reproach on their own
heads, and give them as a prey in a land of captivity!
5 “And do not cover over their wickedness, and do
not let their sin be blotted out from before You, for
they have provoked You before the builders.”
6 So we built the wall, and the entire wall was joined
together up to the half of it, for the people had a heart
to work.
7 And it came to be, when Sanballat and Toḇiyah,
and the Araḇs, and the Ammonites, and the
Ashdoḏites heard that the walls of Yerushalayim were
being repaired and the broken places began to be
filled, that they became very wroth,
8 and all of them conspired together to come to fight
against Yerushalayim and to do harm to it.
9 But we prayed to our Elohim, and stood a watch
against them day and night, because of them.
10 And Yahuḏah said, “The strength of the burden
bearers is weakening, and there is so much rubbish
that we are unable to build the wall.”

1968

NEHEMIAH

And our adversaries said, “Let them not know or
see it until we come into their midst and shall slay
them, and cause the work to cease.”
12 And it came to be, when the Yahuḏim who dwelt
near them came, that they said to us ten times, “From
whatever place you turn, they are against us.”
13 So I appointed behind the lower parts of the wall,
at the openings - the people I appointed according to
their clans, with their swords, their spears, and their
bows.
14 And I looked, and rose up and said to the nobles,
and to the deputy rulers, and to the rest of the people,
“Do not be afraid of them. Remember the great and
awesome, hWhY, and fight for your brothers, your
sons and your daughters, your wives and your
houses.”
15 And it came to be, when our enemies heard that it
was known to us, and that Elohim had brought their
counsel to naught, that all of us returned to the wall,
everyone to his work.
16 And it came to be, from that time on, that half of
my servants were working in the work, while the other
half were holding the spears, the shields, and the
bows, and the breastplates. And the rulers were
behind all the house of Yahuḏah,
17 who were building on the wall, and those bearing
burdens, those loading, working with one hand in the
work, and with the other holding a weapon.
18 As for the builders, each one had his sword girded
at his side as he built. And the one who sounded the
ram’s horn was beside me.
19 And I said to the nobles, and to the deputy rulers,
and to the rest of the people, “The work is great and
large, and we are separated far from one another on
the wall.
11

1969

NEḤEMYAH

“In whatever place you hear the sound of the ram’s
horn, join us there. Our Elohim fights for us.”
21 So we laboured in the work, and half of them held
the spears from the break of day until the stars
appeared.
22 At that time I also said to the people, “Let each
man and his servant spend the night in Yerushalayim,
and they shall be our guard by night, and for the work
by day.”
23 So neither I, nor my brothers, nor my servants, nor
the men of the guard who followed me, none of us
took off our garments, each one his weapon even at
the water.
20

5 And there was a great outcry of the people and their
wives against their brothers, the Yahuḏim.
2 And there were some who were saying, “We, our
sons, and our daughters are many. Let us get grain
for them, and eat, and live.”
3 And there were some who were saying, “We have
mortgaged our lands and vineyards and houses. Let
us buy grain because of the scarcity of food.”
4 And there were those who were saying, “We have
borrowed silver for the sovereign’s tax on our lands
and vineyards.
5 “And now our flesh is like the flesh of our brothers,
our children like their children. And see, we are
subjecting our sons and our daughters to be slaves,
and some of our daughters have been subjected, and
there is no power in our hands, for other men have
our lands and vineyards.”
6 And it was very displeasing to me when I heard
their outcry and these words.
7 And my heart ruled over me, and I strove with the
nobles and with the deputy rulers, and said to them,
1970

NEHEMIAH

“You are exacting interest, each one from his
brother.” And I called a great assembly against them,
8 and said to them, “According to our ability we have
redeemed our brothers, the Yahuḏim, who were sold
to the gentiles. And you even sell your brothers! Or
should they be sold to us?” And they were silent and
found not a word.
9 I also said, “What you are doing is not good.
Should you not walk in the reverence of our Elohim
because of the reproach of the gentiles, our enemies?
10 “And also, I, my brothers and my servants, am
lending them silver and grain. Please, let us leave off
this interest!
11 “Please, give back to them, even today, their
lands, their vineyards, their olive trees, and their
houses, also the hundredth part of the silver and of
the grain, and of the new wine, and of the oil, that you
have taken from them.”
12 And they said, “Let us give it back, and ask no
more from them, we do as you say.” Then I called the
kohenim, and made them swear to do according to
this word.
13 I also shook out the fold of my garment and said,
“Let Elohim in this way shake out each man from his
house, and from his property, who does not do this
word, even to be thus shaken out and emptied.” And
all the assembly said, “Amĕn!” and praised hWhY.
And the people did according to this word.
14 Also, from the day I was appointed to be their
governor in the land of Yahuḏah, from the twentieth
year until the thirty-second year of Sovereign
Artaḥshashta, twelve years, neither I nor my brothers
ate the governor’s food.
15 But the former governors who were before me laid
burdens on the people, and took from them bread and
1971

NEḤEMYAH

wine, besides forty sheqels of silver. Their servants
also oppressed the people, but I did not do so,
because of the reverence of Elohim.
16 And I also applied myself to the work on this wall.
We did not buy any land. And all my servants were
gathered there for the work.
17 And at my table were one hundred and fifty of the
Yahuḏim and deputy rulers, besides those who came
to us from the nations around us.
18 And that which was prepared for me daily was one
ox and six choice sheep, and birds were prepared for
me, and once every ten days plenty of all kinds of
wine. And in spite of this I did not seek the governor’s
food, because the bondage was heavy on this people.
19 O my Elohim, remember me for the good - all that
I have done for this people.

6 And it came to be when Sanballat, and Toḇiyah, and
Geshem the Araḇ, and the rest of our enemies heard
that I had rebuilt the wall, and that there were no
breaks left in it - though at that time I had not put up
the doors in the gates 2 that Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying,
“Come, let us meet together in the villages in the plain
of Ono.” But they were planning to do evil to me.
3 So I sent messengers to them, saying, “I am doing
a great work, and I am unable to come down. Why
should the work cease while I leave it and come down
to you?”
4 However, they sent me the same word four times,
and I answered them the same word.
5 Then Sanballat sent his servant to me with an
open letter in his hand, the same word, the fifth time.
6 In it was written: Among the nations it has been
heard, and Gashmu is saying, that you and the
1972

NEHEMIAH

Yahuḏim are planning to rebel, therefore you are
rebuilding the wall, and you are to be their sovereign
- according to these words.
7 And you have also appointed neḇi’im to proclaim
concerning you at Yerushalayim, saying, ‘A sovereign
is in Yahuḏah!’ And now these words are heard by the
sovereign. Therefore come now, and let us take
counsel together.
8 Then I sent to him, saying, “There are no such
matters done as you are saying, but you are inventing
them in your own heart.”
9 For all of them were making us afraid, saying, “Let
their hands slacken for the work, and it not be done.”
But now, make my hands strong.
10 And when I came to the house of Shemayah son
of Delayah, son of Mehĕtab’ĕl, who was restrained,
he said, “Let us meet together in the House of Elohim,
inside the Hĕyḵal, and let us close the doors of the
Hĕyḵal, for they are coming to slay you - by night they
are coming to slay you.”
11 And I said, “Should a man like me flee? And who
is there like me who would go into the Hĕyḵal to save
his life? I do not go in!”
12 And see, I perceived that Elohim had not sent him,
but that he spoke this neḇuah against me because
Toḇiyah and Sanballat had hired him 13 because he was a hireling - that I should be afraid,
and do so, and shall sin, and so they could give me
an evil name, to reproach me.
14 My Elohim, remember Toḇiyah and Sanballat,
according to these works of theirs, and the neḇiyah
No’aḏyah and the rest of the neḇi’im who would have
made me afraid.
15 And the wall was completed on the twenty-fifth of
the month of Elul, in fifty-two days.
1973

NEḤEMYAH

And it came to be, when all our enemies heard,
and all the nations around us saw, that they fell
greatly in their own eyes, and knew that this work was
done by our Elohim.
17 In those days the nobles of Yahuḏah also sent
many letters to Toḇiyah, while those of Toḇiyah came
to them.
18 For many in Yahuḏah were sworn to him, because
he was the son-in-law of Sheḵanyah son of Araḥ, and
his son Yahoḥanan had married the daughter of
Meshullam son of Bereḵyah.
19 They were also speaking about his good deeds
before me, and reported my words to him. Toḇiyah
sent letters to frighten me.
16

7 And it came to be, when the wall was rebuilt, that
I stood up the doors, and the gatekeepers, and the
singers, and the Lĕwites were appointed.
2 And I put my brother Ḥanani in charge of
Yerushalayim, and Ḥananyah the head of the palace,
for he was a trustworthy man and revered Elohim
more than many.
3 And I said to them, “Let not the gates of
Yerushalayim be opened until the sun is hot. And
while they are standing by, let them shut the doors
and bolt them. And appoint guards from among the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim, each at his post, and
each in front of his own house.”
4 And the city was wide on both sides and great, but
the people in it were few, and the houses were not
rebuilt.
5 And my Elohim put it into my heart to gather the
nobles, and the deputy rulers, and the people, in
order to be registered by genealogy. And I found a
1974

NEHEMIAH

register of the genealogy of those who had come up
at the beginning, and I found written in it:
6 These are the sons of the province who came
back from the captivity of the exiles whom
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar the sovereign of Baḇel had exiled,
and who returned to Yerushalayim and Yahuḏah,
each to his city,
7 who came with Zerubbaḇel, Yĕshua, Neḥemyah,
Azaryahu, Ra’amyah, Naḥamani, Mordeḵai, Bilshan,
Mispereth, Biḡwai, Neḥum, Ba’anah. The number of
the men of the people of Yisra’ĕl:
8 sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred and
seventy-two;
9 sons of Shephatyah, three hundred and seventytwo;
10 sons of Araḥ, six hundred and fifty-two;
11 sons of Paḥath-Mo’aḇ, of the sons of Yĕshua and
Yoaḇ, two thousand eight hundred and eighteen;
12 sons of Ĕylam, one thousand two hundred and
fifty-four;
13 sons of Zattu, eight hundred and forty-five;
14 sons of Zakkai, seven hundred and sixty;
15 sons of Binnui, six hundred and forty-eight;
16 sons of Bĕḇai, six hundred and twenty-eight;
17 sons of Azgaḏ, two thousand three hundred and
twenty-two;
18 sons of Aḏoniqam, six hundred and sixty-seven;
19 sons of Biḡwai, two thousand and sixty-seven;
20 sons of Aḏin, six hundred and fifty-five;
21 sons of Atĕr of Ḥizqiyahu, ninety-eight;
22 sons of Ḥashum, three hundred and twenty-eight;
23 sons of Bĕtsai, three hundred and twenty-four;
24 sons of Ḥariph, one hundred and twelve;
25 sons of Giḇ’on, ninety-five;
1975

NEḤEMYAH

men of Bĕyth Leḥem and Netophah, one hundred
and eighty-eight;
27 men of Anathoth, one hundred and twenty-eight;
28 men of Bĕyth Azmaweth, forty-two;
29 men of Qiryath Ye’arim, Kephirah, and Be’ĕroth,
seven hundred and forty-three;
30 men of Ramah and Geḇa, six hundred and twentyone;
31 men of Miḵmas, one hundred and twenty-two;
32 men of Bĕyth Ĕl and Ai, one hundred and twentythree;
33 men of the other Neḇo, fifty-two;
34 sons of the other Ĕylam, one thousand two
hundred and fifty-four;
35 sons of Ḥarim, three hundred and twenty;
36 sons of Yeriḥo, three hundred and forty-five;
37 sons of Loḏ, Ḥaḏiḏ, and Ono, seven hundred and
twenty-one;
38 sons of Sena’ah, three thousand nine hundred
and thirty.
39 The kohenim: sons of Yeḏayah, of the house of
Yĕshua, nine hundred and seventy-three;
40 sons of Immĕr, one thousand and fifty-two;
41 sons of Pashḥur, one thousand two hundred and
forty-seven;
42 sons of Ḥarim, one thousand and seventeen.
43 The Lĕwites: sons of Yĕshua, of Qaḏmi’ĕl, of the
sons of Hoḏewah, seventy-four.
44 The singers: sons of Asaph, one hundred and
forty-eight.
45 The gatekeepers: sons of Shallum, sons of Atĕr,
sons of Talmon, sons of Aqquḇ, sons of Ḥatita, sons
of Shoḇai, one hundred and thirty-eight.
46 The Nethinim: sons of Tsiḥa, sons of Ḥasupha,
sons of Tabba’oth,
26

1976

NEHEMIAH

sons of Qĕyros, sons of Si’a, sons of Paḏon,
48 sons of Leḇanah, sons of Ḥaḡaḇa, sons of Salmai,
49 sons of Ḥanan, sons of Giddĕl, sons of Gaḥar,
50 sons of Re’ayah, sons of Retsin, sons of Neqoda,
51 sons of Gazzam, sons of Uzza, sons of Pasĕaḥ,
52 sons of Bĕsai, sons of Me’unim, sons of
Nephishesim,
53 sons of Baqbuq, sons of Ḥaqupha, sons of Ḥarḥur,
54 sons of Batslith, sons of Meḥiḏa, sons of Ḥarsha,
55 sons of Barqos, sons of Sisera, sons of Temaḥ,
56 sons of Netsiyaḥ, and sons of Ḥatipha.
57 The sons of Shelomoh’s servants: sons of Sotai,
sons of Sophereth, sons of Periḏa,
58 sons of Ya’ala, sons of Darqon, sons of Giddĕl,
59 sons of Shephatyah, sons of Ḥattil, sons of
Poḵereth of Tseḇayim, sons of Amon.
60 All the Nethinim, and the sons of Shelomoh’s
servants, were three hundred and ninety-two.
61 And these were the ones who came up from Tĕl
Melaḥ, Tĕl Ḥarsha, Keruḇ, Addon, and Immĕr, but
they were unable to show their father’s house, and
their seed, whether they were of Yisra’ĕl:
62 sons of Delayah, sons of Toḇiyah, sons of
Neqoḏa, six hundred and forty-two.
63 And of the kohenim: sons of Ḥaḇayah, sons of
Qots, sons of Barzillai, who took a wife of the
daughters of Barzillai the Gil’aḏite, and was called by
their name.
64 These sought their register of those who were
counted by genealogy, but it was not found, so they
were as defiled from the kehunnah.
65 And the governor said to them that they should not
eat of the most qodesh gifts until a kohĕn stood up
with the Urim and Tummim.
47

1977

NEḤEMYAH

All the assembly together was forty-two thousand
three hundred and sixty,
67 besides their male and female servants, these
were seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven.
And they had two hundred and forty-five men and
women singers.
68 Their horses were seven hundred and thirty-six,
their mules two hundred and forty-five,
69 camels four hundred and thirty-five, donkeys six
thousand seven hundred and twenty.
70 And some of the heads of the fathers contributed
to the work. The governor gave to the treasury one
thousand gold draḵmas, fifty basins, and five hundred
and thirty garments of kohenim.
71 Some of the heads of the fathers’ houses gave to
the treasury of the work twenty thousand gold
draḵmas, and two thousand two hundred silver
minas.
72 And the rest of the people gave twenty thousand
gold draḵmas, two thousand silver minas, and sixtyseven garments of kohenim.
73 So the kohenim, and the Lĕwites, and the
gatekeepers, and the singers, and some of the
people, and the Nethinim, and all Yisra’ĕl dwelt in
their cities.
66

8 And when the seventh month came, the children of
Yisra’ĕl were in their cities. And all the people gathered
together as one man in the open space that was in
front of the Water Gate. And they spoke to Ezra the
scribe to bring the Book of the Torah of Mosheh, which
hWhY had commanded Yisra’ĕl.
2 And Ezra the kohĕn brought the Torah before the
assembly of both men and women and all who could
1978

NEHEMIAH

hear with understanding, on the first day of the
seventh month.
3 And he read from it in the open space in front of
the Water Gate from morning until midday, before the
men and women and those who could understand.
And the ears of all the people were on the Book of the
Torah.
4 And Ezra the scribe stood on a platform of wood
which they had made for the purpose. And beside him
on his right stood Mattithyah, and Shema, and
Anayah, and Uriyah, and Ḥilqiyah, and Ma’asĕyah.
And on his left, Peḏayah, and Misha’ĕl, and Malkiyah,
and Ḥashum, and Ḥashbaddanah, Zeḵaryah,
Meshullam.
5 And Ezra opened the Book in the sight of all the
people, for he was above all the people. And when he
opened it, all the people stood up.
6 And Ezra baraḵ hWhY, the great Elohim. Then all
the people answered, “Amĕn, Amĕn!” while lifting up
their hands. And they bowed their heads and
worshipped hWhY with faces to the ground.
7 And Yĕshua, and Bani, and Shĕrĕḇyah, Yamin,
Aqquḇ, Shabbethai, Hoḏiyah, Ma’asĕyah, Qelita,
Azaryahu, Yozaḇaḏ, Ḥanan, Pelayah, and the
Lĕwites, caused the people to understand the Torah
while the people were in their place.
8 And they read in the Book of the Torah of Elohim,
translating to give the sense, to give understanding to
the reading.
9 And Neḥemyah, who was the governor, and Ezra
the kohĕn, the scribe, and the Lĕwites who taught the
people said to all the people, “This day is qodesh to
hWhY your Elohim. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the
people wept when they heard the words of the Torah.
1979

NEḤEMYAH

Then he said to them, “Go, eat the fatness, drink
the sweet, and send portions to those for whom none
is prepared. For this day is qodesh to our Aḏon. Do
not be sad, for the joy of hWhY is your strength.”
11 And the Lĕwites were silencing all the people,
saying, “Hush, for the day is qodesh, do not be sad.”
12 And all the people went to eat and to drink, and to
send portions and make a great rejoicing, because
they understood the words that were made known to
them.
13 And on the second day the heads of the fathers of
all the people, with the kohenim and Lĕwites, were
gathered to Ezra the scribe, in order to study the
words of the Torah.
14 And they found written in the Torah, which hWhY
had commanded by Mosheh, that the children of
Yisra’ĕl should dwell in booths in the Festival of the
seventh month,
15 and that they should announce and proclaim in all
their cities and in Yerushalayim, saying, “Go out to the
mountain, and bring olive branches, branches of oil
trees, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and
branches of leafy trees, to make booths, as it is
written.”
16 So the people went out and brought them and
made themselves booths, each one on the roof of his
house, and in their courtyards and in the courtyards
of the House of Elohim, and in the open space of the
Water Gate and in the open space of the Gate of
Ephrayim.
17 And the entire assembly of those who had come
back from the captivity made booths and sat under
the booths, for since the days of Yahoshua son of
Nun until that day the children of Yisra’ĕl had not done
so. And there was very great rejoicing.
10

1980

NEHEMIAH

And day by day, from the first day until the last day,
he read from the Book of the Torah of Elohim. And
they performed the Festival seven days. And on the
eighth day there was an assembly, according to the
Right-Ruling.

18

9 And on the twenty-fourth day of this month the
children of Yisra’ĕl were assembled with fasting, and
in sackcloth, and with earth on them.
2 And the descendants of Yisra’ĕl separated
themselves from all foreigners, and stood and
confessed their sins, and the wickednesses of their
fathers,
3 and they stood up in their place and read from the
Book of the Torah of hWhY their Elohim a fourth part
of the day, and a fourth part they were confessing and
worshipping HWHY their Elohim.
4 Then Yĕshua and Bani, Qaḏmi’ĕl, Sheḇanyah,
Bunni, Shĕrĕḇyah, Bani, Kenani stood on the stairs of
the Lĕwites and cried out with a loud voice to hWhY
their Elohim.
5 Then the Lĕwites, Yĕshua and Qaḏmi’ĕl, Bani,
Ḥashaḇneyah, Shĕrĕḇyah, Hoḏiyah, Sheḇanyah,
Pethaḥyah, said, “Rise, baraḵ HWHY your Elohim
forever and ever! And let them baraḵ Your esteemed
Name, which is exalted above all beraḵah and praise!
6 “You are hWhY, You alone. You have made the
shamayim, the shamayim of the shamayim, with all
their host, the earth and all that are on it, the seas and
all that are in them, and You give life to them all. And
the host of the shamayim are bowing themselves to
You.
7 “You are hWhY, the Elohim who chose Aḇram, and
brought him out of Ur of the Kasdim, and gave him
the name of Aḇraham,
1981

NEḤEMYAH

and found his heart trustworthy before You, and
made a Covenant with him to give the land of the
Kena’anites, the Ḥittites, the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Yeḇusites, and the Girgashites to give it to his seed. And You have established Your
words, for You are righteous,
9 and saw the affliction of our fathers in Mitsrayim,
and heard their cry by the Sea of Reeds,
10 and gave signs and wonders against Pharaoh,
and against all his servants, and against all the
people of his land. For You knew that they acted
proudly against them. And You made a Name for
Yourself, as it is this day.
11 “And You split the sea before them, and they
passed over into the midst of the sea on the dry land.
And their pursuers You threw into the deep as a stone
into the mighty waters.
12 “And You led them by day with a cloudy column,
and by night with a column of fire, to give them light
in the way they were to go.
13 “And You came down on Mount Sinai, and spoke
with them from the shamayim, and gave them straight
Right-Rulings and Torah of truth, good Laws and
Commands.
14 “And You made known to them Your qodesh
Shabbath, and You commanded them Commands
and Laws and Torot, by the hand of Mosheh Your
servant.
15 “And You gave them bread from the shamayim for
their hunger, and brought them water out of the rock
for their thirst, and said to them to go in to possess
the land which You had sworn to give them.
16 “But they and our fathers acted proudly, and
hardened their necks, and did not obey Your
Commands.
8

1982

NEHEMIAH

“And they refused to obey, and they remembered
not Your wonders that You did among them, and
hardened their necks, and in their rebellion they
appointed a leader to return to their bondage. But You
are a forgiving Eloah, showing favour, and
compassionate, patient, and of great kindness, and
did not forsake them.
18 “Even when they made a moulded calf for
themselves, and said, ‘This is your mighty one that
brought you up out of Mitsrayim,’ and worked great
blasphemies,
19 yet You, in Your great compassion did not forsake
them in the wilderness. The column of the cloud did
not turn away from them by day to lead them on the
way, nor the column of fire by night to give them light
in the way they were to go.
20 “You also gave Your good Ruaḥ to instruct them,
and did not withhold Your manna from their mouth,
and gave them water for their thirst.
21 “And for forty years You sustained them in the
wilderness - they lacked not. Their garments did not
wear out and their feet did not swell.
22 “And You gave them reigns and peoples, and
apportioned them their lot. So they took possession
of the land of Siḥon, and the land of the sovereign of
Ḥeshbon, and the land of Oḡ sovereign of Bashan.
23 “And You increased their children as the stars of
the shamayim, and brought them into the land which
You had said to their fathers to go in and possess.
24 “So the sons went in and possessed the land, and
You humbled before them the people of the land, the
Kena’anites, and gave them into their hands, with
their sovereigns and the people of the land, to do with
them as they desired.
17

1983

NEḤEMYAH

“And they captured walled cities and a rich land,
and possessed houses filled with all good, cisterns
already dug, vineyards, and olive trees, and fruit
trees, in plenty. So they ate and were satisfied and
grew fat, and delighted themselves in Your great
goodness.
26 “But they became disobedient and rebelled
against You, and cast Your Torah behind their backs.
And they slew Your neḇi’im who had warned them, to
bring them back to Yourself. And they worked great
blasphemies.
27 “Therefore You gave them into the hand of their
enemies, who distressed them. And in the time of
their distress, when they cried to You, You heard from
the shamayim. And according to Your great
compassion You gave them saviours who saved
them from the hand of their enemies.
28 “But after they had rest, they turned back to do evil
before You. Then You left them in the hand of their
enemies, so that they ruled over them. But when they
turned back and cried out to You, You heard from the
shamayim, and delivered them according to Your
compassion, many times,
29 and warned them, to bring them back to Your
Torah. But they acted proudly, and did not obey Your
Commands, and sinned against Your Right-Rulings,
‘which if a man does, he shall live by them.’ And they
gave the rebellious shoulder and hardened their
necks, and would not hear.
30 “And You had patience with them for many years,
and warned them by Your Ruaḥ, by the hand of Your
neḇi’im, yet they would not give ear. Therefore You
gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands.
25

1984

NEHEMIAH

“But in Your great compassion You did not make
an end of them nor forsake them, for You are an Ĕl of
favour and compassion.
32 “And now, our Elohim, the great, the mighty, and
awesome Ĕl, guarding the Covenant and the
kindness, let not all the trouble that has come upon
us, our sovereigns and our heads, our kohenim and
our neḇi’im, our fathers and on all Your people, from
the days of the sovereigns of Ashshur until this day,
seem little before You.
33 “And in all that has come upon us You are
righteous, for You have done truth, but we have done
wickedness.
34 “And our sovereigns, our rulers, our kohenim, and
our fathers, have not done Your Torah, nor heeded
Your Commands and Your Witnesses, with which
You witnessed against them.
35 “For they have not served You in their reign, or in
Your great goodness that You gave them, or in the
large and rich land which You put before them neither turned back from their evil deeds.
36 “See, we are servants today! And the land that
You gave to our fathers, to eat its fruit and the good
of it, see, we are servants in it!
37 “And its rich yield goes to the sovereigns You have
appointed over us, because of our sins. And they rule
over our bodies and our livestock at their pleasure,
and we are in great distress.
38 “And because of all this, we are making a
trustworthy pledge, and write it. And our rulers, our
Lĕwites, our kohenim put their seal on it.
31

10 And those who put their seal were: Neḥemyah
the governor, son of Ḥaḵalyah, and Tsiḏqiyahu,
2 Serayah, Azaryahu, Yirmeyahu,
1985

NEḤEMYAH

Pashḥur, Amaryah, Malkiyah,
4 Ḥattush, Sheḇanyah, Malluḵ,
5 Ḥarim, Merĕmoth, Oḇaḏyah,
6 Dani’ĕl, Ginnethon, Baruḵ,
7 Meshullam, Aḇiyah, Miyamin,
8 Ma’azyah, Bilgai, and Shemayah. These were the
kohenim.
9 And the Lĕwites: both Yĕshua son of Azanyah,
Binnui of the sons of Ḥĕnaḏaḏ, Qaḏmi’ĕl.
10 And their brothers: Sheḇanyah, Hoḏiyah, Qelita,
Pelayah, Ḥanan,
11 Miḵa, Reḥoḇ, Ḥashaḇyah,
12 Zakkur, Shĕrĕḇyah, Sheḇanyah,
13 Hoḏiyah, Bani, and Beninu.
14 The leaders of the people: Parosh, Paḥath-Mo’aḇ,
Ĕylam, Zattu, Bani,
15 Bunni, Azgaḏ, Bĕḇai,
16 Aḏoniyah, Biḡwai, Aḏin,
17 Atĕr, Ḥizqiyah, Azzur,
18 Hoḏiyah, Ḥashum, Bĕtsai,
19 Ḥariph, Anathoth, Nĕḇai,
20 Maḡpi’ash, Meshullam, Ḥĕzir,
21 Meshĕyzaḇ’ĕl, Tsaḏoq, Yaddua,
22 Pelatyah, Ḥanan, Anayah,
23 Hoshĕa, Ḥananyah, Ḥashshuḇ,
24 Halloḥĕsh, Pilḥa, Shoḇĕq,
25 Reḥum, Ḥashaḇnah, Ma’asĕyah,
26 Aḥiyahu, Ḥanan, Anan,
27 Malluḵ, Ḥarim, Ba’anah.
28 And the rest of the people, the kohenim, the
Lĕwites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the Nethinim,
and all those who had separated themselves from the
peoples of the lands unto the Torah of Elohim, their
wives, their sons, and their daughters, all who had
knowledge and understanding,
3

1986

NEHEMIAH

were joining with their brothers, their nobles, and
were entering into a curse and into an oath to walk in
the Torah of Elohim, which was given by Mosheh the
servant of Elohim, and to guard and do all the
Commands of hWhY our Aḏon, and His Right-Rulings
and His Laws,
30 and that we would not give our daughters as wives
to the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for
our sons,
31 and that if the peoples of the land bring wares or
any grain to sell on the Shabbath day, we would not
buy it from them on the Shabbath, or on a qodesh
day, and we would forego the seventh year and the
interest of every hand.
32 And we imposed commands on ourselves, to give
from ourselves yearly one-third of a sheqel for the
service of the House of our Elohim:
33 for the showbread, and for the continual grain
offering, and for the continual burnt offering of the
Shabbathoth, of the New Moons, for the Appointed
Times, and for the qodesh offerings, and for the sin
offerings to make atonement for Yisra’ĕl, and all the
work of the House of our Elohim.
34 And we cast lots among the kohenim, and the
Lĕwites, and the people, for bringing the wood
offering into the House of our Elohim, according to our
fathers’ houses, at the Appointed Times year by year,
to burn on the altar of hWhY our Elohim as it is written
in the Torah,
35 and to bring the first-fruits of our land and the firstfruits of all fruit of all trees, year by year, to the House
of hWhY,
36 also to bring the first-born of our sons and our
livestock, as it is written in the Torah, and the firstlings
of our herds and our flocks, to the House of our
29

1987

NEḤEMYAH

Elohim, to the kohenim attending in the House of our
Elohim.
37 And that we should bring the first-fruits of our
dough, and our contributions, and the fruit from all
kinds of trees, of new wine and of oil, to the kohenim,
to the storerooms of the House of our Elohim; and the
tithes of our land to the Lĕwites, for the Lĕwites
should receive the tithes in all our rural towns.
38 And the kohĕn, son of Aharon, shall be with the
Lĕwites when the Lĕwites receive tithes, and the
Lĕwites bring up a tenth of the tithes to the House of
our Elohim, to the rooms of the storehouse.
39 For the children of Yisra’ĕl and the children of Lĕwi
bring the offering of the grain, of the new wine and the
oil, to the storerooms where the vessels of the
Miqdash are, where the kohenim who attend and the
gatekeepers and the singers are, and we should not
neglect the House of our Elohim.

11 Now the rulers of the people dwelt at
Yerushalayim, and the rest of the people cast lots to
bring one out of ten to dwell in Yerushalayim, the
qodesh city, and nine-tenths were to dwell in other
cities.
2 And the people baraḵ all the men who volunteered
to dwell at Yerushalayim.
3 And these are the heads of the province who dwelt
in Yerushalayim, but in the cities of Yahuḏah
everyone dwelt in his own possession in their cities Yisra’ĕl, the kohenim, and the Lĕwites, and the
Nethinim, and the sons of Shelomoh’s servants.
4 And in Yerushalayim dwelt certain of the children
of Yahuḏah and of the children of Binyamin. Of the
children of Yahuḏah: Athayah son of Uzziyah, son of
1988

NEHEMIAH

Zeḵaryah, son of Amaryah, son of Shephatyah, son
of Mahalal’ĕl, of the children of Perets;
5 and Ma’asĕyah son of Baruḵ, son of Kol-Ḥozeh,
son of Ḥazayah, son of Aḏayah, son of Yoyariḇ, son
of Zeḵaryah, son of Shiloni.
6 All the sons of Perets who dwelt at Yerushalayim
were four hundred and sixty-eight brave men.
7 And these are the sons of Binyamin: Sallu son of
Meshullam, son of Yow’ĕḏ, son of Peḏayah, son of
Qolayah, son of Ma’asĕyah, son of Ithi’ĕl, son of
Yeshayah;
8 and after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred and
twenty-eight.
9 And Yo’ĕl son of Ziḵri was their overseer, and
Yahuḏah son of Senuah was second over the city.
10 Of the kohenim: Yeḏayah son of Yoyariḇ, Yaḵin,
11 Serayah son of Ḥilqiyah, son of Meshullam, son of
Tsaḏoq, son of Merayoth, son of Aḥituḇ, was the
leader of the House of Elohim.
12 And their brothers who did the work of the House
were eight hundred and twenty-two; and Aḏayah son
of Yeroḥam, son of Pelalyah, son of Amtsi, son of
Zeḵaryah, son of Pashḥur, son of Malkiyah,
13 and his brothers, heads of the fathers, were two
hundred and forty-two; and Amashesai son of Azar’ĕl,
son of Aḥzai, son of Meshillĕmoth, son of Immĕr,
14 and their brothers, mighty brave ones, were one
hundred and twenty-eight. And their overseer was
Zaḇdi’ĕl, son of the great ones.
15 Also of the Lĕwites: Shemayah son of Ḥashshuḇ,
son of Azriqam, son of Ḥashaḇyah, son of Bunni;
16 and Shabbethai and Yozaḇaḏ, of the heads of the
Lĕwites, over the outside work of the House of
Elohim;
1989

NEḤEMYAH

and Mattanyah son of Miḵa, son of Zaḇdi, son of
Asaph, who was the leader who began the
thanksgiving with prayer, and Baqbuqyah the second
among his brothers, and Aḇda son of Shammua, son
of Galal, son of Yeḏuthun.
18 All the Lĕwites in the qodesh city were two
hundred and eighty-four.
19 And the gatekeepers, Aqquḇ, Talmon, and their
brothers keeping guard at the gates, were one
hundred and seventy-two.
20 And the rest of Yisra’ĕl, of the kohenim, Lĕwites,
were in all the cities of Yahuḏah, each one in his
inheritance.
21 But the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel. And Tsiḥa and
Gishpa were over the Nethinim.
22 And the overseer of the Lĕwites at Yerushalayim
was Uzzi son of Bani, son of Ḥashaḇyah, son of
Mattanyah, son of Miḵa. Of the sons of Asaph, the
singers were over the work of the House of Elohim,
23 for the sovereign’s command was upon them - and
support for the singers, a matter day by day.
24 And Pethaḥyah son of Meshĕyzaḇ’ĕl, of the
children of Zeraḥ son of Yahuḏah, was the
sovereign’s deputy in all matters concerning the
people.
25 And at the villages with their fields, some of the
children of Yahuḏah dwelt in Qiryath ha’Arba and its
villages, and in Diḇon and its villages, and in
Yeqaḇtse’ĕl and its villages,
26 and in Yĕshua, and in Molaḏah, and in Bĕyth
Pelet,
27 and in Ḥatsar Shu’al, and in Be’ĕrsheḇa and its
villages,
28 and in Tsiqlaḡ, and in Meḵonah and its villages,
17

1990

NEHEMIAH

and in Ĕyn Rimmon, and in Tsorah, and in
Yarmuth,
30 Zanowaḥ, Aḏullam, and their villages; in Laḵish
and its fields; in Azĕqah and its villages. So they dwelt
from Be’ĕrsheḇa to the Valley of Hinnom.
31 And the children of Binyamin: from Geḇa,
Miḵmash, and Ayyah, and Bĕyth Ĕl, and their villages;
32 Anathoth, Noḇ, Ananyah;
33 Ḥatsor, Ramah, Gittayim;
34 Ḥaḏiḏ, Tseḇoyim, Neballat;
35 Loḏ, and Ono, Gĕy ha’Ḥarashim.
36 And of the Lĕwites, the divisions of Yahuḏah were
for Binyamin.
29

12 And these were the kohenim and the Lĕwites
who came up with Zerubbaḇel son of She’alti’ĕl, and
Yĕshua: Serayah, Yirmeyahu, Ezra,
2 Amaryah, Malluḵ, Ḥattush,
3 Sheḵanyah, Reḥum, Merĕmoth,
4 Iddo, Ginnethoi, Aḇiyah,
5 Miyamin, Ma’aḏyah, Bilgah,
6 Shemayah, and Yoyariḇ, Yeḏayah,
7 Sallu, Amoq, Ḥilqiyah, and Yeḏayah. These were
the heads of the kohenim and their brothers in the
days of Yĕshua.
8 And the Lĕwites: Yĕshua, Binnui, Qaḏmi’ĕl,
Shĕrĕḇyah,
Yahuḏah,
Mattanyah
over
the
thanksgiving, he and his brothers.
9 And Baqbuqyah and Unni, their brothers, were
opposite them for guard duties.
10 And Yĕshua brought forth Yoyaqim, and Yoyaqim
brought forth Elyashiḇ, and Elyashiḇ brought forth
Yoyaḏa,
11 and Yoyaḏa brought forth Yahonathan, and
Yahonathan brought forth Yaddua.
1991

NEḤEMYAH

And in the days of Yoyaqim, the kohenim, the
heads of the fathers were: of Serayah, Merayah; of
Yirmeyahu, Ḥananyah;
13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amaryah, Yahoḥanan;
14 of Meliḵu, Yahonathan; of Sheḇanyah, Yosĕph;
15 of Ḥarim, Aḏna; of Merayoth, Ḥelqai;
16 of Iddo, Zeḵaryah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
17 of Aḇiyah, Ziḵri, of Minyamin; of Mo’aḏyah, Piltai;
18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemayah, Yahonathan;
19 of Yoyariḇ, Mattenai; of Yeḏayah, Uzzi;
20 of Sallai, Qallai; of Amoq, Ĕḇer;
21 of Ḥilqiyah, Ḥashaḇyah. And of Yeḏayah,
Nethan’ĕl.
22 The Lĕwites and kohenim in the days of Elyashiḇ,
Yoyaḏa, Yoḥanan, and Yaddua, were recorded
heads of their fathers, also the kohenim in the reign
of Dareyawesh the Parasian.
23 The sons of Lĕwi, the heads of the fathers until the
days of Yoḥanan son of Elyashiḇ, were written in the
book of the annals.
24 And the heads of the Lĕwites were Ḥashaḇyah,
Shĕrĕḇyah, and Yĕshua son of Qaḏmi’ĕl, with their
brothers opposite them, to praise, to give thanks,
watch opposite watch, according to the command of
Dawiḏ the man of Elohim.
25 Mattanyah,
and
Baqbuqyah,
Oḇaḏyah,
Meshullam, Talmon, Aqquḇ were gatekeepers
guarding at the storerooms of the gates.
26 These were in the days of Yoyaqim son of Yĕshua,
son of Yotsaḏaq, and in the days of Neḥemyah the
governor, and of Ezra the kohĕn, the scribe.
27 And at the dedication of the wall of Yerushalayim
they sought out the Lĕwites in all their places, to bring
them to Yerushalayim to perform the dedication with
12

1992

NEHEMIAH

gladness, and with thanksgivings, and with singing,
cymbals, harps and lyres.
28 And the sons of the singers gathered together
from the countryside around Yerushalayim, from the
villages of the Netophathites,
29 and from Bĕyth ha’Gilgal, and from the fields of
Geḇa and Azmaweth - for the singers had built
themselves villages all around Yerushalayim.
30 And
the kohenim and Lĕwites cleansed
themselves, and they cleansed the people, and the
gates, and the wall.
31 And I brought the rulers of Yahuḏah up on the wall,
and appointed two large thanksgiving choirs, to go to
the right on the wall toward the Dung Gate,
32 and after them went Hoshayah and half of the
rulers of Yahuḏah,
33 then Azaryahu, Ezra, and Meshullam,
34 Yahuḏah, and Binyamin, and Shemayah, and
Yirmeyahu,
35 and of the sons of the kohenim with trumpets:
Zeḵaryah son of Yahonathan, son of Shemayah, son
of Mattanyah, son of Miḵayah, son of Zakkur, son of
Asaph,
36 and his brothers Shemayah and Azar’ĕl, Milalai,
Gilalai, Ma’ai, Nethan’ĕl, and Yahuḏah, Ḥanani with
instruments of songs of Dawiḏ the man of Elohim,
with Ezra the scribe before them.
37 And at the Fountain Gate and straight ahead of
them, they went up the stairs of the City of Dawiḏ, on
the stairway of the wall, beyond the house of Dawiḏ,
as far as the Water Gate eastward.
38 And the other thanksgiving choir went over against
them, and I behind them with half of the people on the
wall, going past the Tower of the Ovens as far as the
Broad Wall,
1993

NEḤEMYAH

and above the Gate of Ephrayim, and above the
Old Gate, and above the Fish Gate, and the Tower of
Ḥanane’ĕl, and the Tower of Mĕ’ah, as far as the
Sheep Gate. And they stood still at the Gate of the
Prison.
40 Then the two thanksgiving choirs took their stand
in the House of Elohim, and I and half of the deputy
rulers with me,
41 and the kohĕn, Elyaqim, Ma’asĕyah, Minyamin,
Miḵayah, Elyo’ĕynai, Zeḵaryah, and Ḥananyah, with
trumpets,
42 and Ma’asĕyah, and Shemayah, and El’azar, and
Uzzi and Yahoḥanan, and Malkiyah, and Ĕylam, and
Ĕzer. And the singers sang aloud, with Yizraḥyah in
charge.
43 And on that day they brought great offerings and
rejoiced, for Elohim had made them rejoice with great
joy. And the women and the children also rejoiced, so
that the joy of Yerushalayim was heard far away.
44 And on that day some were appointed over the
rooms for the stores, for the contributions, for the firstfruits, and for tithes, to gather into them from the fields
of the cities the portions required by the Torah for the
kohenim and for the Lĕwites. For Yahuḏah rejoiced
over the kohenim and the Lĕwites who stood up.
45 Both the singers and the gatekeepers guarded the
charge of their Elohim and the charge of the
cleansing, according to the command of Dawiḏ and
Shelomoh his son.
46 For in the days of Dawiḏ and Asaph of old there
were chiefs of the singers, and songs of praise and
thanksgiving to Elohim.
47 And in the days of Zerubbaḇel and in the days of
Neḥemyah all Yisra’ĕl gave the portions for the
singers and the gatekeepers, a portion for each day.
39

1994

NEHEMIAH

And they qadosh what was for the Lĕwites, and the
Lĕwites qadosh what was for the children of Aharon.

13 On that day was read from the Book of Mosheh
in the hearing of the people, and in it was found written
that an Ammonite and Mo’aḇite should not come into
the assembly of Elohim forever,
2 because they had not met the children of Yisra’ĕl
with bread and water, and hired Bil’am against them
to curse them, although our Elohim turned the curse
into a beraḵah.
3 And it came to be, when they had heard the Torah,
that they separated all the mixed multitude from
Yisra’ĕl.
4 And before this, Elyashiḇ the kohĕn, having
authority over the storerooms of the House of our
Elohim, was a relative of Toḇiyah,
5 and he had prepared for him a large room, where
previously they had stored the grain offerings, the
frankincense, and the utensils, and the tithes of grain,
the new wine and the oil, which were commanded to
the Lĕwites and the singers and the gatekeepers, and
the contributions for the kohenim.
6 But in all this I was not in Yerushalayim, for in the
thirty-second year of Artaḥshashta sovereign of
Baḇel I came to the sovereign. And after some days I
obtained my request of the sovereign,
7 and I came to Yerushalayim and learned of the evil
which Elyashiḇ had done for Toḇiyah, in preparing a
room for him in the courts of the House of Elohim.
8 And it was very displeasing to me. Therefore I
threw all the household goods of Toḇiyah out of the
room,

1995

NEḤEMYAH

and I commanded them to cleanse the rooms. And
I put back into them the utensils of the House of
Elohim, with the grain offering and the frankincense.
10 And I learned that the portions for the Lĕwites had
not been given them, for each of the Lĕwites and the
singers who did the work had gone back to his field.
11 Then I contended with the deputy rulers, and said,
“Why is the House of Elohim forsaken?” And I
gathered them together and stood them in their place.
12 And all Yahuḏah brought the tithe of the grain and
the new wine and the oil to the storehouse.
13 And I appointed as treasurers over the storehouse
Shelemyah the kohĕn and Tsaḏoq the scribe, and
Peḏayah of the Lĕwites. And next to them was Ḥanan
son of Zakkur, son of Mattanyah. For they were
reckoned trustworthy, and it was on them to distribute
to their brothers.
14 Remember me, O my Elohim, concerning this, and
do not wipe out my kind deeds that I have done for
the House of my Elohim, and for its charges!
15 In those days I saw in Yahuḏah those treading
wine presses on the Shabbath, and bringing in
sheaves, and loading donkeys with wine, grapes, and
figs, and all kinds of burdens, which they brought into
Yerushalayim on the Shabbath day. So I warned on
the day they sold food.
16 And men of Tsor dwelt there, bringing in fish and
all kinds of goods, and sold them on the Shabbath to
the children of Yahuḏah, and in Yerushalayim.
17 Then I contended with the nobles of Yahuḏah, and
said to them, “What evil matter is this that you are
doing, profaning the Shabbath day?
18 “Did not your fathers do the same so that our
Elohim brought all this evil on us and on this city? Yet
9

1996

NEHEMIAH

you bring added wrath on Yisra’ĕl by profaning the
Shabbath.”
19 And it came to be, at the gates of Yerushalayim,
as it began to be dark before the Shabbath, that I
commanded the gates to be shut, and commanded
that they should not be opened till after the Shabbath.
And I stood some of my servants at the gates, so that
no burdens would be brought in on the Shabbath day.
20 And the merchants and sellers of all kinds of wares
spent the night outside Yerushalayim once or twice,
21 and I warned them, and said to them, “Why do you
spend the night around the wall? If you do so again, I
lay hands on you!” From that time on they came no
more on the Shabbath.
22 And I commanded the Lĕwites that they should
cleanse themselves, and they should come, guarding
the gates, to qadosh the Shabbath day. Remember
me, O my Elohim, concerning this also, and pardon
me according to the greatness of Your kindness!
23 In those days I also saw Yahuḏim who had
married women of Ashdoḏ, Ammon, Mo’aḇ.
24 And half of their children spoke the language of
Ashdoḏ, and could not speak the language of
Yahuḏah, but spoke according to the language of the
other people.
25 Then I contended with them and cursed them, and
smote some of them and pulled out their hair, and
made them swear by Elohim, saying, “You do not give
your daughters as wives to their sons, nor take their
daughters for your sons or yourselves.
26 “Did not Shelomoh sovereign of Yisra’ĕl sin
because of them? Among the many nations there was
no sovereign like him, who was beloved of his Elohim,
and Elohim made him sovereign over all Yisra’ĕl.
Even him foreign women caused to sin.
1997

NEḤEMYAH

“Should we then hear of your doing all this great
evil, trespassing against our Elohim by marrying
foreign wives?”
28 And one of the sons of Yoyaḏa, son of Elyashiḇ
the kohĕn ha’gadol, was a son-in-law of Sanballat the
Ḥornite. And I drove him from me.
29 Remember them, O my Elohim, because they
have defiled the kehunnah and the covenant of the
kehunnah, and of the Lĕwites.
30 Thus I cleansed them from all that is foreign. And
I appointed duties to the kohenim and the Lĕwites,
each in his task,
31 and for the wood offering and the first-fruits at
Appointed Times. Remember me, O my Elohim, for
good!
27

1998

1 CHRONICLES

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1
‫ דברי הימים א‬A mYmYh YRBd

1 Aḏam, Shĕth, Enosh,
Qĕnan, Mahalal’ĕl, Yereḏ,
3 Ḥanoḵ, Methushelaḥ, Lemeḵ,
4 Noaḥ, Shĕm, Ḥam, and Yepheth.
5 The sons of Yepheth: Gomer and Maḡoḡ, and
Maḏai, and Yawan, and Tuḇal, and Mesheḵ, and
Tiras.
6 And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Diphath,
and Toḡarmah.
7 And the sons of Yawan: Elishah and Tarshishah,
Kittim and Roḏanim.
8 The sons of Ḥam: Kush and Mitsrayim, Put and
Kena’an.
9 And the sons of Kush: Seḇa, and Ḥawilah, and
Saḇta, and Ra’mah, and Saḇteḵa. And the sons of
Ra’mah: Sheḇa and Deḏan.
10 And Kush brought forth Nimroḏ; he began to be a
mighty one on the earth.
11 And Mitsrayim brought forth the Luḏim, and the
Anamim, and the Lehaḇim, and the Naphtuḥim,
12 and the Pathrusim, and the Kasluḥim from whom
came the Pelishtites, and the Kaphtorim.
13 And Kena’an brought forth Tsiḏon, his first-born,
and Ḥĕth,
14 and the Yeḇusite, and the Amorite, and the
Girgashite,
15 and the Ḥiwwite, and the Arqite, and the Sinite,
16 and the Arwaḏite, and Tsemarite, and the
Ḥamathite.
2

1999

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

The sons of Shĕm: Ĕylam, and Asshur, and
Arpaḵshaḏ, and Luḏ, and Aram, and Uts, Ḥul, and
Gether, and Mesheḵ.
18 And Arpaḵshaḏ brought forth Shelaḥ, and Shelaḥ
brought forth Ĕḇer.
19 To Ĕḇer were born two sons: the name of one was
Peleḡ, for in his days the earth was divided, and his
brother’s name was Yoqtan.
20 And Yoqtan brought forth Almoḏaḏ, and Sheleph,
and Ḥatsarmaweth, and Yearḥ,
21 and Haḏoram, and Uzal, and Diqlah,
22 and Ĕyḇal, and Aḇima’ĕl, and Sheḇa,
23 and Ophir, and Ḥawilah, and Yoḇaḇ. All these
were the sons of Yoqtan.
24 Shĕm, Arpaḵshaḏ, Shelaḥ,
25 Ĕḇer, Peleḡ, Re’u,
26 Seruḡ, Naḥor, Teraḥ,
27 and Aḇram, that is Aḇraham.
28 The sons of Aḇraham: Yitsḥaq and Yishma’ĕl.
29 These are their genealogies: The first-born of
Yishma’ĕl was Neḇayoth, and Qĕḏar, and Aḏbe’ĕl,
and Miḇsam,
30 Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa, Ḥaḏaḏ, and
Tĕma,
31 Yetur, Naphish, and Qĕḏemah. These were the
sons of Yishma’ĕl.
32 And the sons born to Qeturah, Aḇraham’s
concubine: Zimran, and Yoqshan, and Meḏan, and
Miḏyan, and Yishbaq, and Shuwaḥ. The sons of
Yoqshan: Sheḇa and Deḏan.
33 And the sons of Miḏyan: Ĕphah, and Ĕpher, and
Ḥanoḵ, and Aḇiḏa, and Elda’ah. All these were the
children of Qeturah.
34 And Aḇraham brought forth Yitsḥaq. The sons of
Yitsḥaq: Ĕsaw and Yisra’ĕl.
17

2000

1 CHRONICLES

The sons of Ĕsaw: Eliphaz, Re’uw’ĕl, and Ye’ush,
and Ya’lam, and Qoraḥ.
36 And the sons of Eliphaz: Tĕman, and Omar,
Tsephi, and Gatam, and Qenaz, and Timna, and
Amalĕq.
37 The sons of Re’uw’ĕl: Naḥath, Zeraḥ, Shammah,
and Mizzah.
38 And the sons of Sĕ’ir: Lotan, and Shoḇal, and
Tsiḇ’on, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ĕtser, and
Dishan.
39 And the sons of Lotan: Ḥori and Homam; Lotan’s
sister was Timna.
40 The sons of Shoḇal: Alyan, and Manaḥath, and
Ĕyḇal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Tsiḇ’on: Ayah
and Anah.
41 The son of Anah was Dishon. The sons of Dishon:
Ḥamran, and Eshban, and Yithran, and Keran.
42 The sons of Ĕtser: Bilhan, and Za’awan, and
Ya’aqan. The sons of Dishan: Uts and Aran.
43 And these were the sovereigns who reigned in the
land of Eḏom before any sovereign reigned over the
children of Yisra’ĕl: Bela son of Be’or, and the name
of his city was Dinhaḇah.
44 And when Bela died, Yoḇaḇ son of Zeraḥ of
Botsrah reigned in his place.
45 And Yoḇaḇ died, and Ḥusham of the land of the
Tĕmanites reigned in his place.
46 And when Ḥusham died, Haḏaḏ son of Beḏaḏ,
who smote Miḏyan in the field of Mo’aḇ, reigned in his
place. The name of his city was Awith.
47 And Haḏaḏ died, and Samlah of Masrĕqah
reigned in his place.
48 And Samlah died, and Sha’ul of Reḥoḇoth
ha’Nahar reigned in his place.
35

2001

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And Sha’ul died, and Ba’al-Ḥanan son of Aḵbor
reigned in his place.
50 And Ba’al-Ḥanan died, and Haḏaḏ reigned in his
place. And the name of his city was Pai. And his wife’s
name was Mehĕtab’ĕl the daughter of Matrĕḏ, the
daughter of Mĕy-Zahaḇ.
51 And Haḏaḏ died. And the chiefs of Eḏom were
Chief Timnah, Chief Alyah, Chief Yethĕth,
52 Chief Oholiḇamah, Chief Ĕlah, Chief Pinon,
53 Chief Qenaz, Chief Tĕman, Chief Miḇtsar,
54 Chief Maḡdi’ĕl, and Chief Iram. These were the
chiefs of Eḏom.
49

2 These were the sons of Yisra’ĕl: Re’uḇĕn,
Shim’on, Lĕwi and Yahuḏah, Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun,
2 Dan, Yosĕph and Binyamin, Naphtali, Gaḏ and
Ashĕr.
3 The sons of Yahuḏah: Ĕr, and Onan, and Shĕlah,
the three born to him by the daughter of Shuwa, the
Kena’anitess. And Ĕr, the first-born of Yahuḏah, was
evil in the eyes of hWhY, and He slew him.
4 And Tamar, his daughter-in-law, bore him Perets
and Zeraḥ. All the sons of Yahuḏah were five.
5 The sons of Perets: Ḥetsron and Ḥamul.
6 And the sons of Zeraḥ: Zimri, and Ĕythan, and
Hĕman, and Kalkol, and Dara, five of them in all.
7 And the son of Karmi was Aḵar, the troubler of
Yisra’ĕl, who trespassed in that which was under the
ban.
8 And the son of Ĕythan was Azaryahu.
9 And the sons of Ḥetsron who were born to him:
Yeraḥme’ĕl, and Ram, and Keluḇai.
10 Ram brought forth Amminaḏaḇ, and Amminaḏaḇ
brought forth Naḥshon, leader of the children of
Yahuḏah;
2002

1 CHRONICLES

Naḥshon brought forth Salma, and Salma brought
forth Bo’az;
12 Bo’az brought forth Oḇĕḏ, and Oḇĕḏ brought forth
Yishai;
13 Yishai brought forth Eliyaḇ his first-born, and
Aḇinaḏaḇ the second, and Shim’a the third,
14 Nethan’ĕl the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
15 Otsem the sixth, Dawiḏ the seventh.
16 And their sisters: Tseruyah and Aḇiḡayil. And the
sons of Tseruyah: Aḇishai, and Yo’aḇ, and Asah’ĕl,
three.
17 And Aḇiḡayil bore Amasa. And the father of
Amasa was Yether the Yishma’ĕlite.
18 And Kalĕḇ son of Ḥetsron brought forth children
by Azuḇah, his wife, and by Yeriyoth. Now these were
her sons: Yĕsher, and Shoḇaḇ, and Ardon.
19 And Azuḇah died, and Kalĕḇ took Ephrath as his
wife, who bore him Ḥur.
20 And Ḥur brought forth Uri, and Uri brought forth
Betsal’ĕl.
21 And afterward Ḥetsron went in to the daughter of
Maḵir the father of Gil’aḏ, whom he took when he was
sixty years old. And she bore him Seḡuḇ.
22 And Seḡuḇ brought forth Ya’ir who had twentythree cities in the land of Gil’aḏ.
23 And he took from them Geshur and Aram, with the
towns of Ya’ir, with Qenath and its towns, sixty towns.
All these were of the sons of Maḵir the father of Gil’aḏ.
24 And after the death of Ḥetsron in Kalĕḇ Ephrathah,
Ḥetsron’s wife Aḇiyah bore him Ashḥur the father of
Teqowa.
25 And the sons of Yeraḥme’ĕl the first-born of
Ḥetsron were: Ram the first-born, and Bunah, and
Oren, and Otsem, and Aḥiyahu.
11

2003

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And Yeraḥme’ĕl had another wife, whose name
was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
27 And the sons of Ram, the first-born of Yeraḥme’ĕl,
were Ma’ats, and Yamin, and Ĕqer.
28 And the sons of Onam were Shammai and Yaḏa.
And the sons of Shammai: Naḏaḇ and Aḇishur.
29 And the name of the wife of Aḇishur was Aḇiḥayil,
and she bore him Aḥban and Moliḏ.
30 And the sons of Naḏaḇ: Seleḏ and Appayim, and
Seleḏ died without children.
31 And the son of Appayim was Yishi, and the son of
Yishi was Shĕshan, and the son of Shĕshan was
Aḥlai.
32 And the sons of Yaḏa, the brother of Shammai:
Yether and Yahonathan, and Yether died without
children.
33 And the sons of Yahonathan: Peleth and Zaza.
These were the sons of Yeraḥme’ĕl.
34 And Shĕshan had no sons, only daughters. And
Shĕshan had a Mitsrite servant whose name was
Yarḥa.
35 And Shĕshan gave his daughter to Yarḥa his
servant as wife, and she bore him Attai.
36 And Attai brought forth Nathan, and Nathan
brought forth Zaḇaḏ,
37 and Zaḇaḏ brought forth Ephlal, and Ephlal
brought forth Oḇĕḏ,
38 and Oḇĕḏ brought forth Yahu, and Yahu brought
forth Azaryahu,
39 and Azaryahu brought forth Ḥelets, and Ḥelets
brought forth El’asah,
40 and El’asah brought forth Sismai, and Sismai
brought forth Shallum,
41 and Shallum brought forth Yeqamyah, and
Yeqamyah brought forth Elishama.
26

2004

1 CHRONICLES

And the sons of Kalĕḇ the brother of Yeraḥme’ĕl:
Mĕysha his first-born, who was the father of Ziph, and
the sons of Marĕshah the father of Ḥeḇron.
43 And the sons of Ḥeḇron: Qoraḥ, and Tappuaḥ,
and Reqem, and Shema.
44 And Shema brought forth Raḥam the father of
Yorqe’am, and Reqem brought forth Shammai.
45 And the son of Shammai was Ma’on, and Ma’on
was the father of Bĕyth Tsur.
46 And Ĕphah, Kalĕḇ’s concubine, bore Ḥaran, and
Motsa, and Gazĕz. And Ḥaran brought forth Gazĕz.
47 And the sons of Yahdai: Reḡem, and Yotham, and
Gĕyshan, and Pelet, and Ĕphah, and Sha’aph.
48 Ma’aḵah, Kalĕḇ’s concubine, bore Sheḇer and
Tirḥanah.
49 And she bore Sha’aph the father of Maḏmannah,
Shewa the father of Maḵbĕna and the father of Giḇ’a.
And the daughter of Kalĕḇ was Aḵsah.
50 These were the descendants of Kalĕḇ: The sons
of Ḥur, the first-born of Ephrathah: Shoḇal the father
of Qiryath Ye’arim,
51 Salma the father of Bĕyth Leḥem, Ḥarĕph the
father of Bĕyth Gaḏer.
52 And Shoḇal the father of Qiryath Ye’arim had
descendants: Haro’eh, half of the Menuḥothites.
53 And the clans of Qiryath Ye’arim: the Yithrites, and
the Puthites, and the Shumathites, and the
Mishraites. From these came the Tsor’athites and the
Eshta’olites.
54 The
sons of Salma: Bĕyth Leḥem, the
Netophathites, Atroth Bĕyth Yo’aḇ, and half of the
Menaḥtites, and the Tsor’ites.
55 And the clans of the scribes who dwelt at Yaḇĕts:
the Tirathites, the Shim’athites, the Suḵathites. These
42

2005

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

were the Qĕynites who came from Ḥammath, the
father of the house of Rĕḵaḇ.

3 And these were the sons of Dawiḏ who were born
to him in Ḥeḇron: The first-born was Amnon, by
Aḥino’am the Yizre’ĕlitess; the second, Dani’ĕl, by
Aḇiḡayil the Karmelitess;
2 the third, Aḇshalom son of Ma’aḵah, the daughter
of Talmai, sovereign of Geshur; the fourth, Aḏoniyah
son of Ḥaggith;
3 the fifth, Shephatyah, by Aḇital; the sixth,
Yithre’am, by his wife Eḡlah.
4 Six were born to him in Ḥeḇron. And he reigned
there seven years and six months, and in
Yerushalayim he reigned thirty-three years.
5 And these were born to him in Yerushalayim:
Shim’a, and Shoḇaḇ, and Nathan, and Shelomoh four by Bathshua the daughter of Ammi’ĕl.
6 Yiḇḥar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,
7 and Noḡah, and Nepheḡ, and Yaphiya,
8 and Elishama, and Elyaḏa, and Eliphelet, nine,
9 all the sons of Dawiḏ, besides the sons of the
concubines, and Tamar their sister.
10 And Shelomoh’s son was Reḥaḇ’am, Aḇiyah his
son, Asa his son, Yahoshaphat his son,
11 Yoram his son, Aḥazyahu his son, Yo’ash his son,
12 Amatsyahu his son, Azaryahu his son, Yotham his
son,
13 Aḥaz his son, Ḥizqiyahu his son, Menashsheh his
son,
14 Amon his son, Yoshiyahu his son.
15 And the sons of Yoshiyahu: Yoḥanan the firstborn, the second Yahoyaqim, the third Tsiḏqiyahu,
the fourth Shallum.
2006

1 CHRONICLES

And the sons of Yahoyaqim: Yeḵonyah his son
and Tsiḏqiyahu his son.
17 And the sons of Yeḵonyah the captive: She’alti’ĕl
his son,
18 and Malkiram, and Peḏayah, and Shenatstsar,
Yeqamyah, Hoshama, and Neḏaḇyah.
19 And the sons of Peḏayah: Zerubbaḇel and Shim’i.
The sons of Zerubbaḇel: Meshullam, and Ḥananyah,
and Shelomith their sister,
20 and Ḥashuḇah, and Ohel, and Bereḵyah, and
Ḥasaḏyah, Yushaḇ-Ḥeseḏ, five.
21 And the sons of Ḥananyah: Pelatyah and
Yeshayah, the sons of Rephayah, the sons of Arnan,
the sons of Oḇaḏyah, the sons of Sheḵanyah.
22 And the son of Sheḵanyah: Shemayah. The sons
of Shemayah: Ḥattush, and Yiḡ’al, and Bariyaḥ, and
Ne’aryah, and Shaphat, six.
23 And the sons of Ne’aryah: Elyo’ĕynai, and
Ḥizqiyah, and Azriqam, three.
24 And the sons of Elyo’ĕynai: Hoḏawyah, and
Elyashiḇ, and Pelayah, and Aqquḇ, and Yoḥanan,
and Delayah, and Anani, seven.
16

4 The sons of Yahuḏah: Perets, Ḥetsron, and Karmi,
and Ḥur, and Shoḇal.
2 And Re’ayah son of Shoḇal brought forth Yaḥath,
and Yaḥath brought forth Aḥumai and Lahaḏ. These
were the clans of the Tsor’athites.
3 And these were of the father of Ĕytam: Yizre’ĕl,
and Yishma, and Yiḏbash. And the name of their
sister was Hatselelponi;
4 and Penu’ĕl was the father of Geḏor, and Ĕzer
was the father of Ḥushah. These were the sons of
Ḥur, the first-born of Ephrathah the father of Bĕyth
Leḥem.
2007

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And Ashḥur the father of Teqowa had two wives,
Ḥelah and Na’arah.
6 And Na’arah bore him Aḥuzzam, and Ḥĕpher, and
Tĕmeni, and Ha’aḥashtari. These were the sons of
Na’arah.
7 And the sons of Ḥelah: Tsereth, and Tsoḥar, and
Ethnan;
8 and Qots brought forth Anuḇ, and Tsoḇĕḇah, and
the clans of Aḥarḥĕl son of Harum.
9 And Yaḇĕts was more esteemed than his
brothers, and his mother called his name Yaḇĕts,
saying, “Because I bore him in pain.”
10 And Yaḇĕts called on the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
saying, “Oh, that You would baraḵ me indeed, and
enlarge my border, and that Your hand would be with
me, and that You would keep me from evil, not to be
my pain!” And Elohim gave him what he asked.
11 And Keluḇ the brother of Shuḥah brought forth
Meḥir, who was the father of Eshton.
12 And Eshton brought forth Bĕyth-Rapha, and
Pasĕaḥ, and Teḥinnah the father of Ir Naḥash. These
were the men of Rĕḵah.
13 And the sons of Qenaz: Othni’ĕl and Serayah. And
sons of Othni’ĕl: Ḥathath,
14 and Me’onothai, who brought forth Ophrah. And
Serayah brought forth Yo’aḇ the father of GĕyḤarashim, for they were craftsmen.
15 And the sons of Kalĕḇ the son of Yephunneh: Iru,
Ĕlah, and Na’am. And the son of Elah was Qenaz.
16 And the sons of Yehallel’ĕl: Ziph, and Ziphah,
Tireya, and Asar’ĕl
17 And the sons of Ezrah: Yether, and Mereḏ, and
Ĕpher, and Yalon. And she bore Miryam, and
Shammai, and Yishbaḥ the father of Eshtemoa.
5

2008

1 CHRONICLES

And his wife Yahuḏiyah bore Yereḏ the father of
Geḏor, and Ḥeḇer the father of Soḵo, and Yequthi’ĕl
the father of Zanowaḥ. And these were the sons of
Bithyah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mereḏ took.
19 And the sons of Hoḏiyah’s wife, the sister of
Naḥam, were the fathers of Qe’ilah the Garmite and
of Eshtemoa the Ma’aḵathite.
20 And the sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah,
Ben-Ḥanan, and Tulon. And the sons of Yishi: Zoḥĕth
and Ben-Zoḥĕth.
21 The sons of Shĕlah the son of Yahuḏah: Ĕr the
father of Lĕḵah, and La’dah the father of Marĕshah,
and the clans of the house of the linen workers of the
house of Ashbĕa;
22 and Yoqim, and the men of Kozĕḇa, and Yo’ash,
and Saraph who ruled in Mo’aḇ, and Yashuḇi-Leḥem.
But the records were ancient.
23 These were the potters and those who dwell at
Neta’im and Geḏĕrah; there they dwelt with the
sovereign for his work.
24 The sons of Shim’on: Nemu’ĕl, and Yamin, Yariḇ,
Zeraḥ, Sha’ul,
25 Shallum his son, Miḇsam his son, Mishma his son.
26 And the sons of Mishma: Ḥammu’ĕl his son,
Zakkur his son, Shim’i his son.
27 And Shim’i had sixteen sons and six daughters,
but his brothers did not have many children, nor did
any of their clans increase as much as the children of
Yahuḏah.
28 And they dwelt at Be’ĕrsheḇa, and Molaḏah, and
Ḥatsar Shu’al,
29 and at Bilhah, and at Etsem, and at Tolaḏ,
30 and at Bethu’ĕl, and at Ḥormah, and at Tsiqlaḡ,
18

2009

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

and at Bĕyth Markaḇoth, and at Ḥatsar Susim, and
at Bĕyth Bir’i, and at Sha’arayim. These were their
cities until the reign of Dawiḏ.
32 And their villages were Ĕytam, and Ayin, and
Rimmon, and Toḵen, and Ashan, five cities,
33 and all the villages that were around these cities
as far as Ba’al. These were their dwelling places, and
they kept their genealogy.
34 And Meshoḇaḇ, and Yamlĕḵ, and Yoshah son of
Amatsyah;
35 and Yo’ĕl, and Yahu son of Yoshiḇyah, son of
Serayah, son of Asi’ĕl;
36 and Elyo’ĕynai, and Ya’aqoḇah, and Yeshoḥayah,
and Asayah, and Aḏi’ĕl, and Yesimi’ĕl, and Benayah;
37 and Ziza son of Shiphi, son of Allon, son of
Yeḏayah, son of Shimri, son of Shemayah.
38 These mentioned by name were leaders in their
clans, and their father’s house increased greatly.
39 And they went to the entrance of Geḏor, as far as
the east side of the valley, to look for pasture for their
flocks,
40 and they found rich, good pasture, and the land
was broad, undisturbed and safe, for some Ḥamites
had dwelt there formerly.
41 And these written by name came in the days of
Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, and smote their
tents, and the homes that were found there, and put
them under the ban, as it is to this day, and dwelt in
their place, because there was pasture for their flocks
there.
42 And some of them, five hundred men of the sons
of Shim’on, went to Mount Sĕ’ir, having as their chiefs
Pelatyah, and Ne’aryah, and Rephayah, and Uzzi’ĕl,
the sons of Yishi.
31

2010

1 CHRONICLES

And they smote the rest of the Amalĕqites who
had escaped, and dwelt there to this day.

43

5 As for the sons of Re’uḇĕn the first-born of Yisra’ĕl
- he was the first-born, but because he profaned his
father’s bed, his birthright was given to the sons of
Yosĕph, son of Yisra’ĕl, so that the genealogy is not
listed according to the birthright,
2 for Yahuḏah prevailed over his brothers, and from
him came a ruler, although the birthright was
Yosĕph’s 3 the sons of Re’uḇĕn the first-born of Yisra’ĕl:
Ḥanoḵ and Pallu, Ḥetsron and Karmi.
4 The sons of Yo’ĕl: Shemayah his son, Goḡ his
son, Shim’i his son,
5 Miḵah his son, Re’ayah his son, Ba’al his son,
6 and Be’ĕrah his son, whom Tiḡlath-Pileser
sovereign of Ashshur took into exile. He was leader
of the Re’uḇĕnites.
7 And his brothers by their clans, when the
genealogy of their generations was registered: the
chief, Ye’i’ĕl, and Zeḵaryahu,
8 and Bela son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Yo’ĕl,
who dwelt in Aro’ĕr, as far as Neḇo and Ba’al Me’on.
9 And he dwelt eastward as far as the entrance of
the wilderness from the River Perath, because their
livestock had increased in the land of Gil’aḏ.
10 And in the days of Sha’ul they fought against the
Haḡarites, who fell by their hand. And they dwelt in
their tents over all the eastern part of Gil’aḏ.
11 And the children of Gaḏ dwelt next to them in the
land of Bashan as far as Salḵah:
12 Yo’ĕl was the chief, Shapham the next, then
Ya’anai and Shaphat in Bashan;
2011

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

and their brothers of their father’s house: Miḵa’ĕl,
and Meshullam, and Sheḇa, and Yorai, and Yakan,
and Ziya, and Ĕḇer, seven.
14 These were the children of Aḇiḥayil son of Ḥuri,
son of Yarowaḥ, son of Gil’aḏ, son of Miḵa’ĕl, son of
Yeshishai, son of Yaḥdo, son of Buz;
15 Aḥi son of Aḇdi’ĕl, son of Guni, was chief of their
father’s house.
16 And they dwelt in Gil’aḏ, in Bashan and in its
villages, and in all the open lands of Sharon within
their borders.
17 All these were registered by genealogies in the
days of Yotham sovereign of Yahuḏah, and in the
days of Yaroḇ’am sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
18 The sons of Re’uḇĕn, and the Gaḏites, and half
the tribe of Menashsheh had forty-four thousand
seven hundred and sixty brave men, men able to bear
shield and sword, to shoot with the bow, and skilled
in battle, going out to the army.
19 And they fought against the Haḡrites, and Yetur,
and Naphish, and Noḏaḇ.
20 And they were helped against them, and the
Haḡrites were given into their hand, and all who were
with them. For they cried out to Elohim in the battle,
and He answered their prayer, because they put their
trust in Him.
21 And they took away their livestock: fifty thousand
of their camels, and two hundred and fifty thousand
of their sheep, and two thousand of their donkeys,
also one hundred thousand of their men,
22 for many fell dead, because the battle was of
Elohim. And they dwelt in their place until the exile.
23 And the children of the half-tribe of Menashsheh
dwelt in the land. They increased from Bashan to
Ba’al Ḥermon, that is, to Senir, or Mount Ḥermon.
13

2012

1 CHRONICLES

And these were the heads of their fathers’ houses:
Ĕpher, and Yishi, and Eli’ĕl, and Azri’ĕl, and
Yirmeyahu, Hoḏawyah, and Yaḥdi’ĕl - mighty brave
men, men of name, and heads of their fathers’
houses.
25 But they trespassed against the Elohim of their
fathers, and whored after the mighty ones of the
peoples of the land, whom Elohim had destroyed
before them.
26 So the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl stirred up the spirit of Pul
sovereign of Ashshur, even the spirit of TiḡlathPileser sovereign of Ashshur. And he took the
Re’uḇĕnites, and the Gaḏites, and the half-tribe of
Menashsheh into exile, and brought them to Ḥalaḥ,
and Ḥaḇor, and Hara, and the river of Gozan, unto
this day.
24

6 The sons of Lĕwi: Gĕreshom, Qehath, and Merari.
And the sons of Qehath: Amram, Yitshar, and
Ḥeḇron, and Uzzi’ĕl.
3 And the children of Amram: Aharon, and Mosheh,
and Miryam. And the sons of Aharon: Naḏaḇ and
Aḇihu, El’azar and Ithamar.
4 El’azar brought forth Pineḥas, Pineḥas brought
forth Aḇishua;
5 and Aḇishua brought forth Buqqi, and Buqqi
brought forth Uzzi;
6 and Uzzi brought forth Zeraḥyah, and Zeraḥyah
brought forth Merayoth;
7 Merayoth brought forth Amaryah, and Amaryah
brought forth Aḥituḇ;
8 and Aḥituḇ brought forth Tsaḏoq, and Tsaḏoq
brought forth Aḥima’ats;
9 and Aḥima’ats brought forth Azaryahu, and
Azaryahu brought forth Yoḥanan;
2

2013

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

and Yoḥanan brought forth Azaryahu - it was he
who served as kohĕn in the House that Shelomoh
built in Yerushalayim;
11 and Azaryahu brought forth Amaryah, and
Amaryah brought forth Aḥituḇ;
12 and Aḥituḇ brought forth Tsaḏoq, and Tsaḏoq
brought forth Shallum;
13 and Shallum brought forth Ḥilqiyah, and Ḥilqiyah
brought forth Azaryahu;
14 and Azaryahu brought forth Serayah, and Serayah
brought forth Yahotsaḏaq.
15 And Yahotsaḏaq went away when hWhY sent
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim into exile by the hand of
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar.
16 The sons of Lĕwi: Gĕreshom, Qehath, and Merari.
17 And these are the names of the sons of
Gĕreshom: Liḇni and Shim’i.
18 And the sons of Qehath: Amram, and Yitshar, and
Ḥeḇron, and Uzzi’el.
19 The sons of Merari: Maḥli and Mushi. And these
are the clans of the Lĕwites according to their fathers:
20 Of Gĕreshom were Liḇni his son, Yaḥath his son,
Zimmah his son,
21 Yo’aḥ his son, Iddo his son, Zeraḥ his son,
Ye’atherai his son.
22 The sons of Qehath: Amminaḏaḇ his son, Qoraḥ
his son, Assir his son,
23 Elqanah his son, Eḇyasaph his son, Assir his son,
24 Taḥath his son, Uri’ĕl his son, Uzziyah his son,
and Sha’ul his son.
25 And the sons of Elqanah: Amasai and Aḥimoth.
26 Elqanah - the sons of Elqanah: Tsophai his son,
and Naḥath his son,
27 Eliyaḇ his son, Yeroḥam his son, Elqanah his son.
10

2014

1 CHRONICLES

And the sons of Shemu’ĕl; the first-born Washni,
and Aḇiyah.
29 The sons of Merari: Maḥli, Liḇni his son, Shim’i his
son, Uzzah his son,
30 Shim’a his son, Ḥaggiyah his son, and Asayah his
son.
31 And these are the men whom Dawiḏ appointed
over the service of song in the House of hWhY, after
the ark came to rest.
32 And they were rendering service in song before
the Mishkan of the Tent of Appointment, until
Shelomoh had built the House of hWhY in
Yerushalayim, and they performed their duties
according to their ruling.
33 And these are the ones who stood with their sons:
Of the sons of the Qehathites were Hĕman the singer,
son of Yo’ĕl, son of Shemu’ĕl,
34 son of Elqanah, son of Yeroḥam, son of Eli’ĕl, son
of Towaḥ,
35 son of Tsuph, son of Elqanah, son of Maḥath, son
of Amasai,
36 son of Elqanah, son of Yo’ĕl, son of Azaryahu, son
of Tsephanyah,
37 son of Taḥath, son of Assir, son of Eḇyasaph, son
of Qoraḥ,
38 son of Yitshar, son of Qehath, son of Lĕwi, son of
Yisra’ĕl.
39 And his brother Asaph, who stood at his right
hand, was Asaph son of Bereḵyahu, son of Shim’a,
40 son of Miḵa’ĕl, son of Ba’asĕyah, son of Malkiyah,
41 son of Ethni, son of Zeraḥ, son of Aḏayah,
42 son of Ĕythan, son of Zimmah, son of Shim’i,
43 son of Yaḥath, son of Gĕreshom, son of Lĕwi.
28

2015

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And their brothers, the sons of Merari, on the left
hand, were Ĕythan son of Qishi, son of Aḇdi, son of
Malluḵ,
45 son of Ḥashaḇyah, son of Amatsyah, son of
Ḥilqiyah,
46 son of Amtsi, son of Bani, son of Shemer,
47 son of Maḥli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of
Lĕwi.
48 And their brothers, the Lĕwites, were appointed to
every kind of service of the Mishkan of the House of
Elohim.
49 But Aharon and his sons offered on the altar of
burnt offering and on the altar of incense, for all the
work of the Most Qodesh Place, and to make
atonement for Yisra’ĕl, according to all that Mosheh
the servant of Elohim had commanded.
50 And these are the sons of Aharon: El’azar his son,
Pineḥas his son, Aḇishua his son,
51 Buqqi his son, Uzzi his son, Zeraḥyah his son,
52 Merayoth his son, Amaryah his son, Aḥituḇ his
son,
53 Tsaḏoq his son, Aḥima’ats his son.
54 And these were their dwelling places throughout
their settlements within their borders, of the sons of
Aharon, of the clan of the Qehathites, for the lot was
theirs.
55 And they gave them Ḥeḇron in the land of
Yahuḏah, with its surrounding open lands.
56 But the fields of the city and its villages they gave
to Kalĕḇ son of Yephunneh.
57 And to the sons of Aharon they gave the cities of
refuge: Ḥeḇron, and Liḇnah with its open lands, and
Yattir, and Eshtemoa with its open lands,
58 and Ḥilĕn with its open lands, Deḇir with its open
lands,
44

2016

1 CHRONICLES

and Ashan with its open lands, and Bĕyth
Shemesh with its open lands.
60 And from the tribe of Binyamin: Geḇa with its open
lands, and Alemeth with its open lands, and Anathoth
with its open lands. All their cities among their clans
were thirteen.
61 And to the rest of the clan of the tribe of the
Qehathites by lot ten cities from half the tribe of
Menashsheh.
62 And to the sons of Gĕreshom, throughout their
clans, thirteen cities from the tribe of Yissasḵar, and
from the tribe of Ashĕr, and from the tribe of Naphtali,
and from the tribe of Menashsheh in Bashan.
63 To the sons of Merari, throughout their clans, by
lot twelve cities from the tribe of Re’uḇĕn, and from
the tribe of Gaḏ, and from the tribe of Zeḇulun.
64 So the children of Yisra’ĕl gave cities with their
open lands to the Lĕwites.
65 And they gave by lot from the tribe of the children
of Yahuḏah, and from the tribe of the children of
Shim’on, and from the tribe of the children of
Binyamin these cities which are mentioned by name.
66 And some of the clans of the sons of Qehath had
cities of their borders from the tribe of Ephrayim.
67 And they gave them the cities of refuge: Sheḵem
with its open lands, in the mountains of Ephrayim, and
Gezer with its open lands,
68 and Yoqme’am with its open lands, and Bĕyth
Ḥoron with its open lands,
69 and Ayalon with its open lands, and Gath Rimmon
with its open lands.
70 And from the half-tribe of Menashsheh: Anĕr with
its open lands, and Bil’am with its open lands, for the
rest of the clan of the sons of Qehath.
59

2017

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

From the clan of the half-tribe of Menashsheh the
sons of Gĕreshom: Golan in Bashan with its open
lands and Ashtaroth with its open lands.
72 And from the tribe of Yissasḵar: Qeḏesh with its
open lands, Daḇerath with its open lands,
73 Ramoth with its open lands, and Anĕm with its
open lands.
74 And from the tribe of Ashĕr: Mashal with its open
lands, and Aḇdon with its open lands,
75 and Ḥuqoq with its open lands, and Reḥoḇ with its
open lands.
76 And from the tribe of Naphtali: Qeḏesh in Galil with
its open lands, and Ḥammon with its open lands, and
Qiryathayim with its open lands.
77 From the tribe of Zeḇulun the rest of the children
of Merari: Rimmon with its open lands and Taḇor with
its open lands.
78 And from beyond the Yardĕn of Yeriḥo, on the east
side of the Yardĕn, from the tribe of Re’uḇĕn: Betser
in the wilderness with its open lands, and Yahtsah
with its open lands,
79 Qeḏĕmoth with its open lands, and Mĕpha’ath with
its open lands.
80 And from the tribe of Gaḏ: Ramoth in Gil’aḏ with
its open lands, and Maḥanayim with its open lands,
81 and Ḥeshbon with its open lands, and Ya’zĕr with
its open lands.
71

7 And the sons of Yissasḵar: Tola, and Pu’ah,
Yashuḇ, and Shimron, four.
2 And the sons of Tola: Uzzi, and Rephayah, and
Yeri’ĕl, and Yaḥmai, and Yiḇsam, and Shemu’ĕl,
heads of their father’s house. Of Tola there were
great men of might in their generations; their number
2018

1 CHRONICLES

in the days of Dawiḏ was twenty-two thousand six
hundred.
3 And the son of Uzzi: Yizraḥyah, and the sons of
Yizraḥyah: Miḵa’ĕl, and Oḇaḏyah, and Yo’ĕl,
Yishshiyah. All five of them were heads.
4 And with them, by their generations, according to
their fathers’ houses, were thirty-six thousand, bands
of the army for battle, for they had many wives and
sons.
5 And their brothers among all the clans of
Yissasḵar were mighty brave men, listed by their
genealogies, eighty-seven thousand in all.
6 Of Binyamin: Bela, and Beḵer, and Yeḏiya’ĕl,
three.
7 And the sons of Bela: Etsbon, and Uzzi, and
Uzzi’ĕl, and Yerimoth, and Iri, five - heads of their
fathers’ houses, and they were listed by their
genealogies, twenty-two thousand and thirty-four
mighty brave men.
8 And the sons of Beḵer: Zemirah, and Yo’ash, and
Eli’ezer, and Elyo’ĕynai, and Omri, and Yerimoth, and
Aḇiyah, and Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were
the sons of Beḵer,
9 with
their genealogy according to their
generations, heads of their fathers’ houses, twenty
thousand two hundred mighty brave men.
10 And the son of Yeḏiya’ĕl: Bilhan, and the sons of
Bilhan: Ye’ush, and Binyamin, and Ĕhuḏ, and
Kena’anah, and Zĕthan, and Tarshish, and
Aḥishaḥar.
11 All these sons of Yeḏiya’ĕl were heads of their
fathers’ houses, seventeen thousand two hundred
mighty brave men going out to the army for battle.
12 And Shuppim and Ḥuppim were the sons of Ir, and
Ḥushim was the son of Aḥĕr.
2019

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

The sons of Naphtali: Yaḥtsi’ĕl, and Guni, and
Yĕtser, and Shallum, sons of Bilhah.
14 The sons of Menashsheh: his Aramean concubine
bore him Maḵir the father of Gil’aḏ, the father of
Asri’ĕl.
15 And Maḵir took wives for Ḥuppim and Shuppim;
and the name of one was Ma’aḵah, and the name of
the second was Tselapheḥaḏ. And Tselapheḥaḏ had
daughters.
16 But Ma’aḵah the wife of Maḵir bore a son, and she
called his name Peresh. And the name of his brother
was Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Raqem.
17 And the son of Ulam: Beḏan. These were the sons
of Gil’aḏ, son of Maḵir, son of Menashsheh.
18 And his sister Hammoleḵeth bore Ishhod, and
Aḇi’ezer, and Maḥlah.
19 And the sons of Shemiḏa: Aḥyan, and Sheḵem,
and Liqeḥi, and Aniyam.
20 And the sons of Ephrayim: Shuthelaḥ, and Bereḏ
his son, and Taḥath his son, and Elaḏah his son, and
Taḥath his son,
21 and Zaḇaḏ his son, and Shuthelaḥ his son, and
Ezer and El’aḏ. But the men of Gath who were born
in that land slew them because they came down to
take their livestock.
22 And Ephrayim their father mourned many days,
and his brothers came to comfort him.
23 And when he went in to his wife, she conceived
and bore a son. And he called his name Beri’ah,
because evil had come upon his house.
24 And his daughter was She’erah, who built Lower
and Upper Bĕyth Ḥoron and Uzzen She’erah.
25 And Rephaḥ was his son, as well as Resheph, and
Telaḥ his son, and Taḥan his son,
13

2020

1 CHRONICLES

La’dan his son, Ammihuḏ his son, Elishama his
son,
27 Nun his son, Yahoshua his son.
28 And their possessions and dwelling places were
Bĕyth Ĕl and its towns: to the east Na’aran, and to the
west Gezer and its towns, and Sheḵem and its towns,
as far as Ayyah and its towns.
29 And by the borders of the children of Menashsheh
were Bĕyth She’an and its towns, Ta’anaḵ and its
towns, Meḡiddo and its towns, Dor and its towns. In
these dwelt the children of Yosĕph, son of Yisra’ĕl.
30 The sons of Ashĕr: Yimnah, and Yishwah, and
Yishwi, and Beri’ah, and their sister Seraḥ.
31 And the sons of Beri’ah: Ḥeḇer and Malki’ĕl, who
was the father of Birzoth.
32 And Ḥeḇer brought forth Yaphlĕt, and Shomĕr,
and Ḥotham, and their sister Shuwa.
33 And the sons of Yaphlĕt: Pasaḵ, and Bimhal, and
Ashwath. These were the children of Yaphlĕt.
34 And the sons of Shemer: Aḥi, and Rohagah,
Yeḥubbah, and Aram.
35 And the sons of his brother Ḥĕlem: Tsophaḥ, and
Yimna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
36 The sons of Tsophaḥ: Suwaḥ, and Ḥarnepher,
and Shu’al, and Bĕri, and Yimrah,
37 Betser, and Hoḏ, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and
Yithran, and Be’ĕra.
38 And the sons of Yether: Yephunneh, and Pispah,
and Ara.
39 And the sons of Ulla: Araḥ, and Ḥanni’ĕl, and
Ritsya.
40 All these were the children of Ashĕr, heads of their
fathers’ houses, chosen ones, mighty brave men,
chief leaders. And when they registered by genealogy
26

2021

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

for the army, for battle, their number was twenty-six
thousand.

8 And Binyamin brought forth Bela his first-born,
Ashbĕl the second, Aḥraḥ the third,
2 Noḥah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
3 And the sons of Bela: Addar, and Gĕra, and
Aḇihuḏ,
4 and Aḇishua, and Na’aman, Aḥowaḥ,
5 and Gĕra, and Shephuphan, and Ḥuram.
6 And these are the sons of Ĕḥuḏ. They were the
heads of the fathers’ houses of the inhabitants of
Geḇa, and they were exiled to Manaḥath.
7 And Na’aman, and Aḥiyahu, and Gĕra - he exiled
them. And Ĕḥuḏ brought forth Uzza and Aḥihuḏ.
8 And Shaḥarayim brought forth children in the field
of Mo’aḇ, after he had sent away Ḥushim and Ba’ara
his wives.
9 And by Ḥoḏesh his wife he brought forth Yoḇaḇ,
and Tsiḇya, and Mĕysha, and Malkam,
10 and Ye’uts, and Shoḇyah, and Mirmah. These
were his sons, heads of their fathers’ houses.
11 And by Ḥushim he brought forth Aḇituḇ and
Elpa’al.
12 And the sons of Elpa’al: Ĕḇer, and Mish’am, and
Shemer, who built Ono and Loḏ with its towns;
13 and Beri’ah and Shema, who were heads of their
fathers’ houses of the inhabitants of Ayalon, who
drove out the inhabitants of Gath.
14 and Aḥyo, Shashaq, and Yerĕmoth,
15 and Zeḇaḏyah, and Araḏ, and Ĕḏer,
16 and Miḵa’ĕl, and Yispah, and Yoḥa were the sons
of Beri’ah.
17 And Zeḇaḏyah, and Meshullam, and Ḥizqi, and
Ḥeḇer,
2022

1 CHRONICLES

and Yishmerai, and Yizli’ah, and Yoḇaḇ were the
sons of Elpa’al.
19 And Yaqim, and Ziḵri, and Zaḇdi,
20 and Eli’ĕynai, and Tsillethai, and Eli’ĕl,
21 and Aḏayah, and Berayah, and Shimrath were the
sons of Shim’i.
22 And Yishpan, and Ĕḇer, and Eli’ĕl,
23 and Aḇdon, and Ziḵri, and Ḥanan,
24 and Ḥananyah, and Ĕylam, and Antothiyah,
25 and Yiphdeyah, and Penu’ĕl were the sons of
Shashaq.
26 And Shamsherai, and Sheḥaryah, and Athalyahu,
27 and Ya’areshyah, and Ĕliyahu, and Ziḵri were the
sons of Yeroḥam.
28 These were heads of the fathers’ houses by their
generations, heads. These dwelt in Yerushalayim.
29 And the father of Giḇ’on, whose wife’s name was
Ma’aḵah, dwelt at Giḇ’on.
30 And his first-born son was Aḇdon, then Tsur, and
Qish, and Ba’al, and Naḏaḇ,
31 and Geḏor, and Aḥyo, and Zeḵer,
32 and Miqloth, who brought forth Shim’ah. And they
also dwelt alongside their relatives in Yerushalayim,
with their brothers.
33 And Nĕr brought forth Qish, and Qish brought forth
Sha’ul, and Sha’ul brought forth Yahonathan, and
Malkishua, and Aḇinaḏaḇ, and Esh-Ba’al.
34 And the son of Yahonathan was Meriḇ-Ba’al, and
Meriḇ-Ba’al brought forth Miḵah.
35 And the sons of Miḵah: Pithon, and Meleḵ, and
Ta’arĕa, and Aḥaz.
36 And Aḥaz brought forth Yaho’addah, and
Yaho’addah brought forth Alemeth, and Azmaweth,
and Zimri. And Zimri brought forth Motsa.
18

2023

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And Motsa brought forth Bin’a, Raphah his son,
El’asah his son, Atsĕl his son.
38 And Atsĕl had six sons whose names were these:
Azriqam, Boḵeru, and Yishma’ĕl, and She’aryah, and
Oḇaḏyah, and Ḥanan. All these were the sons of
Atsĕl.
39 And the sons of Ĕsheq his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Ye’ush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
40 And the sons of Ulam were mighty brave men,
archers, and had many sons and grandsons, one
hundred and fifty. These were all sons of Binyamin.
37

9 And all Yisra’ĕl registered themselves by
genealogy. And see, they were written in the book of
the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl. And Yahuḏah was exiled to
Baḇel for their trespass.
2 And the first inhabitants who were in their
possessions in their cities of Yisra’ĕl, were the
kohenim, the Lĕwites, and the Nethinim.
3 And in Yerushalayim dwelt some of the children of
Yahuḏah, and some of the children of Binyamin, and
some of the children of Ephrayim and Menashsheh:
4 Uthai son of Ammihuḏ, son of Omri, son of Imri,
son of Bani, of the sons of Perets, the son of
Yahuḏah.
5 And of the Shilonites: Asayah the first-born and his
sons.
6 And of the sons of Zeraḥ: Ye’u’ĕl, and their
brothers, six hundred and ninety.
7 And of the sons of Binyamin: Sallu son of
Meshullam, son of Hoḏawyah, son of Hasenu’ah;
8 and Yiḇneyah son of Yeroḥam; and Ĕlah son of
Uzzi, son of Miḵri; and Meshullam son of Shephatyah,
son of Re’uw’ĕl, son of Yiḇniyah;
2024

1 CHRONICLES

and their brothers, according to their generations,
nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were heads
of a father’s house in their fathers’ houses.
10 And of the kohenim: Yeḏayah, and Yahoyariḇ, and
Yaḵin;
11 and Azaryahu son of Ḥilqiyah, son of Meshullam,
son of Tsaḏoq, son of Merayoth, son of Aḥituḇ, the
officer over the House of Elohim;
12 and Aḏayah son of Yeroḥam, son of Pashḥur, son
of Malkiyah; and Ma’asai son of Aḏi’ĕl, son of
Yaḥzĕrah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillĕmith,
son of Immĕr;
13 and their brothers, heads of their fathers’ houses,
one thousand seven hundred and sixty, able men for
the work of the service of the House of Elohim.
14 And of the Lĕwites: Shemayah son of Ḥashshuḇ,
son of Azriqam, son of Ḥashaḇyah, of the sons of
Merari;
15 and
Baqbaqqar, Ḥeresh, and Galal, and
Mattanyah son of Miḵa, son of Ziḵri, son of Asaph;
16 and Oḇaḏyah son of Shemayah, son of Galal, son
of Yeḏuthun; and Bereḵyah son of Asa, son of
Elqanah, who dwelt in the villages of the
Netophathites.
17 And the gatekeepers: Shallum, and Aqquḇ, and
Talmon, and Aḥiman, and their brothers - Shallum the
chief.
18 And up till then they were gatekeepers for the
camps of the children of Lĕwi at the Sovereign’s Gate
on the east.
19 And Shallum son of Qorĕ, son of Eḇyasaph, son
of Qoraḥ, and his brothers, from his father’s house,
the Qorḥites, were over the work of the service,
guards of the thresholds of the Tent. And their fathers
had been guards of the entrance to the camp of hWhY.
9

2025

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And Pineḥas son of El’azar was leader over them
in time past. hWhY was with him.
21 Zeḵaryah son of Meshelemyah was gatekeeper at
the entrance of the Tent of Appointment.
22 All those chosen as gatekeepers at the thresholds
were two hundred and twelve. They were registered
by genealogy, in their villages. Dawiḏ and Shemu’ĕl
the seer had appointed them to their office of trust.
23 So they and their sons were over the gates of the
House of hWhY, the House of the Tent, by watches.
24 The gatekeepers were on the four sides: the east,
west, north, and south.
25 And their brothers in their villages had to come
with them from time to time for seven days.
26 For the four chief gatekeepers were in an office of
trust. They were Lĕwites, and they were over the
rooms and treasuries of the House of Elohim.
27 And they spent the night all around the House of
Elohim because they had the duty, and they were to
open it morning by morning.
28 And some of them were over the vessels of
service, for they brought them in and took them out
by count.
29 And some of them were appointed over the
vessels, even over all the vessels of the qodesh
place, and over the fine flour and the wine and the oil
and the incense and the spices.
30 And some of the sons of the kohenim blended the
compound of spices.
31 And Mattithyah of the Lĕwites, the first-born of
Shallum the Qorḥite, was entrusted with the making
of the flat cakes.
32 And some of their brothers of the sons of the
Qehathites were over the showbread, to prepare
every Shabbath.
20

2026

1 CHRONICLES

And these were the singers, heads of the fathers’
houses of the Lĕwites, in the rooms, and were
exempted from other duties, for they were employed
in that work day and night.
34 These heads of the fathers’ houses of the Lĕwites
were heads throughout their generations. They dwelt
at Yerushalayim.
35 And Ye’i’ĕl the father of Giḇ’on, whose wife’s name
was Ma’aḵah, dwelt at Giḇ’on.
36 And his first-born son was Aḇdon, then Tsur, and
Qish, and Ba’al, and Nĕr, and Naḏaḇ,
37 and Geḏor, and Aḥyo, and Zeḵaryah, and Miqloth.
38 And Miqloth brought forth Shim’am. And they too
dwelt alongside their relatives in Yerushalayim, with
their brothers.
39 And Nĕr brought forth Qish, and Qish brought forth
Sha’ul, and Sha’ul brought forth Yahonathan, and
Malkishua, and Aḇinaḏaḇ, and Esh-Ba’al.
40 And the son of Yahonathan was Meriḇ-Ba’al, and
Meriḇ-Ba’al brought forth Miḵah.
41 And the sons of Miḵah: Pithon, and Meleḵ, and
Taḥrĕa,
42 and Aḥaz, who brought forth Yarah; and Yarah
brought forth Alemeth, and Azmaweth, and Zimri. And
Zimri brought forth Motsa;
43 and Motsa brought forth Bin’a, and Rephayah was
his son, El’asah his son, Atsĕl his son.
44 And Atsĕl had six sons whose names were these:
Azriqam, Boḵeru, and Yishma’ĕl, and She’aryah, and
Oḇaḏyah, and Ḥanan. These were the sons of Atsĕl.
33

10 And the Pelishtites fought against Yisra’ĕl. And
the men of Yisra’ĕl fled from before the Pelishtites, and
fell slain on Mount Gilboa.
2027

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And the Pelishtites pursued Sha’ul and his sons,
and the Pelishtites smote Yahonathan, and
Aḇinaḏaḇ, and Malkishua, sons of Sha’ul.
3 And the battle was heavy on Sha’ul. And the
archers hit him, and he was wounded by the archers.
4 And Sha’ul said to his armour-bearer, “Draw your
sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these
uncircumcised ones come and abuse me.” But his
armour-bearer would not, for he was much afraid, so
Sha’ul took a sword and fell on it.
5 And when his armour-bearer saw that Sha’ul was
dead, he also fell on his sword and died.
6 Thus Sha’ul and his three sons died, and all his
house - they died together.
7 And when all the men of Yisra’ĕl who were in the
valley saw that they had fled and that Sha’ul and his
sons were dead, they forsook their cities and fled, and
the Pelishtites came and dwelt in them.
8 And the next day it came to be, when the
Pelishtites came to strip the slain, that they found
Sha’ul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
9 And they stripped him and took his head and his
armour, and sent word throughout the land of the
Pelishtites to proclaim the news among their idols and
among the people,
10 and put his armour in the house of their mighty
ones, and fastened his head in the house of Daḡon.
11 And all Yaḇĕsh Gil’aḏ heard of all that the
Pelishtites had done to Sha’ul,
12 and all the brave men arose and took the body of
Sha’ul and the bodies of his sons. And they brought
them to Yaḇĕsh, and buried their bones under the
tamarisk tree at Yaḇĕsh, and fasted seven days.
13 Thus Sha’ul died for his trespass which he had
trespassed against hWhY, because he did not guard
2

2028

1 CHRONICLES

the Word of hWhY, and also for asking a medium for
to make inquiry,
14 and did not inquire of hWhY. So He put him to
death, and turned the reign over to Dawiḏ son of
Yishai.

11 And all Yisra’ĕl came together to Dawiḏ at
Ḥeḇron, saying, “See, we are your bone and your
flesh.
2 “Also, in time past, even when Sha’ul was
sovereign, you were the one who led Yisra’ĕl out and
brought them in. And hWhY your Elohim said to you,
‘Shepherd My people Yisra’ĕl, and be ruler over My
people Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
3 So all the elders of Yisra’ĕl came to the sovereign
at Ḥeḇron, and Dawiḏ made a covenant with them at
Ḥeḇron before hWhY. And they anointed Dawiḏ
sovereign over Yisra’ĕl, according to the word of
hWhY by Shemu’ĕl.
4 And Dawiḏ and all Yisra’ĕl went to Yerushalayim,
which is Yeḇus, where the Yeḇusites were, the
inhabitants of the land.
5 And the inhabitants of Yeḇus said to Dawiḏ, “You
do not come in here.” But Dawiḏ captured the
stronghold of Tsiyon, the City of Dawiḏ.
6 And Dawiḏ said, “Whoever smites the Yeḇusites
first becomes chief and commander.” And Yo’aḇ son
of Tseruyah went up first, and became chief.
7 And Dawiḏ dwelt in the stronghold, so they called
it the City of Dawiḏ.
8 And he built the city around it, from Millo round
about, and Yo’aḇ restored the rest of the city.
9 And Dawiḏ went on and became great, and hWhY
of hosts was with him.
2029

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And these were the heads of the mighty men
whom Dawiḏ had, who strengthened themselves with
him in his reign, with all Yisra’ĕl, to appoint him to
reign over Yisra’ĕl, according to the word of hWhY.
11 And these are the number of the mighty men
whom Dawiḏ had: Yashoḇ’am son of a Ḥaḵmonite,
chief of the thirty. He had lifted up his spear against
three hundred, slain at one time.
12 And after him was El’azar son of Doḏo, the
Aḥoḥite, who was one of the three mighty men.
13 He was with Dawiḏ at Pasdammim, and the
Pelishtites were gathered there for battle, and a
portion of the field was filled with barley, and the
people had fled before the Pelishtites.
14 But they took their stand in the midst of that field,
and delivered it, and smote the Pelishtites. Thus
hWhY saved them by a great deliverance.
15 And three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock
to Dawiḏ, into the cave of Aḏullam, while the army of
the Pelishtites encamped in the Valley of Repha’im.
16 And Dawiḏ was then in the stronghold, and the
watch-post of the Pelishtites was then in Bĕyth
Leḥem.
17 And Dawiḏ longed and said, “Oh, that someone
would give me a drink of water from the well of Bĕyth
Leḥem, which is by the gate!”
18 And the three broke through the camp of the
Pelishtites, and drew water from the well of Bĕyth
Leḥem that was by the gate, and took it and brought
it to Dawiḏ. But Dawiḏ would not drink it, but poured
it out to hWhY.
19 And he said, “Far be it from me, O my Elohim, that
I should do this! Should I drink the blood of these men
who have risked their lives? For at the risk of their
10

2030

1 CHRONICLES

lives they brought it.” And he would not drink it. This
is what the three mighty men did.
20 And Aḇishai the brother of Yo’aḇ was chief of
another three. And he had lifted up his spear against
three hundred men, who were slain, and won a name
among the three.
21 Of the three he was more esteemed than the other
two men, so he became their head. However he did
not come to the first three.
22 Benayah was the son of Yahoyaḏa, the son of a
brave man from Qaḇtse’ĕl, who had done many
deeds. He smote two lion-like Mo’aḇites. He also
went down and smote a lion in the midst of a pit on a
snowy day.
23 And he smote a Mitsrite, a man of great height,
five ammah tall. And in the Mitsrite’s hand was a
spear like a weaver’s beam, and he went down to him
with a staff and wrenched the spear out of the
Mitsrite’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.
24 This is what Benayahu Yahoyaḏa did, and won a
name among the three mighty men.
25 See, he was more esteemed than the thirty, but he
did not come to the first three. And Dawiḏ appointed
him over his court.
26 And the mighty men of the armies were Asah’ĕl
the brother of Yo’aḇ, Elḥanan son of Doḏo of Bĕyth
Leḥem.
27 Shammoth the Harorite, Ḥĕlets the Pelonite,
28 Ira son of Iqqĕsh the Teqowite, Aḇi’ezer the
Anathothite,
29 Sibbeḵai the Ḥushathite, Ilai the Aḥoḥite,
30 Maharai the Netophathite, Ḥĕleḏ son of Ba’anah
the Netophathite,
31 Ithai son of Riḇai of Giḇ’ah, of the children of
Binyamin, Benayah the Pirathonite,
2031

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Ḥurai of the wadis of Ga’ash, Aḇi’ĕl the Arbathite,
33 Azmaweth
the Baḥarumite, Elyaḥba the
Sha’albonite,
34 the sons of Hashĕm the Gizonite, Yahonathan son
of Shaḡĕ the Hararite,
35 Aḥyam son of Saḵar the Hararite, Eliphal son of
Ur,
36 Ḥĕpher the Mekĕrathite, Aḥiyahu the Pelonite,
37 Ḥetsro the Karmelite, Na’arai son of Ezbai,
38 Yo’ĕl the brother of Nathan, Miḇḥar son of Haḡri,
39 Tseleq the Ammonite, Naḥarai the Bĕrothite - the
armour-bearer of Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah,
40 Ira the Yithrite, Gareb the Yithrite,
41 Uriyah the Ḥittite, Zaḇaḏ son of Aḥlai,
42 Aḏina son of Shiza the Re’uḇĕnite, the head of the
Re’uḇĕnites, and thirty with him,
43 Ḥanan son of Ma’aḵah, and Yoshaphat the
Mithnite,
44 Uzziya the Ashterathite, Shama and Ye’i’ĕl the
sons of Ḥotham the Aro’ĕrite,
45 Yeḏiya’ĕl son of Shimri, and Yoḥa his brother, the
Titsite,
46 Eli’ĕl the Maḥawite, and Yeriḇai and Yoshawyah
the sons of Elna’am, Yithmah the Mo’aḇite,
47 Eli’ĕl, and Oḇĕḏ, and Ya’asi’ĕl of Metsoḇayah.
32

12 Now these are they who came to Dawiḏ at
Tsiqlaḡ while he was still in hiding from Sha’ul son of
Qish. And they were among the mighty men, helping
the battle,
2 armed with bows, using both the right hand and
the left, with stones, and with arrows, with bows, of
the brothers of Sha’ul, of Binyamin.
3 The chief was Aḥi’ezer and Yo’ash, the sons of
Shema’ah the Giḇ’athite; and Yezaw’ĕl and Pelet, the
2032

1 CHRONICLES

sons of Azmaweth; and Beraḵah, and Yahu the
Anathothite;
4 and Yishmayah the Giḇ’onite, a mighty man
among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Yirmeyahu,
and Yaḥazi’ĕl, and Yoḥanan, and Yozaḇaḏ the
Geḏĕrathite;
5 Eluzai,
and Yerimoth, and Be’alyah, and
Shemaryahu, and Shephatyahu the Ḥaruphite;
6 Elqanah, and Yishshiyahu, and Azar’ĕl, and
Yow’ezer, and Yashoḇ’am the Qorḥites;
7 and Yo’ĕlah and Zeḇaḏyah, the sons of Yeroḥam
of Geḏor.
8 And some Gaḏites separated themselves to
Dawiḏ at the stronghold in the wilderness, mighty
brave men, men trained for battle, who could handle
shield and spear, whose faces were like the faces of
lions, and were as swift as gazelles on the mountains:
9 Ĕzer the chief, Oḇaḏyah the second, Eliyaḇ the
third,
10 Mishmannah the fourth, Yirmeyahu the fifth,
11 Attai the sixth, Eli’ĕl the seventh,
12 Yoḥanan the eighth, Elzaḇaḏ the ninth,
13 Yirmeyahu the tenth, Maḵbannai the eleventh.
14 These were from the sons of Gaḏ, chiefs of the
army. The least was over a hundred, and the greatest
was over a thousand.
15 These were the ones who passed over the Yardĕn
in the first month, when it was overflowing all its
banks, and put to flight all those in the valleys, to the
east and to the west.
16 And some of the children of Binyamin and
Yahuḏah came to Dawiḏ at the stronghold.
17 And Dawiḏ went out to face them, and answered
and said to them, “If you have come peaceably to me
to help me, my heart shall be united with you; but if to
2033

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

betray me to my enemies - there is no violence in my
hands - let the Elohim of our fathers see and reprove.”
18 Then the Ruaḥ came upon Amasai, chief of the
officers, “Yours, O Dawiḏ! And with you, O son of
Yishai! Peace, peace to you, and peace to your
helpers! For your Elohim shall help you.” And Dawiḏ
received them, and put them among the chiefs of the
raiding band.
19 And some from Menashsheh went over to Dawiḏ
when he was going with the Pelishtites to battle
against Sha’ul. But they did not help them, for the
princes of the Pelishtites took advice and sent him
away, saying, “He might go over to his master Sha’ul
with our heads!”
20 When he went to Tsiqlaḡ, those of Menashsheh
who went over to him were Aḏnah, and Yozaḇaḏ, and
Yeḏiya’ĕl, and Miḵa’ĕl, and Yozaḇaḏ, and Elihu, and
Tsillethai, chiefs of the thousands who were from
Menashsheh.
21 And they helped Dawiḏ against the raiding bands,
for they were all mighty brave men, and they were
commanders in the army.
22 For at that time they came to Dawiḏ day by day to
help him, until it was a great army, like an army of
Elohim.
23 And these were the numbers of the chiefs of those
that were armed for battle, and came to Dawiḏ at
Ḥeḇron to turn over the reign of Sha’ul to him,
according to the word of hWhY:
24 Of the children of Yahuḏah bearing shield and
spear, six thousand eight hundred armed for battle;
25 of the children of Shim’on, mighty brave men for
the army, seven thousand one hundred;
26 of the children of Lĕwi four thousand six hundred;
2034

1 CHRONICLES

and Yahoyaḏa, the leader of the Aharonites, and
with him three thousand seven hundred;
28 and Tsaḏoq, a young man, a mighty brave man,
and from his father’s house twenty-two commanders;
29 and the children of Binyamin, relatives of Sha’ul,
three thousand - until then the greatest part of them
guarded the charge of the house of Sha’ul;
30 and the children of Ephrayim twenty thousand
eight hundred, mighty brave ones, men of name
throughout their father’s house;
31 and the half-tribe of Menashsheh eighteen
thousand, who were designated by name to come
and appoint Dawiḏ to reign;
32 and
the children of Yissasḵar who had
understanding of the times, to know what Yisra’ĕl
should do, their chiefs were two hundred. And all their
brothers were at their command;
33 of Zeḇulun there were fifty thousand going out to
the army, arranging battle with all weapons of battle,
giving support with undivided heart;
34 and of Naphtali one thousand commanders, and
with them thirty-seven thousand with shield and
spear;
35 and of the Danites, arranging battle, twenty-eight
thousand six hundred;
36 and of Ashĕr, going out to the army, arranging
battle, forty thousand;
37 and of the Re’uḇĕnites and the Gaḏites and the
half-tribe of Menashsheh, from beyond the Yardĕn,
one hundred and twenty thousand armed for battle
with every kind of weapon of battle.
38 All these men of battle, keeping rank, came to
Ḥeḇron with a perfect heart, to appoint Dawiḏ to reign
over all Yisra’ĕl. And all the rest of Yisra’ĕl were of
one heart to appoint Dawiḏ to reign.
27

2035

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And they were there with Dawiḏ three days, eating
and drinking, for their brothers had prepared for them.
40 And also those who were near to them, from as far
away as Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun and Naphtali, were
bringing food on donkeys and camels, on mules and
cattle - food of flour and cakes of figs and cakes of
raisins, wine and oil and cattle and sheep in great
quantities, for there was joy in Yisra’ĕl.
39

13 And Dawiḏ consulted with the commanders of
thousands and hundreds, and with every leader.
2 And Dawiḏ said to all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, “If
it seems good to you, and if it is of hWhY our Elohim,
let us send out to our brothers everywhere who are
left in all the land of Yisra’ĕl, and with them to the
kohenim and Lĕwites who are in their cities of their
open lands, and let them be gathered to us;
3 and let us bring the ark of our Elohim back to us,
for we sought Him not since the days of Sha’ul.”
4 And all the assembly agreed to do so, for the
matter was right in the eyes of all the people.
5 So Dawiḏ assembled all Yisra’ĕl, from Shiḥor in
Mitsrayim to as far as the entrance of Ḥamath, to
bring the ark of Elohim from Qiryath Ye’arim.
6 And Dawiḏ and all Yisra’ĕl went up to Ba’alah, to
Qiryath Ye’arim of Yahuḏah, to bring up from there
the ark of Elohim, hWhY, who dwells between the
keruḇim, where the Name is called on.
7 And they placed the ark of Elohim on a new wagon
from the house of Aḇinaḏaḇ, and Uzza and Aḥyo
were leading the wagon.
8 And Dawiḏ and all Yisra’ĕl were playing before
Elohim with all their might, and with songs, and with
lyres, and with harps, and with tambourines, and with
cymbals, and with trumpets.
2036

1 CHRONICLES

And when they came to the threshing-floor of
Kiḏon, Uzza put out his hand to hold the ark, for the
oxen stumbled.
10 Then the wrath of hWhY burned against Uzza, and
He smote him because he put his hand to the ark.
And he died there before Elohim.
11 And Dawiḏ was displeased because hWhY had
broken out against Uzza, therefore that place is called
Perets Uzza, until this day.
12 And Dawiḏ was afraid of hWhY that day, saying,
“How shall I bring the ark of Elohim to me?”
13 So Dawiḏ did not take the ark with him into the City
of Dawiḏ, but took it aside into the house of OḇĕḏEḏom the Gittite.
14 And the ark of Elohim remained with the
household of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom in his house three months.
And hWhY baraḵ the house of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom and all that
he had.
9

14 And Ḥiram sovereign of Tsor sent messengers to
Dawiḏ, and cedar trees, with stonemasons and
carpenters, to build him a house.
2 And Dawiḏ knew that hWhY had established him
as sovereign over Yisra’ĕl, for his reign was highly
exalted for the sake of His people Yisra’ĕl.
3 And Dawiḏ took more wives in Yerushalayim, and
Dawiḏ brought forth more sons and daughters.
4 And these are the names of his children whom he
had in Yerushalayim: Shammua and Shoḇaḇ, Nathan
and Shelomoh,
5 and Yiḇḥar, and Elishua, and Elpelet,
6 and Noḡah, and Nepheḡ, and Yaphiya,
7 and Elishama, and Be’elyaḏa, and Eliphelet.
8 And when the Pelishtites heard that Dawiḏ had
been anointed sovereign over all Yisra’ĕl, all the
2037

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Pelishtites went up to seek Dawiḏ. And Dawiḏ heard
and went out against them.
9 And the Pelishtites came and made a raid on the
Valley of Repha’im.
10 And Dawiḏ inquired of hWhY, saying, “Do I go up
against the Pelishtites? And shall You give them into
my hand?” And hWhY said to him, “Go up, and I shall
give them into your hand.”
11 And they went up to Ba’al Peratsim, and Dawiḏ
smote them there. Then Dawiḏ said, “hWhY has
broken through my enemies by my hand like a
breakthrough of water.” So they called the name of
that place Ba’al Peratsim.
12 And they left their mighty ones there, so Dawiḏ
commanded, and they were burned with fire.
13 And the Pelishtites once again made a raid on the
valley.
14 And Dawiḏ again inquired of hWhY, and hWhY said
to him, “Do not go up after them. Go around them,
and come upon them in front of the mulberry trees.
15 “And it shall be, when you hear a sound of
stepping in the tops of the mulberry trees, then go out
to battle, for Elohim shall go out before you to smite
the camp of the Pelishtites.”
16 And Dawiḏ did as hWhY commanded him, and
they drove back the army of the Pelishtites from
Giḇ’on as far as Gezer.
17 And the name of Dawiḏ went out into all lands, and
hWhY put the dread of him upon all nations.

15 And he built houses for himself in the City of
Dawiḏ. And he prepared a place for the ark of Elohim,
and pitched a tent for it.

2038

1 CHRONICLES

Then Dawiḏ said, “No one is to lift the ark of
Elohim but the Lĕwites, for hWhY has chosen them to
lift the ark of Elohim and to serve Him forever.”
3 And
Dawiḏ
assembled
all
Yisra’ĕl
at
Yerushalayim, to bring up the ark of hWhY to its place,
which he had prepared for it.
4 And Dawiḏ gathered the children of Aharon and
the Lĕwites;
5 of the sons of Qehath: Uri’ĕl the chief, and one
hundred and twenty of his brothers;
6 of the sons of Merari: Asayah the chief, and two
hundred and twenty of his brothers;
7 of the sons of Gĕreshom: Yo’ĕl the chief, and one
hundred and thirty of his brothers;
8 of the sons of Elitsaphan: Shemayah the chief,
and two hundred of his brothers;
9 of the sons of Ḥeḇron: Eli’ĕl the chief, and eighty
of his brothers;
10 of the sons of Uzzi’el: Amminaḏaḇ the chief, and
one hundred and twelve of his brothers.
11 And Dawiḏ called for Tsaḏoq and Eḇyathar the
kohenim, and for the Lĕwites, for Uri’ĕl, Asayah, and
Yo’ĕl, Shemayah, and Eli’ĕl, and Amminaḏaḇ,
12 and said to them, “You are the heads of the fathers
of the Lĕwites. Qadosh yourselves, you and your
brothers, then you shall bring up the ark of hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl to the place I have prepared for it.
13 “Because you did not do it the first time, hWhY our
Elohim broke out against us, because we did not ask
Him about the Right-Ruling.”
14 So the kohenim and the Lĕwites qadosh
themselves, to bring up the ark of hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
2

2039

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And the children of the Lĕwites bore the ark of
Elohim on their shoulders, by its poles, as Mosheh
had commanded according to the Word of hWhY.
16 And Dawiḏ spoke to the leaders of the Lĕwites to
appoint their brothers the singers with instruments of
song, harps, and lyres, and cymbals, to lift up the
voice with joy.
17 And the Lĕwites appointed Hĕman son of Yo’ĕl,
and of his brothers, Asaph son of Bereḵyahu; and of
their brothers, the sons of Merari, Ĕythan son of
Qushayahu;
18 and with them their brothers of the second rank:
Zeḵaryahu, Bĕn, and Ya’azi’ĕl, and Shemiramoth,
and Yeḥi’ĕl, and Unni, Eliyaḇ, and Benayahu, and
Ma’asĕyahu, and Mattithyahu, and Eliphelĕhu, and
Miqnĕyahu, and Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom, and Ye’i’ĕl, the
gatekeepers;
19 and the singers Hĕman, Asaph, and Ĕythan, were
to sound the cymbals of bronze;
20 and Zeḵaryah, and Asi’ĕl, and Shemiramoth, and
Yeḥi’ĕl, and Unni, and Eliyaḇ, and Ma’asĕyahu, and
Benayahu, with harps besides sopranos;
21 and Mattithyahu, and Eliphelĕhu, and Miqnĕyahu,
and Oḇĕḏ-Edom, and Ye’i’ĕl, and Azazyahu, to lead
on the eight stringed lyres;
22 and Kenanyahu, leader of the Lĕwites, in the
song, because he was skilled;
23 and Bereḵyah and Elqanah were doorkeepers for
the ark;
24 and Sheḇanyahu, and Yoshaphat, and Nethan’ĕl,
and Amasai, and Zeḵaryahu, and Benayahu, and
Eli’ezer, the kohenim, were to blow the trumpets
before the ark of Elohim. And Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom and
Yeḥiyah, were doorkeepers for the ark.
15

2040

1 CHRONICLES

And it was Dawiḏ and the elders of Yisra’ĕl, and
the commanders over thousands, who went to bring
up the ark of the Covenant of hWhY from the house of
Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom with joy.
26 And it came to be, when Elohim helped the
Lĕwites who bore the ark of the Covenant of hWhY,
that they offered seven bulls and seven rams.
27 And Dawiḏ was dressed in a robe of fine linen, as
were all the Lĕwites who bore the ark, the singers,
and Kenanyah the leader of the service with the
singers. And Dawiḏ wore a linen shoulder garment.
28 So all Yisra’ĕl brought up the ark of the Covenant
of hWhY with shouting and with the sound of the horn,
with trumpets and with cymbals, sounding with harps
and lyres.
29 And it came to be, as the ark of the Covenant of
hWhY came to the City of Dawiḏ, that Miḵal the
daughter of Sha’ul, looking through a window, saw
Sovereign Dawiḏ dancing and playing. And she
despised him in her heart.
25

16 And they brought the ark of Elohim, and put it in
the midst of the Tent that Dawiḏ had pitched for it. And
they brought burnt offerings and peace offerings
before hWhY.
2 And when Dawiḏ had made an end of offering the
burnt offerings and the peace offerings, he baraḵ the
people in the Name of hWhY,
3 and gave a portion to everyone of Yisra’ĕl, both
man and woman, to everyone a loaf of bread, a
measure, and a cake of raisins.
4 And he appointed some of the Lĕwites to serve
before the ark of hWhY, to bring to remembrance, and
to thank, and to praise hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl:
2041

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Asaph the chief, and his second Zeḵaryah, Ye’i’ĕl,
and Shemiramoth, and Yeḥi’ĕl, and Mattithyah, and
Eliyaḇ, and Benayahu, and Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom, and Ye’i’ĕl,
with harps and lyres, but Asaph was sounding with
cymbals;
6 and Benayahu and Yaḥazi’ĕl the kohenim
continually blew the trumpets before the ark of the
Covenant of Elohim.
7 And on that day Dawiḏ first gave thanks to hWhY
by the hand of Asaph and his brothers:
8 Give thanks to hWhY, call upon His Name,
Make known His deeds among the peoples!
9 Sing to Him, sing praise to Him,
Speak of all His wonders!
10 Boast in His qodesh Name,
Let the hearts of those seeking HWHY rejoice!
11 Seek hWhY and His strength,
Seek His face continually!
12 Remember His wonders which He has done,
His signs and the Right-Rulings of His mouth,
13 O seed of Yisra’ĕl, His servant;
O children of Ya’aqoḇ, His chosen ones!
14 He is hWhY our Elohim,
His Right-Rulings are in all the earth.
15 Remember His Covenant forever,
The Word He commanded for a thousand
generations,
16 Which He made with Aḇraham,
And His oath to Yitsḥaq,
17 And He established it to Ya’aqoḇ for a Law,
To Yisra’ĕl as an everlasting Covenant,
18 Saying, “To you I give the land of Kena’an,
The portion of your inheritance,”
19 When you were but few in number,
Few indeed, and sojourners in it.
5

2042

1 CHRONICLES

And they went up and down,
From one nation to another,
And from one reign to another people.
21 He allowed no one to oppress them,
And He reproved sovereigns for their sakes,
22 “Do not touch My anointed ones,
And do My neḇi’im no evil.”
23 Sing to hWhY, all the earth;
Proclaim His deliverance from day to day.
24 Declare His esteem among the nations,
His wonders among all peoples.
25 For great is hWhY and greatly to be praised;
And He is to be revered above all mighty ones.
26 For all the mighty ones of the peoples are
matters of naught,
But hWhY made the shamayim.
27 Excellency and splendour are before Him,
Strength and gladness are in His place.
28 Ascribe to hWhY, O clans of the peoples,
Ascribe to HWHY esteem and strength.
29 Ascribe to hWhY the esteem of His Name;
Bring an offering, and come before Him;
Bow yourself to hWhY
In the splendour of qodeshah!
30 Tremble before Him, all the earth.
The world also is firmly established, immovable.
31 Let the shamayim rejoice, and let the earth be
glad;
And let them say among the nations, “hWhY shall
reign.”
32 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
Let the field rejoice, and all that is in it.
33 Let the trees of the forest then sing before hWhY,
For He shall come to judge the earth.
20

2043

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Give thanks to hWhY, for He is good,
For His kindness is everlasting!
35 And say, “Save us, O Elohim of our deliverance;
And gather us together,
And deliver us from the gentiles,
To give thanks to Your qodesh Name,
And boast in Your praise.”
36 Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl
From everlasting to everlasting!
And all the people said, “Amĕn!” and praised hWhY.
37 So he left Asaph and his brothers there before the
ark of the Covenant of hWhY to perform regular
service before the ark, as each day required;
38 also, Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom with his sixty-eight brothers,
including Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom son of Yeḏuthun, and Ḥosah,
to be gatekeepers;
39 and Tsaḏoq the kohĕn and his brothers the
kohenim, before the Mishkan of hWhY at the high
place that was at Giḇ’on,
40 to offer burnt offerings to hWhY on the altar of burnt
offering regularly morning and evening, and to do
according to all that is written in the Torah of hWhY
which He commanded Yisra’ĕl;
41 and with them Hĕman and Yeḏuthun and the rest
who were chosen, who were designated by name, to
give thanks to hWhY, because His kindness is
everlasting;
42 and with them Hĕman and Yeḏuthun, to sound
aloud with trumpets and cymbals and instruments for
the songs of Elohim, and the sons of Yeḏuthun for the
gate.
43 And all the people went, each one to his house,
and Dawiḏ returned to baraḵ his house.
34

2044

1 CHRONICLES

17 And it came to be, when Dawiḏ was dwelling in
his house, that Dawiḏ said to Nathan the naḇi, “See, I
am dwelling in a house of cedar, but the ark of the
Covenant of hWhY is under curtains.”
2 And Nathan said to Dawiḏ, “Do all that is in your
heart, for Elohim is with you.”
3 And it came to be that night that the word of Elohim
came to Nathan, saying,
4 “Go, and you shall say to My servant Dawiḏ, ‘Thus
said hWhY, “You do not build Me a House to dwell in.
5 “For I have not dwelt in a House since the time that
I brought up Yisra’ĕl, even to this day, but have gone
from Tent to Tent, and from Mishkan to another.
6 “Wherever I have moved about with all Yisra’ĕl,
have I ever spoken a word to any of the rulers of
Yisra’ĕl, whom I commanded to shepherd My people,
saying, ‘Why have you not built Me a House of
cedar?’ ” ’
7 “And now, say this to My servant Dawiḏ, ‘Thus
said hWhY of hosts, “I took you from the sheepfold,
from following the sheep, to be ruler over My people
Yisra’ĕl.
8 “And I have been with you wherever you have
gone, and have cut off all your enemies from before
you, and have made you a name like the name of the
great men who are on the earth.
9 “And I shall prepare a place for My people Yisra’ĕl
and plant them, and they shall dwell in a place of their
own and move no more, nor shall the sons of
wickedness oppress them any more, as at the first,
10 since the time that I commanded rulers to be over
My people Yisra’ĕl, and I have humbled all your
enemies. And I declared to you that hWhY builds you
a house.
2045

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

“And it shall be, when your days are filled to go to
be with your fathers, that I shall raise up your seed
after you, who is of your sons. And I shall establish
his reign.
12 “He builds Me a House, and I shall establish his
throne forever.
13 “I am to be his Father, and he is to be My son. And
My kindness I do not turn away from him, as I took it
from him who was before you.
14 “And I shall establish him in My house and in My
reign forever, and let his throne be established
forever.” ’ ”
15 According to all these words and according to all
this vision, so did Nathan speak to Dawiḏ.
16 And Sovereign Dawiḏ came in and sat before
hWhY, and said, “Who am I, O hWhY Elohim? And
what is my house, that You have brought me this far?
17 “And this was a small matter in Your eyes, O
Elohim, but You have spoken of Your servant’s house
for a great while to come, and have looked upon me
as though I were an exalted man, O hWhY Elohim.
18 “What more could Dawiḏ add to You for the
esteem of Your servant? For You know Your servant.
19 “O hWhY, for Your servant’s sake, and according
to Your own heart, You have done all this greatness,
in making known all these great matters.
20 “O hWhY, there is none like You, nor is there any
Elohim besides You, according to all that we have
heard with our ears.
21 “And who is like Your people Yisra’ĕl, the one
nation on the earth whom Elohim went to redeem for
Himself as a people; to make for Yourself a great and
awesome Name, by driving out nations from before
Your people whom You redeemed from Mitsrayim?
11

2046

1 CHRONICLES

“For You appointed Your people Yisra’ĕl to be
Your own people forever. And You, hWhY, have
become their Elohim.
23 “And now, O hWhY, the word which You have
spoken concerning Your servant and concerning his
house, let it stand fast forever, and do as You have
said.
24 “So let it stand fast, and Your Name be great
forever, saying, ‘hWhY of hosts, Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, is
Elohim to Yisra’ĕl. And let the house of Your servant
Dawiḏ be established before You.’
25 “For You, O my Elohim, have revealed to Your
servant to build a house for him. Therefore Your
servant has come to pray before You.
26 “And now, hWhY, You are Elohim, and have
promised this goodness to Your servant.
27 “And now, You have been pleased to baraḵ the
house of Your servant to be before You forever. For
You have baraḵ it, O hWhY, and it is baruḵ forever.”
22

18 And after this it came to be that Dawiḏ smote the
Pelishtites, and humbled them, and took Gath and its
towns from the hand of the Pelishtites.
2 And he smote the Mo’aḇites, and the Mo’aḇites
became Dawiḏ’s servants, and brought presents.
3 And Dawiḏ smote Haḏaḏezer sovereign of Tsoḇah
as far as Ḥamath, as he went to establish his power
by the River Perath.
4 And Dawiḏ took from him one thousand chariots,
and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand
foot soldiers. And Dawiḏ also hamstrung all the
chariot horses, but left of them one hundred chariots.
5 And when Aram of Darmeseq came to help
Haḏaḏezer sovereign of Tsoḇah, Dawiḏ smote
twenty-two thousand of Aram,
2047

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

and Dawiḏ stationed men in Aram of Darmeseq,
and the Arameans became Dawiḏ’s servants, and
brought presents. And hWhY saved Dawiḏ wherever
he went.
7 And Dawiḏ took the shields of gold that were on
the servants of Haḏaḏezer, and brought them to
Yerushalayim.
8 And from Tiḇḥath and from Kun, cities of
Haḏaḏezer, Dawiḏ brought a large amount of bronze,
with which Shelomoh made the bronze sea, and the
columns, and the vessels of bronze.
9 And when To’u sovereign of Ḥamath heard that
Dawiḏ had smitten all the army of Haḏaḏezer
sovereign of Tsoḇah,
10 he sent Haḏoram his son to Sovereign Dawiḏ, to
ask peace of him and baraḵ him, because he had
fought against Haḏaḏezer and smote him - because
Haḏaḏezer had been fighting against To’u - with all
kinds of objects of gold, and silver, and bronze.
11 Sovereign Dawiḏ also qadosh these to hWhY,
along with the silver and gold that he had brought
from all these nations, from Eḏom, and from Mo’aḇ,
and from the children of Ammon, and from the
Pelishtites, and from Amalĕq.
12 And Aḇishai son of Tseruyah smote eighteen
thousand Eḏomites in the Valley of Salt,
13 and he put watch-posts in Eḏom, and all the
Eḏomites became Dawiḏ’s servants. And hWhY
saved Dawiḏ wherever he went.
14 So Dawiḏ reigned over all Yisra’ĕl, and he was
doing right-ruling and righteousness to all his people.
15 And Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah was over the army,
and Yahoshaphat son of Aḥiluḏ was recorder,
6

2048

1 CHRONICLES

and Tsaḏoq son of Aḥituḇ and Aḇimeleḵ son of
Eḇyathar were the kohenim, and Shawsha was the
scribe,
17 and Benayahu son of Yahoyaḏa was over the
Kerĕthites and the Pelĕthites. And the sons of Dawiḏ
were chiefs at the sovereign’s side.
16

19 And after this it came to be that Naḥash the
sovereign of the children of Ammon died, and his son
reigned in his place.
2 And Dawiḏ said, “Let me show kindness to Ḥanun
son of Naḥash, because his father showed kindness
to me.” So Dawiḏ sent messengers to comfort him
concerning his father. And the servants of Dawiḏ
came to Ḥanun in the land of the children of Ammon
to comfort him.
3 And the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to
Ḥanun, “Is Dawiḏ esteeming your father, in your eyes,
because he has sent comforters to you? Have his
servants not come to you to search and to overthrow
and to spy out the land?”
4 So Ḥanun took Dawiḏ’s servants, and shaved
them, and cut off their garments in the middle, at their
buttocks, and sent them away.
5 And when some went and informed Dawiḏ about
the men, he sent to meet them, because the men
were greatly ashamed. And the sovereign said,
“Remain at Yeriḥo until your beards have grown, then
return.”
6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they
had made themselves a stench to Dawiḏ, Ḥanun and
the children of Ammon sent a thousand kiḵars of
silver to hire chariots and horsemen from AramNaharayim, and from Aram-Ma’aḵah, and from
Tsoḇah.
2049

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

So they hired for themselves thirty-two thousand
chariots, with the sovereign of Ma’aḵah and his
people, who came and encamped before Mĕyḏeḇa.
And the children of Ammon had gathered from their
cities, and came to battle.
8 And when Dawiḏ heard, he sent Yo’aḇ and the
entire army of the mighty men,
9 and the children of Ammon came out and put
themselves in battle array before the gate of the city,
and the sovereigns who had come were by
themselves in the field.
10 And when Yo’aḇ saw that the battle had turned
against him before and behind, he chose some of the
choice ones of Yisra’ĕl, and put them in battle array
to meet Aram.
11 And the rest of the people he put under the
command of Aḇishai his brother, and they put
themselves in battle array to meet the children of
Ammon.
12 And he said, “If Aram is too strong for me, then you
shall help me; but if the children of Ammon are too
strong for you, then I shall help you.
13 “Be strong, and let us show strength for our people
and for the cities of our Elohim, and let hWhY do what
is good in His eyes.”
14 And Yo’aḇ drew near, and the people with him, to
battle against Aram, and they fled before him.
15 And when the children of Ammon saw that the
Arameans were fleeing, they also fled before Aḇishai
his brother, and went into the city. And Yo’aḇ came to
Yerushalayim.
16 And when Aram saw that they had been smitten
before Yisra’ĕl, they sent messengers and brought
the Arameans who were beyond the River, and
7

2050

1 CHRONICLES

Shophaḵ the commander of Haḏaḏezer’s army went
before them.
17 And it was reported to Dawiḏ, and he gathered all
Yisra’ĕl, and passed over the Yardĕn and came upon
them, and arranged in battle array against them. And
Dawiḏ arranged in battle array against Aram, and
they fought with him.
18 And Aram fled before Yisra’ĕl, and Dawiḏ slew
seven thousand charioteers and forty thousand foot
soldiers of the Arameans, and smote Shophaḵ the
commander of the army.
19 And the servants of Haḏaḏezer saw that they were
smitten by Yisra’ĕl, and they made peace with Dawiḏ
and became his servants. And the Arameans would
not help the children of Ammon any more.

20 And it came to be at the turn of the year, at the
time sovereigns go out, that Yo’aḇ led out the forces of
the army and destroyed the land of the children of
Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But Dawiḏ
remained at Yerushalayim. And Yo’aḇ smote Rabbah
and overthrew it.
2 And Dawiḏ took their sovereign’s crown from his
head, and found it weighed a kiḵar of gold, and there
were precious stones in it. And it was put on Dawiḏ’s
head. And he also brought out the spoil of the city, a
very great amount.
3 And he brought out the people who were in it, and
put them to work with saws, and with iron picks, and
with axes. And thus Dawiḏ did to all the cities of the
children of Ammon. Then Dawiḏ and all the people
returned to Yerushalayim.
4 And afterward it came to be that fighting broke out
at Gezer with the Pelishtites. Then Sibbeḵai the
2051

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Ḥushathite smote Sippai of the sons of the giant, and
they were humbled.
5 And there was fighting again with the Pelishtites,
and Elḥanan son of Ya’ir smote Laḥmi the brother of
Golyath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like
a weaver’s beam.
6 And there was fighting again at Gath, where there
was a man of great size, with twenty-four fingers and
toes, six and six. And he too was born to the giant.
7 And he reproached Yisra’ĕl, and Yahonathan son
of Shim’a, Dawiḏ’s brother, smote him.
8 These were born to the giant in Gath, and they fell
by the hand of Dawiḏ and by the hand of his servants.

21 And Satan stood up against Yisra’ĕl, and moved
Dawiḏ to number Yisra’ĕl.
2 And Dawiḏ said to Yo’aḇ and to the rulers of the
people, “Go, number Yisra’ĕl from Be’ĕrsheḇa to Dan,
and bring the number of them to me so that I know it.”
3 And Yo’aḇ answered, “hWhY adds to His people a
hundred times more than they are. But, my master the
sovereign, are they not all my master’s servants?
Why does my master seek to do this? Why should he
be a cause of guilt in Yisra’ĕl?”
4 But the sovereign’s word prevailed against Yo’aḇ.
And Yo’aḇ left and went throughout all Yisra’ĕl and
came to Yerushalayim.
5 And Yo’aḇ gave the sum of the number of the
people to Dawiḏ. And all Yisra’ĕl had one million one
hundred thousand men who drew the sword, and
Yahuḏah had four hundred and seventy thousand
men who drew the sword.
6 But he did not number Lĕwi and Binyamin among
them, for the sovereign’s word was loathsome to
Yo’aḇ.
2052

1 CHRONICLES

And it was evil in the eyes of Elohim, concerning
this matter, and He smote Yisra’ĕl.
8 Then Dawiḏ said to Elohim, “I have sinned greatly,
because I have done this matter. But now, I pray, take
away the wickedness of Your servant, for I have done
very foolishly.”
9 And hWhY spoke to Gaḏ, Dawiḏ’s seer, saying,
10 “Go, and you shall speak to Dawiḏ, saying, ‘Thus
said hWhY, “I hold three before you - choose one of
them for yourself, and I do it to you.” ’ ”
11 So Gaḏ came to Dawiḏ and said to him, “Thus said
hWhY, ‘Choose for yourself
12 either three years of scarcity of food, or three
months to be defeated by your foes with the sword of
your enemies overtaking you, or else for three days
the sword of hWhY, even the plague in the land, with
the messenger of hWhY destroying throughout all the
borders of Yisra’ĕl.’ And now consider what answer I
am to return to Him who sent me.”
13 And Dawiḏ said to Gaḏ, “I am in great trouble.
Please let me fall into the hand of hWhY, for His
compassion is very great, but do not let me fall into
the hand of man.”
14 And hWhY sent a plague upon Yisra’ĕl, and
seventy thousand men of Yisra’ĕl fell.
15 And Elohim sent a messenger to Yerushalayim to
destroy it. And as he was destroying, hWhY saw, and
relented about the evil, and said to the messenger
who was destroying, “Enough! Now stop your hand.”
And the messenger of hWhY was standing by the
threshing-floor of Ornan the Yeḇusite.
16 And Dawiḏ lifted his eyes and saw the messenger
of hWhY standing between earth and the shamayim,
having in his hand a drawn sword stretched out over
7

2053

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Yerushalayim. And Dawiḏ and the elders, wrapped in
sackcloth, fell on their faces.
17 And Dawiḏ said to Elohim, “Was it not I who
commanded the people to be numbered? I am the
one who has sinned and done evil indeed. But these,
the sheep, what have they done? Let Your hand, I
pray, O hWhY my Elohim, be against me and my
father’s house, but not against Your people, to be
plagued.”
18 And the messenger of hWhY commanded Gaḏ to
say to Dawiḏ that Dawiḏ should go up to raise an altar
to hWhY on the threshing-floor of Ornan the Yeḇusite.
19 So Dawiḏ went up at the word of Gaḏ, which he
had spoken in the Name of hWhY.
20 And Ornan turned and saw the messenger. And
his four sons with him hid themselves, and Ornan was
threshing wheat.
21 And Dawiḏ came to Ornan, and Ornan looked and
saw Dawiḏ, and he went out from the threshing-floor,
and bowed down to Dawiḏ with his face to the ground.
22 And Dawiḏ said to Ornan, “Give me the site of the
threshing-floor, so that I build an altar to hWhY on it.
Give it to me at the complete price, so that the plague
is restrained from the people.”
23 And Ornan said to Dawiḏ, “Take it for yourself, and
let my master the sovereign do what is good in his
eyes. See, I shall give you the cattle for burnt
offerings, the threshing implements for wood, and the
wheat for the grain offering. I give it all.”
24 And Sovereign Dawiḏ said to Ornan, “No, but I
shall certainly buy it at the complete price, for I do not
take what is yours for hWhY, nor offer a burnt offering
without cost.”
25 And Dawiḏ gave Ornan six hundred sheqels of
gold by weight for the place.
2054

1 CHRONICLES

And Dawiḏ built there an altar to hWhY, and offered
burnt offerings and peace offerings, and called on
hWhY. And He answered him from the shamayim by
fire on the altar of burnt offering.
27 Then hWhY commanded the messenger, and he
returned his sword to its sheath.
28 At that time, when Dawiḏ saw that hWhY had
answered him on the threshing-floor of Ornan the
Yeḇusite, he slaughtered there,
29 for the Mishkan of hWhY and the altar of the burnt
offering, which Mosheh had made in the wilderness,
were at that time at the high place in Giḇ’on.
30 But Dawiḏ was unable to go before it to inquire of
Elohim, for he was afraid of the sword of the
messenger of hWhY.
26

22 Dawiḏ then said, “This is the House of hWhY
Elohim, and this is the altar of burnt offering for
Yisra’ĕl.”
2 And Dawiḏ commanded to gather the foreigners
who were in the land of Yisra’ĕl. And he appointed
stonemasons to cut hewn stones to build the House
of Elohim.
3 And Dawiḏ prepared large quantities of iron for the
nails of the doors of the gates and for the clamps, and
more bronze than could be weighed,
4 and cedar trees beyond number, for the
Tsiḏonians and those from Tsor brought much cedar
wood to Dawiḏ.
5 And Dawiḏ said, “Shelomoh my son is young and
tender, and the House that is to be built for hWhY is to
be exceedingly great, for a splendid Name, to all the
lands. Please, let me make preparation for it.” So
Dawiḏ made extensive preparations before his death.
2055

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

He also called for his son Shelomoh, and
commanded him to build a House for hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
7 And Dawiḏ said to Shelomoh, “My son, as for me,
it has been in my heart to build a House to the Name
of hWhY my Elohim,
8 but the word of hWhY came to me, saying, ‘You
have shed much blood and have fought great battles.
You do not build a House for My Name, because you
have shed much blood on the earth in My presence.
9 ‘See, a son is to be born to you, who is a man of
rest. And I shall give him rest from all his enemies all
around, for Shelomoh is his name, and peace and
rest I give to Yisra’ĕl in his days.
10 ‘He builds a House for My Name, and he is to be
My son, and I am to be his Father. And I shall
establish the throne of his reign over Yisra’ĕl forever.’
11 “Now, my son, hWhY be with you, then you shall
prosper and build the House of hWhY your Elohim, as
He has said to you.
12 “Only,
let hWhY give you wisdom and
understanding, and command you concerning
Yisra’ĕl, so that you guard the Torah of hWhY your
Elohim,
13 then you shall prosper, if you guard to do the Laws
and Right-Rulings with which hWhY commanded
Mosheh concerning Yisra’ĕl. Be strong and brave, do
not fear nor be discouraged.
14 “See, in my affliction I have prepared for the House
of hWhY one hundred thousand kiḵars of gold and one
million kiḵars of silver, and bronze and iron beyond
measure, for it is plenty. And I have prepared timber
and stone, and you shall add to them.
6

2056

1 CHRONICLES

“And with you there are many workmen: hewers
and workers of stone and timber, and all types of
skilled men for every kind of work.
16 “Of gold and silver and bronze and iron there is no
limit. Rise up and do, and hWhY is with you.”
17 And Dawiḏ commanded all the rulers of Yisra’ĕl to
help Shelomoh his son,
18 “Is not hWhY your Elohim with you? And has He
not given you rest all around? For He has given the
inhabitants of the land into my hand, and the land has
been subdued before hWhY and before His people.
19 “Now, give your heart and your being to seek
hWhY your Elohim. And rise up and build the Miqdash
of hWhY Elohim, to bring the ark of the Covenant of
hWhY and the qodesh vessels of Elohim into the
House that is to be built for the Name of hWhY.”
15

23 And Dawiḏ was old and satisfied with days, and
he made his son Shelomoh to reign over Yisra’ĕl,
2 and he gathered all the rulers of Yisra’ĕl, with the
kohenim and the Lĕwites.
3 And the Lĕwites were numbered from the age of
thirty years and above. And their number, head by
head, was thirty-eight thousand males.
4 Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee
the work of the House of hWhY, and six thousand
were officers and judges,
5 and four thousand were gatekeepers, and four
thousand to give praise to hWhY, “which I made for
giving praise.”
6 And Dawiḏ divided them into divisions, of the sons
of Lĕwi: of Gĕreshon, Qehath, and Merari.
7 Of the Gĕreshonites: La’dan and Shim’i.
8 The sons of La’dan: Yeḥi’ĕl the head, then Zĕthan
and Yo’ĕl, three.
2057

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

The sons of Shim’i: Shelomith, and Ḥazi’ĕl, and
Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers’
houses of La’dan.
10 And the sons of Shim’i: Yaḥath, Zina, and Ye’ush,
and Beri’ah. These were the four sons of Shim’i.
11 And Yaḥath was the head and Zizah the second.
But Ye’ush and Beri’ah did not have many sons, so
they were reckoned as one father’s house.
12 The sons of Qehath: Amram, Yitshar, Ḥeḇron, and
Uzzi’ĕl, four.
13 The sons of Amram: Aharon and Mosheh. And
Aharon was qadosh, he and his sons forever, that he
should qadosh the most qodesh, to burn incense
before hWhY, to serve Him, and to give the beraḵah
in His Name forever.
14 Now Mosheh, the man of Elohim, his sons were
named after the tribe of Lĕwi.
15 The sons of Mosheh: Gĕreshom and Eli’ezer.
16 The sons of Gĕreshom: Sheḇu’ĕl was the head.
17 And the sons of Eli’ezer: Reḥaḇyah was the head.
And Eli’ezer had no other sons, but the sons of
Reḥaḇyah were very many.
18 The sons of Yitshar: Shelomith was the head.
19 The sons of Ḥeḇron: Yeriyahu was the head,
Amaryah the second, Yaḥazi’ĕl the third, and
Yeqam’am the fourth.
20 The sons of Uzzi’ĕl: Miḵah was the head and
Yishshiyah the second.
21 The sons of Merari: Maḥli and Mushi. The sons of
Maḥli: El’azar and Qish.
22 And El’azar died, and had no sons, but only
daughters. And their brothers, the sons of Qish, took
them.
23 The sons of Mushi: Maḥli, Ĕḏer, and Yerĕmoth,
three.
9

2058

1 CHRONICLES

These were the sons of Lĕwi by their fathers’
houses, the heads of the fathers’ houses as they were
counted head by head by the number of their names,
who did the work for the service of the House of hWhY,
from the age of twenty years and above.
25 For Dawiḏ said, “hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl has
given rest to His people, and He dwells in
Yerushalayim forever,”
26 and also of the Lĕwites, “They shall no longer bear
the Mishkan, or any of the vessels for its service.”
27 For by the last words of Dawiḏ the Lĕwites were
numbered from twenty years old and above,
28 because their duty was to help the sons of Aharon
in the service of the House of hWhY, in the courtyards
and in the rooms, in the cleansing of all that was
qodesh, and the work of the service of the House of
Elohim,
29 both with the showbread and the fine flour for the
grain offering, and with the unleavened cakes and
what is baked on the griddle, and with what is mixed
and with all kinds of measures and sizes;
30 and to stand every morning to thank and praise
hWhY, and so at evening;
31 and for all the burnt offerings to hWhY on the
Shabbathoth and on the New Moons and on the
Appointed Times, by number according to the RightRuling upon them, continually before hWhY;
32 and that they should guard the duty of the Tent of
Appointment, the duty of the qodesh place, and the
duty of the sons of Aharon their brothers in the service
of the House of hWhY.
24

24 And the divisions of the sons of Aharon: The sons
of Aharon were Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu, El’azar and Ithamar.
2059

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

But Naḏaḇ and Aḇihu died before their father, and
had no children, so El’azar and Ithamar served as
kohenim.
3 And Dawiḏ, with Tsaḏoq of the sons of El’azar,
and Aḥimeleḵ of the sons of Ithamar, divided them
according to their offices in their service.
4 And there were more leaders found of the sons of
El’azar than of the sons of Ithamar. So they divided
the sons of El’azar into sixteen heads of their fathers’
houses, and the sons of Ithamar into eight heads of
their fathers’ houses.
5 And they were divided by lot, one group as
another, for there were officials of the qodesh place
and officials of Elohim, from the sons of El’azar and
from the sons of Ithamar.
6 And the scribe, Shemayah son of Nethan’ĕl, one
of the Lĕwites, wrote them down before the
sovereign, and the rulers, and Tsaḏoq the kohĕn, and
Aḥimeleḵ son of Eḇyathar, and the heads of the
fathers’ houses of the kohenim and Lĕwites, one
father’s house taken for El’azar and one for Ithamar.
7 And the first lot came forth to Yahoyariḇ, the
second to Yeḏayah,
8 the third to Ḥarim, the fourth to Se’orim,
9 the fifth to Malkiyah, the sixth to Miyamin,
10 the seventh to Haqqots, the eighth to Aḇiyah,
11 the ninth to Yĕshua, the tenth to Sheḵanyah,
12 the eleventh to Elyashiḇ, the twelfth to Yaqim,
13 the thirteenth to Ḥuppah, fourteenth to Yesheḇ’aḇ,
14 the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immĕr,
15 the
seventeenth Ḥĕzir, to eighteenth to
ha’Pitstsĕts,
16 the nineteenth to Pethaḥyah, the twentieth to
Yeḥezqĕl,
2

2060

1 CHRONICLES

the twenty-first to Yaḵin, the twenty-second to
Gamul,
18 the twenty-third to Delayahu, the twenty-fourth to
Ma’azyahu.
19 These were their offices in their service for coming
into the House of hWhY according to their RightRuling by the hand of Aharon their father, as hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl had commanded him.
20 And the rest of the sons of Lĕwi: of the sons of
Amram, Shuḇa’ĕl; of the sons of Shuḇu’ĕl,
Yeḥdeyahu.
21 Concerning
Reḥaḇyahu, of the sons of
Reḥaḇyahu, the head was Yishshiyah.
22 Of the Yitsharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of
Shelomoth, Yaḥath
23 and Bĕnai. Yeriyahu, Amaryahu the second,
Yaḥazi’ĕl the third, and Yeqam’am the fourth.
24 Of the sons of Uzzi’ĕl, Miḵah; of the sons of Miḵah,
Shamir.
25 The brother of Miḵah, Yishshiyah; of the sons of
Yishshiyah, Zeḵaryahu.
26 The sons of Merari: Maḥli and Mushi; the son of
Ya’aziyahu, Beno.
27 The sons of Merari by Ya’aziyahu: Beno, and
Shoham, and Zakkur, and Iḇri.
28 Of Maḥli: El’azar, who had no sons.
29 Of Qish: the son of Qish, Yeraḥme’ĕl.
30 And the sons of Mushi: Maḥli, Ĕḏer, and
Yeremoth. These were the sons of the Lĕwites
according to their fathers’ houses.
31 These also cast lots, they too, as their brothers the
sons of Aharon, in the presence of Sovereign Dawiḏ,
and Tsaḏoq, and Aḥimeleḵ, and the heads of the
fathers’ houses of the kohenim and Lĕwites - the
head of the fathers, as well as his younger brothers.
17

2061

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

25 And Dawiḏ and the commanders of the army
separated for the service some of the sons of Asaph,
and of Hĕman, and of Yeḏuthun, who should naḇa with
lyres, with harps, and with cymbals. And the number of
the workmen according to their service was:
2 Of the sons of Asaph: Zakkur, and Yosĕph, and
Nethanyah, and Ashar’ĕlah, the sons of Asaph at the
hands of Asaph, who naḇu at the hands of the
sovereign.
3 Of Yeḏuthun, the son of Yeḏuthun: Geḏalyahu,
and Tseri, and Yeshayahu, Ḥashaḇyahu, and
Mattithyahu, six, under the hands of their father
Yeḏuthun, who naḇu with a lyre to give thanks and to
praise hWhY.
4 Of Hĕman, the sons of Hĕman: Buqqiyahu,
Mattanyahu, Uzzi’ĕl, Sheḇu’ĕl, and Yerimoth,
Ḥananyah, Ḥanani, Eliyathah, Giddalti, and
Romamti-Ezer, Yoshbeqashah, Mallothi, Hothir,
Maḥaziyoth.
5 All these were the sons of Hĕman the sovereign’s
seer in the words of Elohim, to exalt his horn. For
Elohim gave Hĕman fourteen sons and three
daughters.
6 All these were at the hands of their father for song
in the House of hWhY, with cymbals, harps and lyres,
for the service of the House of Elohim: Asaph,
Yeḏuthun, and Hĕman, at the hands of the sovereign.
7 And the number of them, with their brothers who
were taught in the songs of hWhY, all who were
skilled, was two hundred and eighty-eight.
8 And they cast lots for their duty, the small as well
as the great, the teacher with the student.

2062

1 CHRONICLES

And the first lot for Asaph came forth for Yosĕph;
Geḏalyahu the second, he, and his brothers and
sons, twelve;
10 the third Zakkur, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
11 the fourth Yitsri, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
12 the fifth Nethanyahu, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
13 the sixth Buqqiyahu, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
14 the seventh Yesar’ĕlah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
15 the eighth Yeshayahu, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
16 the ninth Mattanyahu, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
17 the tenth Shim’i, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
18 the eleventh Azar’ĕl, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
19 the twelfth Ḥashaḇyah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
20 the thirteenth Shuḇu’ĕl, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
21 the fourteenth Mattithyahu, his sons and his
brothers, twelve;
22 the fifteenth Yerĕmoth, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
23 the sixteenth Ḥananyahu, his sons and his
brothers, twelve;
24 the seventeenth Yoshbeqashah, his sons and his
brothers, twelve;
25 the eighteenth Ḥanani, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
26 the nineteenth Mallothi, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
9

2063

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

the twentieth Eliyathah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
28 the twenty-first Hothir, his sons and his brothers,
twelve;
29 the twenty-second Giddalti, his sons and his
brothers, twelve;
30 the twenty-third Maḥaziyoth, his sons and his
brothers, twelve;
31 the twenty-fourth Romamti-Ezer, his sons and his
brothers, twelve.
27

26 For the divisions of the gatekeepers: Of the
Qorḥites, Meshelemyahu son of Qorĕ, of the sons of
Asaph.
2 And the sons of Meshelemyahu: Zeḵaryahu the
first-born, Yeḏiya’ĕl the second, Zeḇaḏyahu the third,
Yathni’ĕl the fourth,
3 Ĕylam the fifth, Yahoḥanan the sixth, Elyo’ĕynai
the seventh.
4 And the sons of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom: Shemayah the firstborn, Yahozaḇaḏ the second, Yo’aḥ the third, Saḵar
the fourth, Nethan’ĕl the fifth,
5 Ammi’ĕl the sixth, Yissasḵar the seventh,
Pe’ullethai the eighth, for Elohim baraḵ him.
6 Also to Shemayah his son were sons born who
ruled their fathers’ houses, because they were able
mighty men.
7 The sons of Shemayah: Othni, and Repha’ĕl, and
Oḇĕḏ, Elzaḇaḏ, whose brothers Elihu and
Semaḵyahu were able men.
8 All these were of the sons of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom, they
and their sons and their brothers, able men with
strength for the work: sixty-two of Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom.
9 And Meshelemyahu had sons and brothers,
eighteen able men.
2064

1 CHRONICLES

Also Ḥosah, of the children of Merari, had sons:
Shimri the head - although he was not the first-born,
his father made him the head,
11 Ḥilqiyahu the second, Teḇalyahu the third,
Zeḵaryahu the fourth. All the sons and brothers of
Ḥosah were thirteen.
12 These divisions of the gatekeepers, among the
chief men, had duties like their brothers, to serve in
the House of hWhY.
13 And they cast lots for each gate, the small as well
as the great, according to their father’s house.
14 And the lot to the east fell to Shelemyahu. Then
they cast lots for his son Zeḵaryahu, a wise
counsellor, and his lot came out to the north;
15 to Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom to the south, and to his sons the
storehouse;
16 to Shuppim and Ḥosah to the west, with the
Shalleḵeth Gate on the ascending highway; guard
corresponding with guard.
17 On the east were six Lĕwites, on the north four
each day, on the south four each day, and for the
storehouse two by two.
18 As for the Parbar to the west, there were four on
the highway and two at Parbar.
19 These were the divisions of the gatekeepers
among the sons of Qoraḥ and among the sons of
Merari.
20 And of the Lĕwites, Aḥiyahu was over the
treasuries of the House of Elohim and over the
treasuries of the qodesh gifts.
21 The sons of Laidan, the sons of the Gĕreshonites
of Laidan, heads of their fathers’ houses, of Laidan
the Gĕreshonites: Yeḥi’ĕli.
22 The sons of Yeḥi’ĕli, Zĕtham and Yo’ĕl his brother,
were over treasuries of the House of HWHY.
10

2065

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

Of the Amramites, the Yitsharites, the Ḥeḇronites,
and the Uzzi’ĕlites,
24 even Sheḇu’ĕl son of Gĕreshom, son of Mosheh,
was overseer of the treasuries.
25 And his brothers by Eli’ezer were Reḥaḇyahu his
son, and Yeshayahu his son, and Yoram his son, and
Ziḵri his son, and Shelomoth his son.
26 This Shelomoth and his brothers were over all the
treasuries of the qodesh gifts which Sovereign Dawiḏ
and the heads of fathers’ houses, the commanders
over thousands and hundreds, and the commanders
of the army, had qadosh.
27 Some of the booty won in battles they qadosh to
maintain the House of hWhY.
28 And all that Shemu’ĕl the seer, and Sha’ul son of
Qish, and Aḇnĕr son of Nĕr, and Yo’aḇ son of
Tseruyah had qadosh, all who were under the hand
of Shelomith and his brothers.
29 Of the Yitsharites, Kenanyahu and his sons were
for the outward duties as officials and judges over
Yisra’ĕl.
30 Of the Ḥeḇronites, Ḥashaḇyahu and his brothers,
one thousand seven hundred able men, had the
oversight of Yisra’ĕl beyond the Yardĕn westward, for
all the work of hWhY, and in the service of the
sovereign.
31 Of the Ḥeḇronites, Yeriyah was head of the
Ḥeḇronites according to his genealogy of the fathers.
In the fortieth year of the reign of Dawiḏ they were
sought, and there were found among them able men
at Ya’zĕr of Gil’aḏ.
32 And his brothers were two thousand seven
hundred able men, heads of fathers, whom Sovereign
Dawiḏ made officials over the Re’uḇĕnites, and the
23

2066

1 CHRONICLES

Gaḏites, and the half-tribe of Menashsheh, in all
matters of Elohim and matters of the sovereign.

27 And the children of Yisra’ĕl, according to their
number, the heads of fathers, and the commanders
of thousands and hundreds and their officers, served
the sovereign in all matters of the divisions which
came in and went out month by month throughout all
the months of the year, each division having twentyfour thousand.
2 Over the first division for the first month was
Yashoḇ’am son of Zaḇdi’ĕl, and in his division were
twenty-four thousand;
3 of the sons of Perets, and the chief of all the
commanders of the army for the first month.
4 And over the division of the second month was
Doḏai an Aḥoḥite, and of his division Miqloth also was
the leader, and in his division were twenty-four
thousand.
5 The third commander of the army for the third
month was Benayahu, son of Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn,
who was chief, and in his division were twenty-four
thousand.
6 This was the Benayahu who was mighty among
the thirty, and was over the thirty, and in his division
was Ammizaḇaḏ his son.
7 The fourth for the fourth month was Asah’ĕl the
brother of Yo’aḇ, and Zeḇaḏyah his son after him, and
in his division were twenty-four thousand.
8 The fifth for the fifth month was Shamhuth the
Yizraḥite, and in his division were twenty-four
thousand.
9 The sixth for the sixth month was Ira son of Iqqĕsh
the Teqowite, and in his division were twenty-four
thousand.
2067

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

The seventh for the seventh month was Ḥĕlets the
Pelonite, of the children of Ephrayim, and in his
division were twenty-four thousand.
11 The eighth for the eighth month was Sibbeḵai the
Ḥushathite, of the Zarḥites, and in his division were
twenty-four thousand.
12 The ninth for the ninth month was Aḇi’ezer the
Anathothite, of the Binyamites, and in his division
were twenty-four thousand.
13 The tenth for the tenth month was Maharai the
Netophathite, of the Zarḥites, and in his division were
twenty-four thousand.
14 The eleventh for the eleventh month was Benayah
the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephrayim, and in his
division were twenty-four thousand.
15 The twelfth for the twelfth month was Ḥeldai the
Netophathite, of Othni’ĕl, and in his division were
twenty-four thousand.
16 And over the tribes of Yisra’ĕl: the chief officer
over Re’uḇĕn: Eli’ezer son of Ziḵri; over Shim’on:
Shephatyahu son of Ma’aḵah;
17 Lĕwi: Ḥashaḇyah son of Qemu’ĕl; over Aharon:
Tsaḏoq;
18 Yahuḏah: Elihu, one of Dawiḏ’s brothers;
Yissasḵar: Omri son of Miḵa’ĕl;
19 Zeḇulun: Yishmayahu son of Oḇaḏyahu; Naphtali:
Yerimoth son of Azri’ĕl;
20 the children of Ephrayim: Hoshĕa son of
Azazyahu; the half-tribe of Menashsheh: Yo’ĕl son of
Peḏayahu;
21 the half-tribe of Menashsheh in Gil’aḏ: Iddo son of
Zeḵaryahu; Binyamin: Ya’asi’ĕl son of Aḇnĕr;
22 Dan: Azar’ĕl son of Yeroḥam. These were the
rulers of the tribes of Yisra’ĕl.
10

2068

1 CHRONICLES

But Dawiḏ did not take the number of those twenty
years old and under, because hWhY had said He
would increase Yisra’ĕl like the stars of the
shamayim.
24 Yo’aḇ son of Tseruyah began a census, but he did
not finish, for wrath came upon Yisra’ĕl because of
this census; nor was the number recorded in the
account of the annals of Sovereign Dawiḏ.
25 And Azmaweth son of Aḏi’ĕl was over the
sovereign’s treasuries. And Yahonathan son of
Uzziyahu was over the storehouses in the field, in the
cities, and in the villages, and in the watchtowers.
26 And Ezri son of Keluḇ was over those who did the
work of the field for tilling the ground.
27 And Shim’i the Ramalhite was over the vineyards,
and Zaḇdi the Shiphmite was over the increase of the
vineyards for the wine cellars.
28 And Ba’al-Ḥanan the Geḏĕrite was over the olive
trees and the sycamore trees that were in the low
country, and Yo’ash was over the oil-stores.
29 And Shitrai the Sharonite was over the herds that
fed in Sharon, and Shaphat son of Aḏlai was over the
herds that were in the valleys.
30 And Oḇil the Yishma’ĕlite was over the camels,
and Yeḥdeyahu the Mĕronothite was over the
donkeys,
31 and Yaziz the Haḡrite was over the flocks. All of
these were heads over the property of Sovereign
Dawiḏ.
32 Also
Yahonathan, Dawiḏ’s uncle, was a
counsellor, a wise man and a scribe. And Yeḥi’ĕl son
of Ḥaḵmoni was with the sovereign’s sons.
33 And Aḥithophel was the sovereign’s counsellor,
and Ḥushai the Arkite was the sovereign’s
companion.
23

2069

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

And after Aḥithophel was Yahoyaḏa son of
Benayahu, then Eḇyathar. And the chief of the
sovereign’s army was Yo’aḇ.

34

28 And Dawiḏ assembled at Yerushalayim all the
rulers of Yisra’ĕl: the rulers of the tribes and the
commanders of the divisions who served the
sovereign, the commanders over thousands and
commanders over hundreds, and the heads over all
the property and possessions of the sovereign and of
his sons, with the officials, the mighty men, and all the
mighty brave men.
2 Then Sovereign Dawiḏ rose to his feet and said,
“Hear me, my brothers and my people: I had it in my
heart to build a House of rest for the ark of the
Covenant of hWhY, and for the footstool of our Elohim,
and had made preparations to build it.
3 “But Elohim said to me, ‘You do not build a House
for My Name, because you have been a man of battle
and have shed blood.’
4 “Yet hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl chose me above all
the house of my father to be sovereign over Yisra’ĕl
forever, for He has chosen Yahuḏah to be the ruler.
And of the house of Yahuḏah, the house of my father,
and among the sons of my father, He was pleased
with me to make me reign over all Yisra’ĕl.
5 “And of all my sons - for hWhY has given me many
sons - He has chosen my son Shelomoh to sit on the
throne of the reign of hWhY over Yisra’ĕl,
6 and said to me, ‘Shelomoh your son is the one to
build My house and My courtyards, for I have chosen
him to be My son, and I Myself am a Father to him.
7 ‘And I shall establish his reign forever, if he is
strong to do My Commands and My Right-Rulings, as
it is this day.’
2070

1 CHRONICLES

“And now, before the eyes of all Yisra’ĕl, the
assembly of hWhY, and in the hearing of our Elohim,
guard and seek all the Commands of hWhY your
Elohim, so that you possess this good land, and leave
it as an inheritance for your children after you forever.
9 “As for you, my son Shelomoh, know the Elohim
of your father, and serve Him with a perfect heart and
with a pleasing life, for hWhY searches all hearts and
understands all the intent of the thoughts. If you do
seek Him, He is found by you; but if you forsake Him,
He rejects you forever.
10 “See, now, for hWhY has chosen you to build a
House for the Miqdash. Be strong, and do it.”
11 And Dawiḏ gave his son Shelomoh the plans for
the porch, and its houses, and its treasuries, and its
upper rooms, and its inner rooms, and the place of
atonement;
12 and the plans for all that he had by the Ruaḥ, of
the courtyards of the House of hWhY, and of all the
rooms all around, and of the treasuries of the House
of Elohim, and of the treasuries for the qodesh gifts;
13 and for the divisions of the kohenim and the
Lĕwites, and for all the work of the service of the
House of hWhY, and for all the vessels of service in
the House of hWhY;
14 even gold by weight for utensils of gold, for all
used in every kind of service; for silver for all utensils
of silver by weight, for all utensils used in every kind
of service;
15 and by weight for the lampstands of gold, and their
lamps of gold, by weight for each lampstand and its
lamps; and for the lampstands of silver by weight, for
the lampstand and its lamps, according to the use of
each lampstand;
8

2071

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

and by weight, gold for the tables of the
showbread, for each table, and silver for the tables of
silver;
17 and clean gold for the forks, and the basins, and
the jars of clean gold, and the golden bowls, by weight
for every bowl; and for the silver bowls, silver by
weight for every bowl;
18 and refined gold by weight for the altar of incense,
and for the pattern of the chariot of the gold keruḇim,
spreading out their wings and covering over the ark
of the Covenant of hWhY.
19 “hWhY made me understand all this in writing, by
His hand upon me, all the works of these plans.”
20 And Dawiḏ said his son Shelomoh, “Be strong and
courageous, and do it. Do not fear nor be afraid, for
hWhY Elohim, my Elohim, is with you. He shall not
leave you nor forsake you, until you have completed
all the work for the service of the House of hWhY.
21 “And see, the divisions of the kohenim and the
Lĕwites for all the service of the House of Elohim, and
every volunteer of any skill is with you in all work, for
every kind of service. And the rulers and all the
people are entirely at your command.”
16

29 And Dawiḏ the sovereign said to all the
assembly, “My son Shelomoh, the one whom Elohim
has chosen, is young and tender. And the work is
great, because the Palace is not for man but for HWHY
Elohim.
2 “And with all my power I have prepared for the
House of my Elohim: the gold for the gold, and the
silver for the silver, and the bronze for the bronze, the
iron for the iron, and the wood for the wood, shoham
stones, and mountings, and coloured stones of
2072

1 CHRONICLES

various colours, and all kinds of precious stones, and
marble slabs - in large quantities.
3 “And also, because I delighted in the House of my
Elohim, I have treasure of gold and silver; I give for
the House of my Elohim even more than all that I have
prepared for the Qodesh House:
4 three thousand kiḵars of gold, of the gold of Ophir,
and seven thousand kiḵars of refined silver, to overlay
the walls of the houses;
5 the gold for the gold and the silver for the silver,
and for all kinds of work to be done by the hands of
craftsmen. Who then is moved to fill his hand today
for hWhY?”
6 And the leaders of the fathers, and the leaders of
the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, and the commanders of
thousands and of hundreds, with the heads over the
sovereign’s work, volunteered
7 and gave for the work of the House of Elohim five
thousand kiḵars and ten thousand darics of gold, and
ten thousand kiḵars of silver, and eighteen thousand
kiḵars of bronze, and one hundred thousand kiḵars of
iron.
8 And those with whom were found stones gave
them to the treasury of the House of hWhY, into the
hand of Yeḥi’ĕl the Gĕreshonite.
9 And the people rejoiced, for they had given
voluntarily, because with a perfect heart they had
given voluntarily to hWhY. And Dawiḏ the sovereign
also rejoiced greatly.
10 And Dawiḏ baraḵ hWhY before all the assembly.
And Dawiḏ said, “Baruḵ are You, hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, our Father, forever and ever.
11 “Yours, O hWhY, is the greatness, the power and
the comeliness, the pre-eminence and the
excellency, because of all that is in the shamayim and
2073

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 1

in the earth. Yours is the reign, O hWhY, and You are
exalted as head above all.
12 “And the riches and the esteem come from Your
presence, and You rule over all. And in Your hand is
power and might, and in Your hand to make great and
to give strength to all.
13 “And now, our Elohim, we thank You and praise
Your splendid Name.
14 “But who am I, and who are my people, that we
should be able to give so voluntarily as this? For all
comes from You, and we have given to You out of
Your hand.
15 “For we are sojourners and pilgrims before You,
as were all our fathers; our days on earth are as a
shadow, and without permanence.
16 “O hWhY our Elohim, all this store that we have
prepared to build You a House for Your qodesh Name
is from Your hand, and all is of You.
17 “And I know, my Elohim, that You are trying the
heart and desire uprightness. As for me, in the
uprightness of my heart I have voluntarily given all
these. And now with joy I have seen Your people, who
are present here to give voluntarily to You.
18 “O hWhY Elohim of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and
Yisra’ĕl, our fathers, guard this forever in the intent of
the thoughts of the heart of Your people, and prepare
their heart toward You.
19 “And give my son Shelomoh a perfect heart to
guard Your Commands and Your Witnesses and
Your Laws, to do all, and to build the Palace for which
I have prepared.”
20 And Dawiḏ said to all the assembly, “Now baraḵ
hWhY your Elohim.” And all the assembly baraḵ hWhY
Elohim of their fathers, and bowed their heads and
did obeisance to hWhY and the sovereign.
2074

1 CHRONICLES

And they made offerings to hWhY and offered
burnt offerings to hWhY on the next day: a thousand
bulls, a thousand rams, a thousand lambs, with their
drink offerings, and slaughterings in large numbers
for all Yisra’ĕl.
22 And they ate and drank before hWhY with great joy
on that day. And they appointed Shelomoh son of
Dawiḏ to reign the second time, and anointed him
before hWhY to be leader, and Tsaḏoq to be kohĕn.
23 And Shelomoh sat on the throne of hWhY as
sovereign instead of Dawiḏ his father, and prospered;
and all Yisra’ĕl obeyed him.
24 And all the rulers and the mighty men, and also all
the sons of Sovereign Dawiḏ, submitted themselves
to Shelomoh the sovereign.
25 And hWhY exalted Shelomoh exceedingly in the
eyes of all Yisra’ĕl, and put upon him such royal
splendour as had not been on any sovereign before
him in Yisra’ĕl.
26 Thus Dawiḏ son of Yishai reigned over all Yisra’ĕl.
27 And the days that he reigned over Yisra’ĕl was
forty years. He reigned seven years in Ḥeḇron, and
he reigned thirty-three years in Yerushalayim.
28 And he died in a good old age, satisfied with days,
riches and esteem. And Shelomoh his son reigned in
his place.
29 And the acts of Sovereign Dawiḏ, first and last,
see, they are written in the book of Shemu’ĕl the seer,
in the book of Nathan the naḇi, and in the book of Gaḏ
the seer,
30 with all his reign and his might, and the times that
passed over him, and over Yisra’ĕl, and over all the
reigns of the lands.
21

2075

2 CHRONICLES

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2
‫ ב דברי הימים‬B mYmYh YRBd

1 And Shelomoh son of Dawiḏ strengthened himself
over his reign, and hWhY his Elohim was with him and
made him exceedingly great.
2 And Shelomoh spoke to all Yisra’ĕl, to the
commanders of the thousands and of the hundreds,
to the judges, and to every leader in all Yisra’ĕl, the
heads of the fathers.
3 And Shelomoh, and all the assembly with him,
went to the high place that was at Giḇ’on, for Elohim’s
Tent of Appointment was there, which Mosheh the
servant of hWhY had made in the wilderness.
4 However, Dawiḏ had brought up the ark of Elohim
from Qiryath Ye’arim to the place Dawiḏ had prepared
for it, for he had pitched a tent for it in Yerushalayim.
5 And the bronze altar that Betsal’ĕl son of Uri son
of Ḥur had made, he put before the Mishkan of hWhY.
And Shelomoh and the assembly sought it.
6 And Shelomoh went up there to the bronze altar
before hWhY, which was at the Tent of Appointment,
and offered a thousand burnt offerings on it.
7 That night Elohim appeared to Shelomoh, and
said to him, “Ask what I should give you.”
8 And Shelomoh said to Elohim, “You have shown
great kindness to Dawiḏ my father, and have made
me sovereign in his place.
9 “Now, hWhY Elohim, let Your promise to Dawiḏ my
father stand fast, for You have appointed me to reign
over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth.
10 “Now give me wisdom and knowledge, so that I go
out and come in before this people. For who rightly
rules this great people of Yours?”
2076

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And Elohim said to Shelomoh, “Because this was
in your heart, and you have not asked riches or wealth
or esteem or the life of your enemies, nor have you
asked long life, but have asked wisdom and
knowledge for yourself, so as to rightly rule My people
over whom I have appointed you to reign,
12 wisdom and knowledge are given to you. And
riches and wealth and esteem I give you, such as
none of the sovereigns have had who have been
before you, nor have any after you.”
13 And Shelomoh went to Yerushalayim from the
high place that was at Giḇ’on, from before the Tent of
Appointment, and reigned over Yisra’ĕl.
14 And Shelomoh gathered chariots and horsemen,
and he had one thousand four hundred chariots and
twelve thousand horsemen, whom he stationed in the
chariot cities and with the sovereign in Yerushalayim.
15 And the sovereign made silver and gold to be as
stones in Yerushalayim, and he made cedars to be as
plenty as the sycamores which are in the low country.
16 And Shelomoh had horses imported from
Mitsrayim and from Quĕ - the sovereign’s merchants
bought them in Quĕ at a price.
17 And they came up and brought from Mitsrayim a
chariot for six hundred pieces of silver, and a horse
for one hundred and fifty. And so, for all the
sovereigns of the Ḥittites and the sovereigns of Aram,
they brought them out by their hand.
11

2 And Shelomoh gave word to build a House for the
Name of hWhY, and a house for his reign.
2 Then Shelomoh enrolled seventy thousand men to
bear burdens, eighty thousand hewing in the
mountains, and three thousand six hundred to
oversee them.
2077

2 CHRONICLES

And Shelomoh sent to Ḥuram sovereign of Tsor,
saying, “As you did for my father Dawiḏ, and sent him
cedars to build himself a house to dwell in 4 see, I am building a House for the Name of hWhY
my Elohim, to qadosh it to Him, to burn before Him
sweet incense, and for the continual showbread, and
for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the
Shabbathoth, and on the New Moons, and on the
Appointed Times of hWhY our Elohim. This is for
Yisra’ĕl forever.
5 “And the House which I build is great, for our
Elohim is greater than all mighty ones.
6 “But who is able to build Him a House, since the
shamayim and the shamayim of the shamayim are
unable to contain Him? Who am I then, that I should
build Him a House, except to offer before Him?
7 “And now, send me at once a man who knows to
work in gold, and in silver, and in bronze, and in iron,
and in purple and crimson and blue, and knowing to
engrave with the skilled men who are with me in
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, whom Dawiḏ my father
has prepared.
8 “And send me cedar, cypress and algum logs from
Leḇanon, for I know that your servants know to cut
timber in Leḇanon. And see, my servants are with
your servants,
9 even to prepare plenty of timber for me, for the
House that I am building is great and marvellous.
10 “And see, I have given servants to you, the hewers
who cut timber, twenty thousand kors of ground
wheat, and twenty thousand kors of barley, and
twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand
baths of oil.”
11 Then Ḥuram the sovereign of Tsor answered in
writing, which he sent to Shelomoh, “Because hWhY
3

2078

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

loves His people, He has made you sovereign over
them.”
12 And Ḥuram said, “Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, who made the shamayim and earth, for He
has given Sovereign Dawiḏ a wise son, knowing
wisdom and understanding, to build a House for hWhY
and a house for his reign!
13 “And now I have sent a skilled man having
understanding, Ḥuram-aḇi,
14 the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and
his father was a man of Tsor, who knows to work in
gold, and in silver, in bronze, in iron, in stone, and in
wood, purple and blue, and in fine linen, and in
crimson, and to make any engraving and to
accomplish any plan that is given to him, with your
skilled men and with the skilled men of my master
Dawiḏ your father.
15 “And now, the wheat and the barley, the oil and
the wine which my master has spoken of, let him send
to his servants.
16 “And let us cut wood from Leḇanon, as much as
you need, and bring it to you in rafts by sea to Yapho,
and you take it up to Yerushalayim.”
17 And Shelomoh numbered all the men, the
strangers who were in the land of Yisra’ĕl, according
to the census in which Dawiḏ his father had
numbered them, and they were found to be one
hundred and fifty-three thousand six hundred.
18 And he made seventy thousand of them to bear
burdens, and eighty thousand hewers in the
mountain, and three thousand six hundred overseers
to make the people work.

3 And Shelomoh began to build the House of hWhY at
Yerushalayim on Mount Moriyah, where He appeared
2079

2 CHRONICLES

to his father Dawiḏ, at the place that Dawiḏ had
prepared on the threshing-floor of Ornan the Yeḇusite.
2 And he began to build on the second day of the
second month in the fourth year of his reign.
3 And these are the foundations which Shelomoh
laid for building the House of Elohim: The length by
ammah according to the former measure were sixty
ammah, and the width twenty ammah.
4 And the porch that was in front was twenty ammah
long according to the breadth of the House, and the
height was one hundred and twenty. And he overlaid
the inside with clean gold.
5 And the great House he panelled with cypress
which he overlaid with fine gold, and he carved palm
trees and chainwork on it.
6 And he covered the House with precious stones
for comeliness, and the gold was gold from
Parwayim.
7 And he overlaid the House, the beams, the
doorposts, and its walls, and its doors with gold, and
carved keruḇim on the walls.
8 And he made the House of the Most Qodesh. Its
length was according to the width of the House,
twenty ammah, and its width twenty ammah. And he
overlaid it with fine gold, six hundred kiḵars.
9 And the weight of the nails was fifty sheqels of
gold. And he overlaid the upper rooms with gold.
10 In the Most Qodesh House he made two keruḇim
of sculptured work, and overlaid them with gold.
11 And the wings of the keruḇim: their length was
twenty ammah, one wing was five ammah, touching
the wall of the room, and the other wing was five
ammah, touching the wing of the other keruḇ,

2080

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

and the wing of the other keruḇ was five ammah,
touching the wall of the room, and the other wing also
was five ammah, touching the wing of the other keruḇ.
13 The wings of these keruḇim spread out twenty
ammah, and they stood on their feet, and they faced
inward.
14 And he made the veil of blue and purple and
crimson and fine linen, and worked keruḇim on it.
15 And at the front of the House he made two
columns thirty-five ammah high, and the capital that
was on the top of each of them was five ammah.
16 And he made wreaths of chainwork, as in the
Speaking Place, and put them on top of the columns.
And he made one hundred pomegranates, and put
them on the wreaths of chainwork.
17 And he put up the columns before the Hĕyḵal, one
on the right and the other on the left, and called the
name of the one on the right Yaḵin, and the name of
the one on the left Bo’az.
12

4 And he made an altar of bronze, twenty ammah
long, and twenty ammah wide, and ten ammah high.
2 And he made the sea of cast metal, ten ammah
from one rim to the other, round all about. And its
height was five ammah, and a line of thirty ammah
measured around it.
3 And figures like oxen were under it, all around it,
ten to an ammah, all the way around the sea. Two
rows of oxen were cast when it was cast.
4 It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, and
three facing west, and three facing south, and three
facing east. And the sea was put upon them, and all
their back parts were inward.

2081

2 CHRONICLES

And it was a tophaḥ thick, and its rim was shaped
like the rim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It held three
thousand baths.
6 And he made ten basins, and put five on the right
side and five on the left, to wash in them. In them they
rinsed off what pertains to the burnt offering, but the
sea was for the kohenim to wash in.
7 And he made ten lampstands of gold according to
their ruling, and put them in the Hĕyḵal, five on the
right side and five on the left.
8 And he made ten tables, and placed them in the
Hĕyḵal, five on the right side and five on the left. And
he made one hundred bowls of gold.
9 And he made the courtyard of the kohenim, and
the great court and doors for the court. And he
overlaid these doors with bronze.
10 And he placed the sea on the right side, eastward
over against the south.
11 And Ḥuram made the pots and the shovels and
the bowls. So Ḥuram completed doing the work that
he was to do for Sovereign Shelomoh for the House
of Elohim:
12 the two columns and the bowl-shaped capitals that
were on top of the two columns, and the two networks
to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals which were on
top of the columns;
13 and four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, two rows of pomegranates for each
network, to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that
were on the columns.
14 And he made stands and the basins on the stands,
15 one sea and twelve oxen under it;
16 and the pots, and the shovels, and the forks. And
all their vessels Ḥuram his master craftsman made of
5

2082

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

polished bronze for Sovereign Shelomoh for the
House of hWhY.
17 On the plain of Yardĕn the sovereign had them
cast in clay moulds, between Sukkoth and
Tserĕḏathah.
18 And Shelomoh made so large a number of all
these vessels that the weight of the bronze was not
searched out.
19 And Shelomoh had all the furnishings made for the
House of Elohim, and the altar of gold and the tables
on which was the showbread,
20 and the lampstands with their lamps of refined
gold, to burn according to Right-Ruling in front of the
Speaking Place,
21 and the blossoms and the lamps and the snuffers
of gold, of perfect gold,
22 and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the ladles,
and the fire holders of refined gold. And the entrance
to the House, its inner doors to the Most Qodesh
Place, and the doors of the Hĕyḵal of the House, were
of gold.

5 And all the work that Shelomoh had done for the
House of hWhY was completed. And Shelomoh
brought in the qodesh items of his father Dawiḏ: the
silver and the gold and all the utensils. And he put
them in the treasuries of the House of Elohim.
2 And Shelomoh assembled the elders of Yisra’ĕl
and all the heads of the tribes, the chief fathers of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, in Yerushalayim, to bring up the
ark of the Covenant of hWhY from the City of Dawiḏ,
which is Tsiyon.
3 And all the men of Yisra’ĕl assembled to the
sovereign at the Festival, which was in the seventh
month.
2083

2 CHRONICLES

And all the elders of Yisra’ĕl came, and the
Lĕwites took up the ark,
5 and they brought up the ark, the Tent of
Appointment, and all the qodesh utensils that were in
the Tent. The Lĕwite kohenim brought them up.
6 And
Sovereign Shelomoh, and all the
congregation of Yisra’ĕl who were assembled to him
before the ark, were slaughtering so many sheep and
cattle that could not be counted or numbered.
7 And the kohenim brought in the ark of the
Covenant of hWhY to its place, into the Speaking
Place of the House, to the Most Qodesh Place, under
the wings of the keruḇim.
8 For the keruḇim spread their wings over the place
of the ark, and the keruḇim covered over the ark and
its poles.
9 And the poles were so long that the ends of the
poles of the ark were seen from in front of the
Speaking Place, but they were not seen from outside.
And they are there to this day.
10 There was naught in the ark but the two tablets
which Mosheh put there at Ḥorĕḇ, when hWhY made
a Covenant with the children of Yisra’ĕl, when they
came out of Mitsrayim.
11 And it came to be when the kohenim came out of
the Most Qodesh Place - for all the kohenim who were
present had qadosh themselves, there was none to
watch by division 12 and the Lĕwite singers, all those of Asaph and
Hĕman and Yeḏuthun, with their sons and their
brothers, stood at the east end of the altar, dressed in
white linen, having cymbals and harps and lyres, and
with them one hundred and twenty kohenim sounding
with trumpets.
4

2084

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

Then it came to be, as the trumpeters and singers
were as one, to make one sound to be heard in
praising and thanking hWhY, and when they lifted up
their voice with the trumpets, and with cymbals, and
with instruments of song, and giving praise to hWhY,
“For He is good, for His kindness is everlasting,” that
the House, the House of hWhY, was filled with a cloud,
14 and the kohenim were unable to stand and
perform the service because of the cloud, for the
esteem of hWhY filled the House of Elohim.
13

6 Then Shelomoh said, “hWhY has said He would
dwell in the thick cloud.
2 “But I have built You an exalted house, and a place
for You to dwell in forever.”
3 And the sovereign turned around and baraḵ all the
assembly of Yisra’ĕl, while all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl
stood.
4 And he said, “Baruḵ be hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl,
who has filled with His hands what He spoke with His
mouth to my father Dawiḏ, saying,
5 ‘From the day that I brought My people out of the
land of Mitsrayim, I have chosen no city from any tribe
of Yisra’ĕl in which to build a House for My Name to
be there, nor did I choose any man to be a leader over
My people Yisra’ĕl.
6 ‘But I have chosen Yerushalayim, for My Name to
be there. And I have chosen Dawiḏ to be over My
people Yisra’ĕl.’
7 “And it was in the heart of my father Dawiḏ to build
a House for the Name of hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
8 “But hWhY said to my father Dawiḏ, ‘Because it
was in your heart to build a House for My Name, you
did well in that it was in your heart.
2085

2 CHRONICLES

‘But you do not build the House, for your son who
comes forth from your loins, he builds the House for
My Name.’
10 “Now hWhY has established His word which He
spoke, and I have been raised up instead of my father
Dawiḏ, and sit on the throne of Yisra’ĕl, as hWhY
promised. And I have built the House for the Name of
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
11 “And there I have placed the ark, in which is the
Covenant of hWhY which He made with the children
of Yisra’ĕl.”
12 And he stood before the altar of hWhY in front of
all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, and spread out his hands
13 for Shelomoh had made a bronze platform five
ammah long, and five ammah broad, and three
ammah high, and had put it in the midst of the court.
And he stood on it, and knelt down on his knees
before all the assembly of Yisra’ĕl, and spread out his
hands toward the shamayim 14 and said, “hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, there is no
Elohim in the shamayim or on earth like You,
guarding the Covenant and kindness with Your
servants who walk before You with all their heart,
15 who has guarded what You promised Your
servant Dawiḏ my father. Indeed, You have both
spoken with Your mouth and have filled it with Your
hand, as it is this day.
16 “And now, hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, guard what
You promised Your servant Dawiḏ my father, saying,
‘There is not to cease a man of yours before Me,
sitting on the throne of Yisra’ĕl - only, if your sons
guard their way, to walk in My Torah as you have
walked before Me.’
9

2086

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

“And now, O hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, let Your
word come true which You have spoken to Your
servant Dawiḏ.
18 “For is it true: Elohim dwells with men on the earth!
See, the shamayim and the shamayim of the
shamayim are unable to contain You, how much less
this House which I have built!
19 “Yet, shall You turn to the prayer of Your servant
and his supplication, O hWhY my Elohim, to listen to
the cry and to the prayer which Your servant is
praying before You?
20 “For Your eyes to be open toward this House day
and night, toward the place You have said to put Your
Name there, to listen to the prayer which Your servant
prays toward this place.
21 “And shall You give heed to the supplications of
Your servant and of Your people Yisra’ĕl, when they
pray toward this place, and hear from Your dwelling
place, in the shamayim, and shall hear and forgive?
22 “If anyone sins against his neighbour, and he has
lifted up an oath on him, to cause him to swear, and
comes and swears before Your altar in this House,
23 then hear in the shamayim, and act, and rightly
rule Your servants, repaying the wicked by bringing
his way on his own head, and declare right the
righteous by giving him according to his
righteousness.
24 “And if Your people Yisra’ĕl are smitten before an
enemy because they have sinned against You, and
they shall turn back and confess Your Name, and
pray and make supplication before You in this House,
25 then hear in the shamayim and forgive the sin of
Your people Yisra’ĕl, and bring them back to the land
which You gave to them and their fathers.
17

2087

2 CHRONICLES

“When the shamayim are shut up and there is no
rain because they have sinned against You, and they
shall pray toward this place and confess Your Name,
and turn from their sin because You afflict them,
27 then hear in the shamayim, and forgive the sin of
Your servants, Your people Yisra’ĕl - for You teach
them the good Way in which they should walk - and
shall send rain on Your land which You have given to
Your people as an inheritance.
28 “When there is scarcity of food in the land; when
there is pestilence or blight or mildew, locusts or
grasshoppers; when their enemies distress them in
the land of their cities; any plague or any sickness;
29 whatever prayer, whatever supplication is made
by anyone, or by all Your people Yisra’ĕl, when, each
one knows his own plague and his own grief, and
spreads out his hands to this house,
30 then hear from the shamayim Your dwelling place,
and forgive, and give to everyone according to all his
ways, whose heart You know - for You alone know
the hearts of the sons of men 31 so that they revere You, to walk in Your Ways as
long as they live in the land which You gave to our
fathers.
32 “Also, concerning a foreigner, who is not of Your
people Yisra’ĕl, but who comes from a far land for the
sake of Your great Name and Your strong hand and
Your outstretched arm, when they come and pray in
this House,
33 then hear from the shamayim Your dwelling place,
and do according to all which the foreigner calls to
You for, so that all the people of the earth know Your
Name and revere You, as do Your people Yisra’ĕl,
and to know that this House which I have built is
called by Your Name.
26

2088

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

“When Your people go out to battle against their
enemies, in the way that You send them, and they
shall pray to You toward this city which You have
chosen and toward the House which I have built for
Your Name,
35 then shall You hear from the shamayim their
prayer and their supplication, and maintain their
cause?
36 “When they sin against You - for there is no one
who does not sin - and You become enraged with
them and give them to the enemy, and they take them
captive to a land far or near,
37 and they shall turn back unto their heart, in the
land where they have been taken captive, and shall
turn, and make supplication to You in the land of their
captivity, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have acted
wickedly, and have done wickedness,’
38 and when they return to You with all their heart and
with all their being in the land of their captivity, where
they have taken them captive, and they shall pray
toward their land which You gave to their fathers, and
the city which You have chosen, and toward the
House which I have built for Your Name,
39 then shall You hear from the shamayim, Your
dwelling place, their prayer and their supplications,
and maintain their cause, and forgive Your people
who have sinned against You?
40 “Now, my Elohim, I pray, let Your eyes be open
and let Your ears be attentive to the prayer of this
place.
41 “And now, arise, O hWhY Elohim, to Your resting
place, You and the ark of Your strength. Let Your
kohenim, O hWhY Elohim, be robed with deliverance,
and let Your kind ones rejoice in goodness.
34

2089

2 CHRONICLES

“O hWhY Elohim, do not turn away the face of Your
anointed; remember the kind acts of Your servant
Dawiḏ.”

42

7 And when Shelomoh had ended praying, fire came
down from the shamayim and consumed the burnt
offering and the slaughterings. And the esteem of
hWhY filled the House.
2 And the kohenim were unable to enter the House
of hWhY, because the esteem of HWHY had filled the
House of hWhY.
3 And all the children of Yisra’ĕl saw how the fire
came down, and the esteem of hWhY on the House,
and they bowed their faces to the ground on the
pavement, and did obeisance and gave thanks to
hWhY, saying, “For He is good, for His kindness is
everlasting.”
4 And the sovereign and all the people were making
offerings before hWhY.
5 And Sovereign Shelomoh made an offering of
twenty-two thousand bulls and one hundred and
twenty thousand sheep. Thus the sovereign and all
the people dedicated the House of Elohim.
6 And the kohenim were standing over their duties,
and the Lĕwites with instruments of the song to hWhY,
which Sovereign Dawiḏ had made to give thanks to
hWhY, saying, “For His kindness is everlasting,”
whenever Dawiḏ praised by their hand. And the
kohenim were blowing trumpets before them, and all
Yisra’ĕl were standing.
7 And Shelomoh qadosh the middle of the courtyard
that was in front of the House of hWhY, for there he
made burnt offerings and the fat of the peace
offerings, because the bronze altar which Shelomoh
2090

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

had made was not able to contain the burnt offerings
and the grain offerings and the fat.
8 And Shelomoh at that time observed the Festival
seven days, and all Yisra’ĕl with him, a very great
assembly from the entrance of Ḥamath to the wadi of
Mitsrayim.
9 And on the eighth day they held an assembly, for
they performed the dedication of the altar seven days,
and the Festival seven days.
10 And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month
he sent the people away to their tents, rejoicing and
glad of heart for the goodness that hWhY had done for
Dawiḏ, and for Shelomoh, and for His people Yisra’ĕl.
11 Thus Shelomoh finished the House of hWhY and
the sovereign’s house. And all that came into the
heart of Shelomoh to do in the House of hWhY and in
his own house, he prosperously executed.
12 And HWHY appeared to Shelomoh by night, and
said to him, “I have heard your prayer, and have
chosen this place for Myself as a House of
slaughtering.
13 “If I shut up the shamayim and there is no rain, or
if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I
send pestilence among My people,
14 and My people upon whom My Name is called,
shall humble themselves, and pray and seek My face,
and turn from their evil ways, then I shall hear from
the shamayim, and forgive their sin and heal their
land.
15 “Now, My eyes are open and My ears attentive to
the prayer of this place.
16 “And now, I have chosen and qadosh this house
for My Name to be there forever. And My eyes and
My heart shall always be there.
2091

2 CHRONICLES

“And you, if you walk before Me as your father
Dawiḏ walked, and do according to all that I have
commanded you, and if you guard My Laws and My
Right-Rulings,
18 then I shall establish the throne of your reign, as I
covenanted with Dawiḏ your father, saying, ‘There is
not to cease a man of yours as ruler in Yisra’ĕl.’
19 “But if you turn away and forsake My Laws and My
Commands which I have put before you, and shall go
and serve other mighty ones, and bow yourself to
them,
20 then I shall pluck them from My land, which I have
given them, and this House which I have qadosh for
My Name I shall cast out of My sight and make it to
be a proverb and a mockery among all peoples.
21 “And this House, which has been exalted,
everyone who passes by it shall be astonished and
say, ‘Why has hWhY done thus to this land and this
House?’
22 “Then they shall say, ‘Because they forsook hWhY
Elohim of their fathers, who brought them out of the
land of Mitsrayim, and embraced other mighty ones,
and bowed themselves to them and served them,
therefore He has brought all this evil on them.’ ”
17

8 And it came to be at the end of twenty years, that
Shelomoh had built the House of HWHY, and his own
house.
2 As to the cities which Ḥuram had given to
Shelomoh, Shelomoh had built them, and he settled
the children of Yisra’ĕl there.
3 And Shelomoh went to Ḥamath Tsoḇah and
seized it.
4 And he built Taḏmor in the wilderness, and all the
storage cities which he built in Ḥamath.
2092

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he built Upper Bĕyth Ḥoron and Lower Bĕyth
Ḥoron, cities of defence, with walls, gates, and bars,
6 also Ba’alath and all the storage cities that
Shelomoh had, and all the chariot cities and the cities
of the cavalry, and all that Shelomoh desired to build
in Yerushalayim, and in Leḇanon, and in all the land
of his rule.
7 All the people who were left of the Ḥittites, and the
Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Ḥiwwites, and
the Yeḇusites, who were not of Yisra’ĕl 8 their descendants who were left in the land after
them, whom the children of Yisra’ĕl did not destroy from these Shelomoh raised compulsory labour, as it
is to this day.
9 And Shelomoh did not make slaves of the children
of Yisra’ĕl for his work, but they were men of battle,
and chiefs of his officers, and commanders of his
chariots, and his cavalry.
10 And these were the chiefs of the officials of
Sovereign Shelomoh: two hundred and fifty, who
ruled over the people.
11 And Shelomoh brought the daughter of Pharaoh
up from the City of Dawiḏ to the house he had built
for her, for he said, “My wife does not dwell in the
house of Dawiḏ sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, for where the
ark of hWhY has come, is qodesh.”
12 Then Shelomoh offered burnt offerings to hWhY on
the altar of hWhY which he had built before the porch,
13 even as the duty of every day required, offering
according to the command of Mosheh, for the
Shabbathoth, and for the New Moons, and for the
Appointed Times three times a year: the Festival of
Matstsoth, and the Festival of Shaḇuoth, and the
Festival of Sukkoth.
5

2093

2 CHRONICLES

And according to the ruling of Dawiḏ his father, he
appointed the divisions of the kohenim for their
service, the Lĕwites for their duties, to praise and
serve before the kohenim, as the duty of each day
required, and the gatekeepers by their divisions at
each gate, for so was the command of Dawiḏ the man
of Elohim.
15 And they did not turn aside from the command of
the sovereign to the kohenim and Lĕwites concerning
any matter or concerning the treasuries.
16 And all the work of Shelomoh was prepared from
the day of the foundation of the House of hWhY until
it was completed. And the House of hWhY was
perfected.
17 Then Shelomoh went to Etsyon Geḇer and Ĕyloth
on the seacoast, in the land of Eḏom.
18 And Ḥuram sent him ships by the hand of his
servants, and servants who knew the sea. And they
went with the servants of Shelomoh to Ophir, and
took four hundred and fifty kiḵars of gold from there,
and brought it to Sovereign Shelomoh.
14

9 And the sovereigness of Sheḇa heard of the report
of Shelomoh, and came to Yerushalayim to try
Shelomoh with hard questions, with a very great
company, and camels bearing spices, and much gold,
and precious stones. And she came to Shelomoh, and
she spoke with him about all that was in her heart.
2 And Shelomoh answered all her questions. And
there was no matter hidden for Shelomoh which he
did not make known to her.
3 And the sovereigness of Sheḇa saw the wisdom
of Shelomoh, and the house that he had built,
4 and the food on his table, and the seating of his
servants, and the service of his waiters and their
2094

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

attire, and his cupbearers and their attire, and his
burnt offerings that he offered up in the House of
hWhY, and there was no more spirit in her.
5 Then she said to the sovereign, “True was the
word I heard in my own land about your words and
your wisdom.
6 “But I did not believe their words until I came and
saw with my own eyes. And see, I have not been told
the half of the greatness of your wisdom! You exceed
the report which I heard.
7 “Baruḵ are your men and baruḵ are these your
servants, who stand continually before you and hear
your wisdom!
8 “Baruḵ be hWhY your Elohim, who delighted in
you, to put you on His throne to be sovereign for hWhY
your Elohim! Because your Elohim has loved Yisra’ĕl,
to establish them forever, therefore He made you
sovereign over them, to do right-ruling and
righteousness.”
9 And she gave the sovereign one hundred and
twenty kiḵars of gold, and very many spices, and
precious stones. And there has not been any spices
such as those the sovereigness of Sheḇa gave to
Sovereign Shelomoh.
10 And also, the servants of Ḥuram and the servants
of Shelomoh, who brought gold from Ophir, brought
algum wood and precious stones.
11 And the sovereign made stairs of the algum wood
for the House of hWhY and for the sovereign’s house,
also lyres and harps for singers. And there was never
seen the like of them before in the land of Yahuḏah.
12 And
Sovereign Shelomoh gave to the
sovereigness of Sheḇa all she desired, whatever she
asked, besides that which she had brought to the
2095

2 CHRONICLES

sovereign. And she turned and went to her own land,
she and her servants.
13 And the weight of gold that came to Shelomoh
yearly was six hundred and sixty-six kiḵars of gold,
14 besides that which the merchants and traders
brought. And all the sovereigns of Araḇia and
governors of the land were bringing gold and silver to
Shelomoh.
15 And Sovereign Shelomoh made two hundred
large shields of beaten gold - six hundred pieces of
beaten gold went into each shield,
16 and three hundred shields of beaten gold - three
hundred pieces of gold went unto each shield. And
the sovereign put them in the House of the Forest of
Leḇanon.
17 And the sovereign, made a great throne of ivory,
and overlaid it with clean gold,
18 and six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fastened to the throne; and there were
armrests on either side of the place of the seat, and
two lions stood beside the armrests.
19 And twelve lions were standing there, one on each
side of the six steps. The like of it was not in any reign.
20 And all the drinking vessels of Sovereign
Shelomoh were of gold, and all the vessels of the
House of the Forest of Leḇanon were of refined gold
- silver was reckoned of little value in the days of
Shelomoh.
21 For the sovereign’s ships went to Tarshish with the
servants of Ḥuram. Once in three years the ships of
Tarshish came, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, apes,
and baboons.
22 And Sovereign Shelomoh became greater than all
the sovereigns of the earth in riches and wisdom.
2096

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And all the sovereigns of the earth sought the
presence of Shelomoh to hear his wisdom, which
Elohim had put in his heart.
24 And each man brought his present: objects of
silver, and objects of gold, and garments, and armour,
and spices, horses and mules, the matter of a year by
year.
25 And Shelomoh had four thousand stalls for horses
and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen whom
he stationed in the chariot cities and with the
sovereign at Yerushalayim.
26 And he ruled over all the sovereigns from the River
to the land of the Pelishtites, as far as the border of
Mitsrayim.
27 And the sovereign made silver in Yerushalayim as
the stones, and he made cedar trees as plenty as the
sycamores which are in the low country.
28 And they were bringing horses to Shelomoh from
Mitsrayim and from all lands.
29 And the rest of the acts of Shelomoh, first and last,
are they not written in the book of Nathan the naḇi,
and in the neḇuah of Aḥiyahu the Shilonite, and in the
visions of Iddo the seer concerning Yaroḇ’am son of
Neḇat?
30 And Shelomoh reigned in Yerushalayim over all
Yisra’ĕl forty years.
31 So Shelomoh slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the City of Dawiḏ his father. And Reḥaḇ’am
his son reigned in his place.
23

10 And Reḥaḇ’am went to Sheḵem, for all Yisra’ĕl
had gone to Sheḵem to appoint him to reign.
2 And it came to be, when Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat
heard it - he was in Mitsrayim where he had fled from
2097

2 CHRONICLES

the presence of Shelomoh the sovereign - that
Yaroḇ’am returned from Mitsrayim.
3 So they sent for him and called him. And Yaroḇ’am
and all Yisra’ĕl came and spoke to Reḥaḇ’am, saying,
4 “Your father made our yoke hard, and now, lighten
the hard service of your father and his heavy yoke
which he put on us, then we shall serve you.”
5 And he said to them, “Come back to me after three
days.” And the people went.
6 Then Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am consulted the elders
who stood before his father Shelomoh while he still
lived, saying, “What do you advise me to answer
these people?”
7 And they spoke to him, saying, “If you are good to
these people, and shall please them, and speak good
words to them, they shall be your servants all the
days.”
8 But he ignored the advice the elders gave him, and
consulted the young men who had grown up with him,
who stood before him.
9 And he said to them, “What advice do you give?
How should we answer this people who have spoken
to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke which your father put
on us’?”
10 And the young men who had grown up with him
spoke to him, saying, “Say this to the people who
have spoken to you, saying, ‘Your father made our
yoke heavy, but you make it lighter on us.’ Say this to
them, ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s waist!
11 ‘And now, my father put a heavy yoke on you, but
I, I add to your yoke; my father chastised you with
whips, but I with scourges!’ ”
12 So Yaroḇ’am and all the people came to
Reḥaḇ’am on the third day, as the sovereign
2098

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

commanded, saying, “Come back to me the third
day.”
13 And the sovereign answered them harshly. Thus
Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am ignored the advice of the elders,
14 and spoke to them according to the advice of the
young men, saying, “My father made your yoke
heavy, but I, I add to it; my father chastised you with
whips, but I with scourges!”
15 So the sovereign did not listen to the people, for
the turn of events was from Elohim, in order for hWhY
to establish His word, which He had spoken by the
hand of Aḥiyahu the Shilonite to Yaroḇ’am son of
Neḇat.
16 And when all Yisra’ĕl saw that the sovereign did
not listen to them, the people answered the
sovereign, saying, “What portion have we in Dawiḏ?
And we have no inheritance in the son of Yishai.
Every man to your mighty ones, O Yisra’ĕl! Now see
to your own house, O Dawiḏ!” So all Yisra’ĕl went to
their tents.
17 But as for the children of Yisra’ĕl who dwelt in the
cities of Yahuḏah, Reḥaḇ’am reigned over them.
18 Then Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am sent Haḏoram, who
was over the compulsory labour, and the children of
Yisra’ĕl stoned him with stones, and he died. And
Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am hastily mounted his chariot to
flee to Yerushalayim.
19 Thus Yisra’ĕl revolted against the house of Dawiḏ
to this day.

11 And when Reḥaḇ’am came to Yerushalayim, he
assembled from the house of Yahuḏah and Binyamin
one hundred and eighty thousand men of battle to fight
against Yisra’ĕl, to bring back the reign to Reḥaḇ’am.
2099

2 CHRONICLES

But the word of hWhY came to Shemayahu the
man of Elohim, saying,
3 “Speak to Reḥaḇ’am son of Shelomoh, sovereign
of Yahuḏah, and to all Yisrael in Yahuḏah and
Binyamin, saying,
4 ‘Thus said hWhY, “Do no go up or fight against your
brothers! Let every man return to his house, for this
matter is from Me.” ’ ” So they obeyed the words of
hWhY, and turned back from going against Yaroḇ’am.
5 And Reḥaḇ’am dwelt in Yerushalayim, and built
cities for a defence in Yahuḏah.
6 And he built Bĕyth Leḥem, and Ĕytam, and
Teqowa,
7 and Bĕyth Tsur, and Soḵo, and Aḏullam,
8 and Gath, and Marĕshah, and Ziph,
9 and Aḏorayim, and Laḵish, and Azĕqah,
10 and Tsor’ah, and Ayalon, and Ḥeḇron, which are
in Yahuḏah and Binyamin, cities of defence.
11 And he strengthened the strongholds, and put
commanders in them, and stores of food, and oil, and
wine,
12 and shields and spears in every city, and made
them very strong. Thus Yahuḏah and Binyamin were
his.
13 And from all their borders the kohenim and the
Lĕwites who were in all Yisra’ĕl took their stand with
him.
14 For the Lĕwites left their open lands and their
possessions and came to Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, for Yaroḇ’am and his sons had
rejected them from serving as kohenim unto hWhY,
15 as he appointed for himself priests for the high
places, and for demons, and the calf idols which he
had made.
2

2100

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And after the Lĕwites left, those from all the tribes
of Yisra’ĕl, such as applied their heart to seek hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, came to Yerushalayim to offer to
hWhY Elohim of their fathers.
17 And they strengthened the reign of Yahuḏah, and
made Reḥaḇ’am son of Shelomoh strong for three
years, for they walked in the way of Dawiḏ and
Shelomoh for three years.
18 And Reḥaḇ’am took for himself as wife Maḥalath
the daughter of Yerimoth son of Dawiḏ, and of
Aḇiḥayil the daughter of Eliyaḇ son of Yishai.
19 And she bore him sons: Ye’ush, and Shemaryah,
and Zaham.
20 And after her he took Ma’aḵah the granddaughter
of Aḇshalom. And she bore him Aḇiyah, and Attai,
and Ziza, and Shelomith.
21 And Reḥaḇ’am loved Ma’aḵah the granddaughter
of Aḇshalom more than all his wives and his
concubines. For he had taken eighteen wives and
sixty concubines, and brought forth twenty-eight sons
and sixty daughters.
22 And Reḥaḇ’am appointed Aḇiyah son of Ma’aḵah
as chief, to be leader among his brothers, in order to
make him reign.
23 And he had understanding, and dispersed some
of his sons throughout all the lands of Yahuḏah and
Binyamin, to all the cities of defence, and gave them
ample provision. And he sought many wives.
16

12 And it came to be, when Reḥaḇ’am had
established the reign and had strengthened himself,
that he forsook the Torah of hWhY, and all Yisra’ĕl with
him.
2 And it came to be, in the fifth year of Sovereign
Reḥaḇ’am, that Shishaq sovereign of Mitsrayim came
2101

2 CHRONICLES

up against Yerushalayim - because they had
trespassed against HWHY 3 with twelve hundred chariots, and sixty thousand
horsemen, and innumerable people who came with
him out of Mitsrayim: the Luḇim, the Sukkites and the
Kushites.
4 And he took the cities of defence of Yahuḏah and
came to Yerushalayim.
5 And Shemayah the naḇi came to Reḥaḇ’am and
the rulers of Yahuḏah, who had been gathered in
Yerushalayim because of Shishaq, and said to them,
“Thus said HWHY, ‘You have forsaken Me, and
therefore I also have left you in the hand of Shishaq.’
”
6 Then the rulers of Yisra’ĕl and the sovereign
humbled themselves, and they said, “hWhY is
righteous.”
7 And when hWhY saw that they humbled
themselves, the word of hWhY came to Shemayah,
saying, “They have humbled themselves. I do not
destroy them, but I shall give to them some
deliverance, and not pour out My wrath on
Yerushalayim by the hand of Shishaq,
8 but they are to become his servants, so that they
know My service and the service of the reigns of the
lands.”
9 And Shishaq sovereign of Mitsrayim came up
against Yerushalayim, and took away the treasures
of the House of hWhY and the treasures of the
sovereign’s house. He took all, he also took the gold
shields which Shelomoh had made.
10 And Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am made bronze shields to
replace them and committed them into the hands of
the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the entrance of
the sovereign’s house.
2102

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And it came to be, whenever the sovereign went
into the House of hWhY, the guard would go and bring
them out, then they would take them back into the
guardroom.
12 And when he humbled himself, the wrath of hWhY
turned from him, so as not to destroy him completely.
And matters also went well in Yahuḏah.
13 So Sovereign Reḥaḇ’am strengthened himself in
Yerushalayim and reigned. For Reḥaḇ’am was fortyone years old when he became sovereign, and he
reigned seventeen years in Yerushalayim, the city
which hWhY had chosen out of all the tribes of
Yisra’ĕl, to put His Name there. And his mother’s
name was Na’amah, the Ammonitess.
14 And he did evil, because he did not prepare his
heart to seek hWhY.
15 And the acts of Reḥaḇ’am, the first and the last,
are they not written in the book of Shemayah the naḇi,
and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And
there was fighting between Reḥaḇ’am and Yaroḇ’am
all the days.
16 So Reḥaḇ’am slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the City of Dawiḏ. And Aḇiyah his son
reigned in his place.
11

13 In the eighteenth year of Sovereign Yaroḇ’am,
Aḇiyah began to reign over Yahuḏah.
2 He reigned three years in Yerushalayim. And his
mother’s name was Miḵayahu the daughter of Uri’ĕl
of Giḇ’ah. And there was fighting between Aḇiyah and
Yaroḇ’am.
3 And Aḇiyah joined the battle with an army of
mighty men of battle, four hundred thousand choice
men. And Yaroḇ’am drew up in battle formation
2103

2 CHRONICLES

against him with eight hundred thousand choice men,
mighty brave men.
4 And Aḇiyah stood on Mount Tsemarayim, which is
in the mountains of Ephrayim, and said, “Hear me,
Yaroḇ’am and all Yisra’ĕl:
5 “Do you not know that hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl has
given the reign over Yisra’ĕl to Dawiḏ forever, to him
and his sons, by a covenant of salt?
6 “Yet Yaroḇ’am son of Neḇat, the servant of
Shelomoh son of Dawiḏ, rose up and rebelled against
his master.
7 “And vain men gathered to him, sons of Beliya’al,
and strengthened themselves against Reḥaḇ’am son
of Shelomoh, when Reḥaḇ’am was young and tender
of heart and could not stand against them.
8 “And now you think to stand against the reign of
hWhY, which is in the hand of the sons of Dawiḏ. And
you are a large crowd, and with you are the gold
calves which Yaroḇ’am made for you as mighty ones.
9 “Have you not thrown out the kohenim of hWhY,
the sons of Aharon, and the Lĕwites, and made for
yourselves priests, like the peoples of the lands, so
that whoever comes to ordain himself with a young
bull and seven rams then becomes a priest of nonmighty ones?
10 “But as for us, hWhY is our Elohim, and we have
not forsaken Him, and kohenim are serving hWhY, the
sons of Aharon and the Lĕwites, in the work,
11 and are burning to HWHY every morning and every
evening burnt offerings and sweet incense, and the
showbread is put on the clean table, and the
lampstand of gold with its lamps to burn every
evening, for we are guarding the Charge of HWHY our
Elohim. But you have forsaken Him.
2104

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

“And see, with us as Head is Elohim Himself, and
His kohenim with sounding trumpets to sound the
alarm against you. O children of Yisra’ĕl, do not fight
against HWHY Elohim of your fathers, for you are not
going to prosper!”
13 But Yaroḇ’am sent round an ambush to go behind
them, so they were in front of Yahuḏah, and the
ambush was behind them.
14 And Yahuḏah turned and saw the battle was both
in front and behind them. Then they cried out to HWHY,
and the kohenim sounded the trumpets.
15 And the men of Yahuḏah gave a shout. And it
came to be, as the men of Yahuḏah shouted, that
Elohim smote Yaroḇ’am and all Yisra’ĕl before Aḇiyah
and Yahuḏah.
16 And the children of Yisra’ĕl fled before Yahuḏah,
and Elohim gave them into their hand.
17 And Aḇiyah and his people smote them with a
great smiting, and five hundred thousand choice men
of Yisra’ĕl fell slain.
18 And the children of Yisra’ĕl were humbled at that
time, while the children of Yahuḏah prevailed,
because they relied on HWHY Elohim of their fathers.
19 And Aḇiyah pursued Yaroḇ’am and captured cities
from him: Bĕyth Ĕl with its villages, and Yeshanah
with its villages, and Ephron with its villages.
20 And Yaroḇ’am did not regain power again in the
days of Aḇiyahu. And HWHY smote him, and he died.
21 But Aḇiyah grew strong, and took fourteen wives,
and brought forth twenty-two sons and sixteen
daughters.
22 And the rest of the acts of Aḇiyah, and his ways,
and his words are written in the commentary of the
naḇi Iddo.
12

2105

2 CHRONICLES

14 So Aḇiyah slept with his fathers, and they buried
him in the City of Dawiḏ. And Asa his son reigned in
his place. In his days the land rested ten years.
2 And Asa did what was good and what was right in
the eyes of hWhY his Elohim,
3 and removed the altars of the stranger, and the
high places, and broke down the pillars and cut down
the Ashĕrim,
4 and commanded Yahuḏah to seek hWhY Elohim
of their fathers, and to do the Torah and the
Command.
5 And he removed the high places and the sunpillars from all the cities of Yahuḏah, and the reign
rested under him.
6 And he built cities of defence in Yahuḏah, since
the land had rest and he had no fighting in those
years, because hWhY had given him rest.
7 And he said to Yahuḏah, “Let us build these cities
and make walls around them, and towers, gates, and
bars, while the land is yet before us, because we have
sought hWhY our Elohim. We have sought, and He
has given us rest all around.” So they built and
prospered.
8 And Asa had an army of three hundred thousand
men from Yahuḏah bearing shields and spears, and
from Binyamin two hundred and eighty thousand men
bearing shields and drew bows. All of them were
mighty brave men.
9 And Zeraḥ the Kushite came out against them with
an army of a million men and three hundred chariots,
and he came to Marĕshah.
10 And Asa went out against him, and they prepared
in battle array in the Valley of Tsephathah at
Marĕshah.
2106

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And Asa called to hWhY his Elohim, and said,
“hWhY, there is no one but You to help between the
mighty and the powerless. Help us, O hWhY our
Elohim, for we rest on You, and in Your Name we go
against this crowd. O hWhY, You are our Elohim, do
not let man prevail against You!”
12 So hWhY smote the Kushites before Asa and
Yahuḏah, and the Kushites fled.
13 And Asa and the people who were with him
pursued them to Gerar. And the Kushites fell, until
none was left alive for them, for they were broken
before hWhY and His army. And they took very much
spoil,
14 and smote all the cities around Gerar, for the fear
of hWhY came upon them. And they plundered all the
cities, for there was exceedingly much spoil in them.
15 And they also smote the camps of the herdsmen,
and captured many sheep and camels, and returned
to Yerushalayim.
11

15 And the Ruaḥ of Elohim came upon Azaryahu
son of Oḏĕḏ.
2 And he went out to face Asa, and said to him,
“Hear me, Asa, and all Yahuḏah and Binyamin. hWhY
is with you while you are with Him. And if you seek
Him, He is found by you, but if you forsake Him, He
forsakes you.
3 “And for many days Yisra’ĕl has been without the
true Elohim, and without a Torah kohĕn, and without
Torah.
4 “But in their distress they turned to hWhY Elohim
of Yisra’ĕl, and they sought Him, and He was found
by them.

2107

2 CHRONICLES

“And in those days there was no peace to the one
who went out, nor to the one who came in, for great
disturbances were on all the inhabitants of the lands,
6 and they were beaten down, nation by nation, and
city by city, for Elohim troubled them with every
distress.
7 “But you, be strong and do not let your hands be
feeble, for there is a reward for your work!”
8 And when Asa heard these words and the neḇuah
of Oḏĕḏ the naḇi, he took courage, and removed the
abominations from all the land of Yahuḏah and
Binyamin and from the cities which he had taken in
the mountains of Ephrayim, and restored the altar of
hWhY that was before the porch of hWhY,
9 and gathered all Yahuḏah and Binyamin, and
those who sojourned with them from Ephrayim, and
Menashsheh, and Shim’on, for they came over to him
in great numbers from Yisra’ĕl when they saw that
hWhY his Elohim was with him.
10 And they gathered together at Yerushalayim in the
third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa,
11 and offered to hWhY on that day seven hundred
bulls and seven thousand sheep from the spoil which
they had brought.
12 And they entered into a covenant to seek hWhY
Elohim of their fathers with all their heart and with all
their being;
13 and whoever would not seek hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl would be put to death, from small to great,
from man to woman.
14 And they swore to hWhY with a loud voice, with
shouting and with trumpets and with rams’ horns.
15 And all Yahuḏah rejoiced concerning the oath, for
they had sworn with all their heart and sought Him
5

2108

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

with all their being. And He was found by them, and
hWhY gave them rest all around.
16 And he also removed Ma’aḵah, the mother of Asa
the sovereign, from being sovereigness mother,
because she had made an abominable image of
Ashĕrah. And Asa cut down her abominable image,
and crushed it, and burned it by the wadi Qiḏron.
17 Yet the high places were not removed from
Yisra’ĕl. However, the heart of Asa was perfect all his
days.
18 And he brought into the House of Elohim the
qodesh items of his father and his own qodesh items:
silver and gold and utensils.
19 And there was no more fighting until the thirty-fifth
year of the reign of Asa.

16 In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa,
Ba’asha the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl came up against
Yahuḏah and built Ramah, to prevent anyone going
out or coming in to Asa, sovereign of Yahuḏah.
2 And Asa brought silver and gold from the
treasuries of the House of hWhY and of the
sovereign’s house, and sent to Ben-Haḏaḏ sovereign
of Aram, who dwelt in Darmeseq, saying,
3 “Let there be a covenant between you and me, as
there was between my father and your father. See, I
have sent you silver and gold. Come, break your
covenant with Ba’asha sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, so that
he withdraws from me.”
4 And Ben-Haḏaḏ listened to Sovereign Asa and
sent the commanders of his armies against the cities
of Yisra’ĕl, and they smote Iyon, and Dan, and Aḇĕl
Mayim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali.
5 And it came to be, when Ba’asha heard it, that he
stopped building Ramah and ceased his work.
2109

2 CHRONICLES

Then Asa the sovereign brought all Yahuḏah, and
they took away the stones and timber of Ramah,
which Ba’asha had used for building. And with them
he built Geḇa and Mitspah.
7 And at that time Ḥanani the seer came to Asa
sovereign of Yahuḏah, and said to him, “Because you
have relied on the sovereign of Aram, and have not
relied on hWhY your Elohim, therefore the army of the
sovereign of Aram has escaped from your hand.
8 “Were the Kushites and the Luḇim not a mighty
army with very many chariots and horsemen? And
because you relied on hWhY, He gave them into your
hand.
9 “For the eyes of hWhY diligently search throughout
all the earth, to show Himself strong on behalf of
those whose heart is perfect to Him. You have acted
foolishly in this, so from now on you shall have
battles.”
10 And Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in
prison, enraged at him because of this. And Asa
oppressed some of the people at that time.
11 And look, the acts of Asa, the first and the last,
see, they are written in the book of the sovereigns of
Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl.
12 And in the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa
became diseased in his feet, and his disease was
severe. Yet even in his disease he did not seek hWhY,
but the physicians.
13 So Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the fortyfirst year of his reign.
14 And they buried him in his own tomb, which he had
made for himself in the City of Dawiḏ. And they laid
him in the bed which was filled with spices and
various kinds of ointments mixed by the perfumer’s
skill. And they made a very great burning for him.
6

2110

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

17 And Yahoshaphat his son reigned in his place,
and strengthened himself against Yisra’ĕl,
2 and placed an army in all the walled cities of
Yahuḏah, and put watch-posts in the land of Yahuḏah
and in the cities of Ephrayim which Asa his father had
taken.
3 And hWhY was with Yahoshaphat, for he walked in
the former ways of his father Dawiḏ, and did not seek
the Ba’als,
4 but sought the Elohim of his father, and walked in
His Commands and not according to the deeds of
Yisra’ĕl.
5 So hWhY established the reign in his hand. And all
Yahuḏah gave presents to Yahoshaphat, and he had
great riches and esteem.
6 And his heart was exalted in the Ways of hWhY,
and he again removed the high places and the
Ashĕrim from Yahuḏah.
7 And in the third year of his reign he sent his
leaders, Ben-Ḥayil, and Oḇaḏyah, and Zeḵaryah, and
Nethan’ĕl, and Miḵayahu, to teach in the cities of
Yahuḏah.
8 And with them he sent Lĕwites: Shemayahu, and
Nethanyahu, and Zeḇaḏyahu, and Asah’ĕl, and
Shemiramoth, and Yahonathan, and Aḏoniyahu, and
Toḇiyahu, and Toḇaḏoniyah, the Lĕwites, and with
them Elishama and Yahoram, the kohenim.
9 And they taught in Yahuḏah, and with them was
the Book of the Torah of hWhY. And they went around
into all the cities of Yahuḏah and taught the people.
10 And the fear of hWhY fell on all the reigns of the
lands that were around Yahuḏah, and they did not
fight against Yahoshaphat.
2111

2 CHRONICLES

And some of the Pelishtites brought Yahoshaphat
gifts and a load of silver. And the Araḇians brought
him flocks, seven thousand seven hundred rams and
seven thousand seven hundred male goats.
12 And Yahoshaphat became increasingly great, and
he built palaces and storage cities in Yahuḏah.
13 And he had much work in the cities of Yahuḏah.
And the men of battle, mighty brave men, were in
Yerushalayim.
14 And these were their numbers, according to their
fathers’ houses: Of Yahuḏah, the commanders of
thousands: Aḏnah the commander, and with him
three hundred thousand mighty brave men;
15 and next to him was Yahoḥanan the commander,
and with him two hundred and eighty thousand;
16 and next to him was Amasyah son of Ziḵri, who
volunteered himself to hWhY, and with him two
hundred thousand mighty brave men.
17 And of Binyamin: Elyaḏa, a mighty brave one, and
with him two hundred thousand men armed with bow
and shield;
18 and next to him was Yahozaḇaḏ, and with him one
hundred and eighty thousand prepared for battle.
19 These were the ones serving the sovereign,
besides those whom the sovereign put in the walled
cities throughout all Yahuḏah.
11

18 And Yahoshaphat had great riches and esteem,
and allied himself with Aḥaḇ by marriage.
2 And some years later he went down to visit Aḥaḇ
in Shomeron. And Aḥaḇ slaughtered many sheep and
cattle for him and the people with him, and incited him
to go up with him to Ramoth Gil’aḏ.
3 And
Aḥaḇ sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to
Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah, “Do you go with
2112

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

me against Ramoth Gil’aḏ?” And he answered him, “I
am as you are, and my people as your people, even
with you in battle.”
4 And Yahoshaphat said to the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl,
“Please inquire for the word of hWhY today.”
5 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl gathered the neḇi’im
together, four hundred men, and said to them, “Do we
go against Ramoth Gil’aḏ to battle, or do I refrain?”
And they said, “Go up, for Elohim gives it into the
sovereign’s hand.”
6 But Yahoshaphat said, “Is there not still a naḇi of
hWhY here, so that we inquire of him?”
7 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to Yahoshaphat,
“There is still one man to inquire of hWhY from him;
but I hate him, because he never naḇa good
concerning me, but always evil. He is Miḵayahu, the
son of Yimla.” And Yahoshaphat said, “Let not the
sovereign say so!”
8 So the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl called one of his
officers and said, “Bring Miḵayahu son of Yimla at
once!”
9 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and Yahoshaphat
the sovereign of Yahuḏah, dressed in their robes, sat
each on his throne. And they sat at a threshing-floor
at the entrance of the gate of Shomeron. And all the
neḇi’im naḇu before them.
10 And Tsiḏqiyahu son of Kena’anah had made
horns of iron for himself, and said, “Thus said hWhY,
‘With these you push the Arameans until they are
destroyed.’ ”
11 And all the neḇi’im naḇu so, saying, “Go up to
Ramoth Gil’aḏ and prosper, and hWhY shall give it into
the hand of the sovereign.”
12 And the messenger who had gone to call
Miḵayahu spoke to him, saying, “See, the words of
2113

2 CHRONICLES

the neḇi’im with one mouth are good towards the
sovereign. So please let your word be like the word of
one of them, and you shall speak good.”
13 And Miḵayahu said, “As hWhY lives, whatever my
Elohim says, that I speak.”
14 And he came to the sovereign. And the sovereign
said to him, “Miḵayahu, do we go against Ramoth
Gil’aḏ to battle, or do I refrain?” And he said, “Go and
prosper, and they are given into your hand!”
15 And the sovereign said to him, “How many times
have I made you swear that you do not speak to me,
except the truth, in the Name of hWhY?”
16 So he said, “I saw all Yisra’ĕl scattered on the
mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And
hWhY said, ‘These have no master. Let each return to
his house in peace.’ ”
17 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to Yahoshaphat,
“Did I not say to you that he would not naḇa good
concerning me, but evil?”
18 Then he said, “Therefore hear the word of hWhY: I
saw hWhY sitting on His throne, and all the host of the
shamayim standing on His right and on His left.
19 “And hWhY said, ‘Who shall entice Aḥaḇ sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl to go up and fall at Ramoth Gil’aḏ?’ And
one said this, and another said that.
20 “And a spirit came forward and stood before hWhY,
and said, ‘Let me entice him.’ hWhY said to him, ‘In
what way?’
21 “And he said, ‘I shall go out and be a spirit of
falsehood in the mouth of all his neḇi’im.’ And He said,
‘Entice him, and also prevail. Go out and do so.’
22 “And now, see, hWhY has put a spirit of falsehood
in the mouth of these neḇi’im of yours, and hWhY has
spoken evil concerning you.”
2114

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And Tsiḏqiyahu son of Kena’anah came near and
smote Miḵayahu on the cheek, and said, “Which way
did the spirit of hWhY pass over from me to speak to
you?”
24 And Miḵayahu said, “Look, you shall see on that
day when you go into an inner room to hide!”
25 Then the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said, “Take
Miḵayahu, and return him to Amon the governor of the
city and to Yo’ash the sovereign’s son,
26 and say, ‘Thus said the sovereign, “Put this one in
prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and water
of affliction until I return in peace.” ’ ”
27 And Miḵayahu said, “If you return at all in peace,
hWhY has not spoken by me.” And he said, “Hear, all
you people!”
28 Then the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl and Yahoshaphat
the sovereign of Yahuḏah went up to Ramoth Gil’aḏ.
29 And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl said to Yahoshaphat,
“Let me disguise myself and go into battle, but you put
on your robes.” And the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl
disguised himself, and they went into battle.
30 And the sovereign of Aram had commanded the
commanders of the chariots who were with him,
saying, “Fight with no one small or great, but only with
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.”
31 And it came to be, when the commanders of the
chariots saw Yahoshaphat, that they said, “It is the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl!” So they turned around to fight
against him, and Yahoshaphat cried out, and hWhY
helped him, and Elohim moved them to turn away
from him.
32 And it came to be, when the commanders of the
chariots saw that it was not the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl,
that they turned back from pursuing him.
23

2115

2 CHRONICLES

And a man drew a bow in his simplicity, and smote
the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl between the joints of his
armour. And he said to the driver of his chariot, “Turn
around and take me out of the battle, for I am
wounded.”
34 But the battle increased that day, and the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl was propped up in his chariot
facing the Arameans until evening, and he died at the
time of the going down of the sun.
33

19 And Yahoshaphat the sovereign of Yahuḏah
returned to his house in peace in Yerushalayim.
2 And Yahu son of Ḥanani the seer went out to face
him, and said to Sovereign Yahoshaphat, “Do you
help the wicked and love those who hate hWhY?
Therefore the wrath of hWhY is upon you.
3 “But good matters are found in you, in that you
have removed the Ashĕroth from the land, and have
prepared your heart to seek Elohim.”
4 So Yahoshaphat dwelt in Yerushalayim, and he
went out again among the people from Be’ĕrsheḇa to
the hill country of Ephrayim, and brought them back
to hWhY Elohim of their fathers.
5 And he appointed judges in the land in all the
walled cities of Yahuḏah, city by city,
6 and said to the judges, “Watch what you are doing,
for you do not judge for man, but for hWhY who is with
you in the matter of right-ruling.
7 “And now, let the reverence of hWhY be upon you.
Guard and do it, for there is no unrighteousness with
hWhY our Elohim nor partiality, nor taking of bribes.”
8 And in Yerushalayim Yahoshaphat also appointed
some of the Lĕwites and kohenim, and some of the
chief fathers of Yisra’ĕl, for the right-ruling of hWhY
and for dispute. Then they returned to Yerushalayim.
2116

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he commanded them, saying, “Do this in the
reverence of hWhY, trustworthy and with a perfect
heart:
10 “When any dispute comes to you from your
brothers who dwell in their cities, between blood and
blood, between Torah and Command, Laws and
Right-Rulings, then you shall warn them, lest they
trespass against hWhY and wrath come upon you and
your brothers. Do this, and you shall not be guilty.
11 “And look, Amaryahu the chief kohĕn is over you
in all matters of hWhY. And Zeḇaḏyahu son of
Yishma’ĕl, the ruler of the house of Yahuḏah, for all
the matters of the sovereign, and the Lĕwites are
officials before you. Be strong and do, and hWhY is
with the good.”
9

20 And after this it came to be that the children of
Mo’aḇ and the children of Ammon came in, and with
them some of the peoples, against Yahoshaphat to
battle.
2 And they came and spoke to Yahoshaphat,
saying, “A great army is coming against you from
beyond the sea, from Aram. And see, they are in
Ḥatsatson Tamar,” which is Ĕyn Geḏi.
3 And Yahoshaphat was afraid, and turned his face
to seek hWhY, and proclaimed a fast throughout all
Yahuḏah.
4 And Yahuḏah gathered to inquire of hWhY, even
from all the cities of Yahuḏah they came to seek
HWHY.
5 And Yahoshaphat stood in the assembly of
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, in the House of hWhY, in
front of the new courtyard,
6 and said, “O hWhY Elohim of our fathers, are You
not Elohim in the shamayim, and do You not rule over
2117

2 CHRONICLES

all the reigns of the nations, and in Your hand is there
not power and might, so that no one is able to stand
against You?
7 “Are You not our Elohim? You have driven out the
inhabitants of this land before Your people Yisra’ĕl,
and gave it to the seed of Aḇraham whom you love
forever.
8 “And they dwell in it, and have built You a Miqdash
in it for Your Name, saying,
9 ‘If evil comes upon us, such as the sword,
judgment, or pestilence, or scarcity of food, we shall
stand before this House and in Your presence - for
Your Name is in this House - and cry out to You in our
distress, and You do hear and save.’
10 “And now, see, the children of Ammon and Mo’aḇ,
and Mount Sĕ’ir, whom You would not let Yisra’ĕl
invade when they came out of the land of Mitsrayim,
for they turned from them and did not destroy them,
11 and see, they are repaying us by coming in to drive
us out of Your possession which You have given us
to inherit.
12 “O our Elohim, would You not judge them? For we
are powerless against this great army that is coming
against us. And we do not know what to do, but our
eyes are upon You.”
13 And all Yahuḏah, with their little ones, their wives,
and their children, stood before hWhY.
14 And the Ruaḥ of hWhY came upon Yaḥazi’ĕl son
of Zeḵaryahu, son of Benayah, son of Ye’i’ĕl, son of
Mattanyah, a Lĕwite of the sons of Asaph, in the midst
of the assembly,
15 and he said, “Listen, all Yahuḏah, and you
inhabitants of Yerushalayim, and Sovereign
Yahoshaphat! Thus said hWhY to you, ‘Do not fear,
2118

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

nor be afraid of the face of this great army, for the
battle is not yours, but Elohim’s.
16 ‘Go down against them tomorrow. See, they are
coming up by the ascent of Tsits, and you shall find
them at the end of the wadi before the Wilderness of
Yeru’ĕl.
17 ‘It is not for you to fight in this. Position yourselves,
stand still and see the deliverance of hWhY with you,
O Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim!’ Do not be afraid nor
fear, go out against them tomorrow, for hWhY is with
you.”
18 And Yahoshaphat bowed his head with his face to
the ground, and all Yahuḏah and the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim fell down before hWhY, to bow
themselves before HWHY.
19 And the Lĕwites, of the children of the Qehathites
and of the children of the Qorḥites stood up to praise
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl with an exceedingly loud
voice.
20 And they rose early in the morning and went out
into the Wilderness of Teqowa. And as they went out,
Yahoshaphat stood and said, “Hear me, O Yahuḏah
and you inhabitants of Yerushalayim: Trust in hWhY
your Elohim and be steadfast, trust His neḇi’im and
prosper.”
21 And after consulting with the people, he appointed
those who should sing to hWhY, and who should
praise the splendour of qodeshah, as they went out
before the army and were saying, “Give thanks to
hWhY, for His kindness is everlasting.”
22 And when they began singing and praising, hWhY
laid ambushes against the children of Ammon, Mo’aḇ,
and Mount Sĕ’ir, who had come against Yahuḏah,
and they were smitten.
2119

2 CHRONICLES

Then the children of Ammon and Mo’aḇ stood up
against the inhabitants of Mount Sĕ’ir to destroy and
annihilate them. And when they had made an end of
the inhabitants of Sĕ’ir, they helped to destroy one
another.
24 And when Yahuḏah came at the lookout in the
wilderness, they looked toward the army and saw
their dead bodies, lying on the ground, and none had
escaped.
25 And Yahoshaphat and his people came to take
away their spoil, and they found among them a great
amount of valuables on the dead bodies, and
precious jewelry, which they stripped off for
themselves, more than they could take away. And
they were three days plundering the spoil, for it was
much.
26 And on the fourth day they assembled in the Valley
of Beraḵah, for there they baraḵ hWhY. Therefore the
name of that place was called The Valley of Beraḵah
to this day.
27 Then they returned, every man of Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, with Yahoshaphat in front of them, to
go back to Yerushalayim with joy, for hWhY had made
them rejoice over their enemies.
28 And they came to Yerushalayim, with harps and
lyres and trumpets, to the House of HWHY.
29 And the fear of Elohim was on all the reigns of the
lands when they heard that hWhY had fought against
the enemies of Yisra’ĕl.
30 Then the reign of Yahoshaphat was at peace, for
his Elohim gave him rest on all sides.
31 Thus Yahoshaphat reigned over Yahuḏah - thirtyfive years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
twenty-five years in Yerushalayim. And his mother’s
name was Azuḇah the daughter of Shilḥi.
23

2120

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he walked in the way of his father Asa and did
not turn aside from it, doing what was right in the eyes
of hWhY.
33 Only, the high places were not taken away, for as
yet the people had not prepared their hearts for the
Elohim of their fathers.
34 And the rest of the acts of Yahoshaphat, the first
and the last see, they are written in the book of Yahu
son of Ḥanani, which is mentioned in the book of the
sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl.
35 And after this Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yahuḏah
joined himself with Aḥazyahu sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
He did wickedness in doing so.
36 And he joined himself with him to make ships to go
to Tarshish, and they made the ships in Etsyon
Geḇer.
37 Then Eli’ezer son of Doḏawahu of Marĕshah naḇu
against Yahoshaphat, saying, “Because you have
joined yourself with Aḥazyahu, hWhY shall break up
your work.” And the ships were wrecked, so that they
were unable to go to Tarshish.
32

21 And Yahoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the City of Dawiḏ. And
Yahoram his son reigned in his place.
2 And he had brothers, the sons of Yahoshaphat:
Azaryahu, and Yeḥi’ĕl, and Zeḵaryahu, and
Azaryahu, and Miḵa’ĕl, and Shephatyahu. All these
were sons of Yahoshaphat sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
3 And their father gave them many gifts of silver and
gold and precious items, with walled cities in
Yahuḏah, but he had given the reign to Yahoram
because he was the first-born.
4 And when Yahoram had risen up over the reign of
his father and made himself strong, he slew all his
2121

2 CHRONICLES

brothers with the sword, and also others of the heads
of Yisra’ĕl.
5 Yahoram was thirty-two years old when he began
to reign, and he reigned eight years in Yerushalayim.
6 And he walked in the way of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl, as the house of Aḥaḇ had done, for he had
the daughter of Aḥaḇ as a wife. And he did evil in the
eyes of hWhY.
7 However, hWhY would not destroy the house of
Dawiḏ, because of the covenant He had made with
Dawiḏ, and since He had promised to give a lamp to
him and to his sons, all the days.
8 In his days the Eḏomites revolted from under the
hand of Yahuḏah, and appointed a sovereign over
themselves.
9 Then Yahoram went out with his officers, and all
his chariots with him. And it came to be that he rose
by night and smote the Eḏomites who had
surrounded him and the commanders of the chariots.
10 Thus the Eḏomites revolted from under the hand
of Yahuḏah to this day. Then Liḇnah revolted from
under his hand, because he had forsaken hWhY
Elohim of his fathers.
11 He had also made high places in the mountains of
Yahuḏah, and caused the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim to commit whoring, and led Yahuḏah
astray.
12 And a letter came to him from Ĕliyahu the naḇi,
saying, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of your father Dawiḏ,
‘Because you have not walked in the ways of
Yahoshaphat your father, or in the ways of Asa
sovereign of Yahuḏah,
13 but have walked in the way of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl, and have made Yahuḏah and the inhabitants
of Yerushalayim to commit whoring like the whorings
2122

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

of the house of Aḥaḇ, and also have slain your
brothers, those of your father’s household, who were
better than yourself,
14 see, hWhY is going to strike with a great blow
among your people, your children, your wives, and all
your possessions,
15 and you, with many sicknesses, with disease of
your intestines, until your intestines come out
because of the sickness, day by day.’ ”
16 And hWhY stirred up the spirit of the Pelishtites
against Yahoram, and of the Araḇians who were near
the Kushites.
17 And they came up into Yahuḏah and broke into it,
and captured all the possessions that were found in
the sovereign’s house, and also his sons and his
wives, so that there was not a son left to him except
Yaho’aḥaz, the youngest of his sons.
18 And after all this hWhY plagued him in his
intestines with a disease for which there was no
healing.
19 And it came to be in the course of time, at the end
of two years, that his intestines came out because of
his sickness, and he died in great pain. And his
people made no burning for him, like the burning for
his fathers.
20 He was thirty-two years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned eight years in Yerushalayim,
and passed away without pleasantries. And they
buried him in the City of Dawiḏ, but not in the tombs
of the sovereigns.

22 And the inhabitants of Yerushalayim appointed
Aḥazyahu his youngest son to reign in his place, for
the raiding band that came with the Araḇians into the
2123

2 CHRONICLES

camp had slain all the older sons. So Aḥazyahu son of
Yahoram, sovereign of Yahuḏah, reigned.
2 Aḥazyahu was twenty-two years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned in Yerushalayim one
year. And his mother’s name was Athalyahu the
granddaughter of Omri.
3 He too walked in the ways of the house of Aḥaḇ,
for his mother counselled him to do wickedly.
4 And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, like the house
of Aḥaḇ, for they were his counsellors after the death
of his father, to his destruction.
5 He also walked in their counsel, and went with
Yahoram son of Aḥaḇ sovereign of Yisra’ĕl to fight
against Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram at Ramoth Gil’aḏ.
And the Arameans smote Yoram,
6 and he returned to Yizre’ĕl to recover from the
wounds which he had received at Ramah, when he
fought against Ḥaza’ĕl sovereign of Aram. And
Azaryahu son of Yahoram, sovereign of Yahuḏah,
went down to see Yahoram son of Aḥaḇ in Yizre’ĕl,
for he was sick.
7 But from Elohim came the downfall of Aḥazyahu,
through his coming to Yoram. For when he came he
went out with Yahoram against Yahu son of Nimshi,
whom hWhY had anointed to cut off the house of
Aḥaḇ.
8 And it came to be, when Yahu was executing
judgment on the house of Aḥaḇ, that he found the
rulers of Yahuḏah and the sons of Aḥazyahu’s
brothers who served Aḥazyahu, and slew them.
9 So he searched for Aḥazyahu, and they caught
him while he was hiding in Shomeron, and brought
him to Yahu, and put him to death, then buried him,
for they said, “He is the son of Yahoshaphat, who
2124

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

sought hWhY with all his heart.” And there was none
in the house of Aḥazyahu strong enough to reign.
10 And when Athalyahu the mother of Aḥazyahu saw
that her son was dead, she rose up and destroyed all
the offspring of the reign of the house of Yahuḏah.
11 But Yahoshaḇ’ath, the daughter of the sovereign,
took Yo’ash son of Aḥazyahu, and stole him away
from among the sovereign’s sons who were slain, and
put him and his nurse in a bedroom. So
Yahoshaḇ’ath, the daughter of Sovereign Yahoram,
the wife of Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn, because she was the
sister of Aḥazyahu, hid him from Athalyahu so that
she could not put him to death.
12 And he was hidden with them in the House of
Elohim for six years, while Athalyahu was reigning
over the land.

23 And in the seventh year Yahoyaḏa strengthened
himself, and made a covenant with the commanders of
hundreds: Azaryahu son of Yeroḥam, and Yishma’ĕl
son of Yahoḥanan, and Azaryahu son of Oḇĕḏ, and
Ma’asĕyahu son of Aḏayah, and Elishaphat son of
Ziḵri.
2 And they went about through Yahuḏah and
gathered the Lĕwites from all the cities of Yahuḏah,
and the chiefs of the fathers of Yisra’ĕl, and they
came to Yerushalayim.
3 And all the assembly made a covenant with the
sovereign in the House of Elohim. And he said to
them, “See, the son of the sovereign is to reign, as
hWhY has said of the sons of Dawiḏ.
4 “This is what you do: One-third of you entering on
the Shabbath, of the kohenim and the Lĕwites,
gatekeepers of the thresholds;
2125

2 CHRONICLES

and one-third are at the sovereign’s house, and
one-third at the Gate of the Foundation, while all the
people are in the courtyards of the House of hWhY.
6 “And let no one come into the House of hWhY
except the kohenim and those of the Lĕwites who
serve - they go in, for they are qodesh. But all the
people are to guard the Charge of hWhY.
7 “And the Lĕwites shall surround the sovereign on
all sides, every man with his weapons in his hand.
And whoever comes into the House, let him be put to
death. And be with the sovereign when he comes in
and when he goes out.”
8 And the Lĕwites and all Yahuḏah did according to
all that Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn commanded. And each
man took his men who were to come in on the
Shabbath, with those going out on the Shabbath, for
Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn did not dismiss the divisions.
9 And
Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn gave to the
commanders of hundreds the spears and the large
and small shields which had been Sovereign Dawiḏ’s,
that were in the House of Elohim.
10 And he stood all the people, every man with his
weapon in his hand, from the right side of the House
to the left side of the House, along by the altar and by
the House, all around the sovereign.
11 And they brought out the son of the sovereign and
put on him the diadem and the Witness, and
appointed him to reign. Then Yahoyaḏa and his sons
anointed him, and said, “Let the sovereign live!”
12 And Athalyahu heard the noise of the people
running and praising the sovereign, and she came to
the people in the House of hWhY,
13 and looked and saw the sovereign standing by his
column at the entrance. And the chiefs and the
trumpeters were beside the sovereign, and all the
5

2126

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

people of the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets,
also the singers with instruments of song, and those
who led in praise. Then Athalyahu tore her garments
and said, “Treason! Treason!”
14 And Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn brought out the
commanders of hundreds who were put over the
army, and said to them, “Take her outside the ranks,
and slay with the sword whoever follows her.” For the
kohĕn said, “Do not kill her in the House of hWhY.”
15 So they laid hands on her, and she went by way of
the entrance of the Horse Gate into the sovereign’s
house, and they put her to death there.
16 Yahoyaḏa then made a covenant - between
himself and the people and the sovereign - to be the
people of hWhY.
17 And all the people went to the house of Ba’al, and
broke it down. They completely broke up its altars and
images, and slew Mattan the priest of Ba’al before the
altars.
18 And Yahoyaḏa put the offices of the House of
hWhY into the hand of the kohenim, the Lĕwites,
whom Dawiḏ had assigned in the House of hWhY, to
offer the burnt offerings of hWhY, as it is written in the
Torah of Mosheh, with rejoicing and with singing, by
the hands of Dawiḏ.
19 And he stood the gatekeepers at the gates of the
House of hWhY, so that no one who was in any way
unclean should enter.
20 And he took the commanders of hundreds, and
the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all
the people of the land, and brought the sovereign
down from the House of hWhY. And they went through
the Upper Gate to the sovereign’s house, and placed
the sovereign on the throne of the reign.
2127

2 CHRONICLES

And all the people of the land rejoiced. And the city
had rest, for they had slain Athalyahu with the sword.

21

24 Yo’ash was seven years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned forty years in Yerushalayim. And
the name of his mother was Tsiḇyah of Be’ĕrsheḇa.
2 And Yo’ash did what was right in the eyes of hWhY
all the days of Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn.
3 And Yahoyaḏa took for him two wives, and he
brought forth sons and daughters.
4 And after this it came to be that Yo’ash applied his
heart on restoring the House of HWHY.
5 And he gathered the kohenim and the Lĕwites,
and said to them, “Go out to the cities of Yahuḏah,
and gather from all Yisra’ĕl silver to repair the House
of your Elohim from year to year, and see that you
hurry the matter.” But the Lĕwites did not hurry it.
6 And the sovereign called Yahoyaḏa the chief, and
said to him, “Why have you not required the Lĕwites
to bring in from Yahuḏah and from Yerushalayim the
levy of Mosheh the servant of hWhY and of the
assembly of Yisra’ĕl, for the Tent of the Witness?”
7 For the sons of Athalyahu, that wicked woman,
had broken into the House of Elohim, and had also
prepared all the qodesh vessels of the House of hWhY
to the Ba’als.
8 So the sovereign commanded and they made a
chest, and put it outside at the gate of the House of
hWhY,
9 and made it known in Yahuḏah and in
Yerushalayim to bring to hWhY the levy that Mosheh
the servant of Elohim had imposed on Yisra’ĕl in the
wilderness.

2128

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And all the rulers and all the people rejoiced, and
they brought in and put them into the chest to
completion.
11 And it came to be, at that time, when the chest was
brought to the sovereign’s official by the hand of the
Lĕwites, and when they saw that there was much
silver, that the sovereign’s scribe and the kohĕn
ha’gadol’s officer came and emptied the chest, and
took it and returned it to its place. So they did day by
day, and gathered a large amount of silver.
12 And the sovereign and Yahoyaḏa gave it to those
who did the work of the service of the House of hWhY.
And they hired stonemasons and carpenters to
restore the House of hWhY, and also those who
worked in iron and bronze to repair the House of
HWHY.
13 And the workmen laboured, and the work of
restoration progressed in their hands, and they
established the House of Elohim to its proper form
and strengthened it.
14 And when they had finished, they brought the rest
of the silver before the sovereign and Yahoyaḏa, and
they made utensils from it for the House of hWhY,
utensils for serving and offering, ladles and vessels of
gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the
House of hWhY continually all the days of Yahoyaḏa.
15 And Yahoyaḏa was old and satisfied with days,
and died, one hundred and thirty years old when he
died.
16 And they buried him in the City of Dawiḏ among
the sovereigns, for he had done good in Yisra’ĕl, both
toward Elohim and His house.
17 And after the death of Yahoyaḏa the rulers of
Yahuḏah came and bowed themselves to the
sovereign. And the sovereign listened to them,
10

2129

2 CHRONICLES

and they forsook the House of hWhY Elohim of
their fathers, and served the Ashĕrim and the idols.
And wrath came upon Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim
because of their trespass.
19 And He sent neḇi’im to them, to bring them back
to hWhY. And they witnessed against them, but they
did not listen.
20 Then the Ruaḥ of Elohim came upon Zeḵaryah
son of Yahoyaḏa the kohĕn, who stood above the
people, and said to them, “Thus said Elohim, ‘Why
are you transgressing the Commands of hWhY and do
not prosper? Because you have forsaken hWhY, He
has forsaken you.’ ”
21 And they conspired against him, and at the
command of the sovereign they stoned him with
stones in the courtyard of the House of hWhY.
22 Thus Yo’ash the sovereign did not remember the
kindness which Yahoyaḏa his father had done to him,
and slew his son. And as he died, he said, “hWhY
sees, and repays!”
23 And it came to be, at the turn of the year, that the
army of Aram came up against him. And they came
into Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, and destroyed all
the rulers of the people from among the people, and
sent all their spoil to the sovereign of Darmeseq.
24 For the army of Aram came with few men, but
hWhY gave a very great army into their hand, because
they had forsaken hWhY Elohim of their fathers. So
they executed judgment against Yo’ash.
25 And when they had withdrawn from him - for they
left him very sick - his own servants conspired against
him because of the blood of the sons of Yahoyaḏa the
kohĕn, and slew him on his bed, and he died. And
they buried him in the City of Dawiḏ, but they did not
bury him in the tombs of the sovereigns.
18

2130

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And these are the ones who conspired against
him: Zaḇaḏ the son of Shim’ath the Ammonitess, and
Yahozaḇaḏ the son of Shimrith the Mo’aḇitess.
27 As to his sons, and the many words about him,
and the rebuilding of the House of Elohim, see, they
are written in the commentary of the book of the
sovereigns. And Amatsyahu his son reigned in his
place.
26

25 Amatsyahu was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in
Yerushalayim. And the name of his mother was
Yaho’addan of Yerushalayim.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY, but
not with a perfect heart.
3 And it came to be, upon his strong control of the
reign, that he slew his servants who had smitten his
father the sovereign.
4 But he did not put their children to death, but did
as it is written in the Torah in the Book of Mosheh,
where hWhY commanded, saying, “Fathers are not
put to death for their children, and children are not put
to death for their fathers, but each one has to die for
his own sin.”
5 And Amatsyahu gathered Yahuḏah and appointed
over them commanders of thousands and
commanders of hundreds, according to the fathers’
houses, for all Yahuḏah and Binyamin. And he
registered them from twenty years old and above, and
found them to be three hundred thousand choice men
going out to the army, handling spear and shield.
6 And he hired one hundred thousand mighty brave
ones from Yisra’ĕl for one hundred kiḵars of silver.
7 But a man of Elohim came to him, saying, “O
sovereign, do not let the army of Yisra’ĕl go with you,
2131

2 CHRONICLES

for hWhY is not with Yisra’ĕl, with all the children of
Ephrayim.
8 “But if you are going, do it! Be strong in battle, or
Elohim would make you fall before the enemy, for
Elohim has power to help and to overthrow.”
9 And Amatsyahu said to the man of Elohim, “But
what do we do about the hundred kiḵars which I have
given to the army of Yisra’ĕl?” And the man of Elohim
answered, “hWhY has more to give you than this.”
10 So Amatsyahu dismissed the army that had come
to him from Ephrayim, to go back home. And they
were greatly enraged against Yahuḏah, and they
returned home in a rage.
11 And Amatsyahu strengthened himself, and led his
people, and went to the Valley of Salt and smote ten
thousand of the sons of Sĕ’ir.
12 And the sons of Yahuḏah took captive another ten
thousand alive, and they brought them to the top of
the rock, and threw them down from the top of the
rock, and all of them were dashed to pieces.
13 And the soldiers of the army which Amatsyahu had
sent back from going with him to battle, they raided
the cities of Yahuḏah from Shomeron to Bĕyth Ḥoron,
and smote three thousand in them, and took much
spoil.
14 And it came to be, after Amatsyahu came from
smiting the Eḏomites, that he brought the mighty ones
of the people of Sĕ’ir, and stood them up to be his
mighty ones, and bowed down before them and
burned incense to them.
15 Therefore the displeasure of hWhY burned against
Amatsyahu, and He sent him a naḇi who said to him,
“Why have you sought the mighty ones of the people,
which did not deliver their own people from your
hand?”
2132

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And it came to be, as he talked with him, that the
sovereign said to him, “Have we appointed you
counsellor to the sovereign? Stop! Why should they
smite you?” Then the naḇi stopped and said, “I know
that Elohim has counselled to destroy you, because
you have done this and have not listened to my
counsel.”
17 And Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah took
counsel and sent to Yo’ash son of Yaho’aḥaz, son of
Yahu, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, saying, “Come, let us
look each other in the face!”
18 And Yo’ash sovereign of Yisra’ĕl sent to
Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, saying, “The
thistle that was in Leḇanon sent to the cedar that was
in Leḇanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as
wife.’ And a wild beast that was in Leḇanon passed
by and trampled the thistle.
19 “You have said, ‘See, I have smitten Eḏom,’ and
your heart has lifted you up to boast. Now stay at
home, why should you stir up yourself to evil, that you
should fall - you and Yahuḏah with you?”
20 But Amatsyahu did not listen, for it came from
Elohim, in order to give them into the hand of their
enemies, because they had sought the mighty ones
of Eḏom.
21 So Yo’ash sovereign of Yisra’ĕl went out. And he
and Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah faced one
another at Bĕyth Shemesh, which belongs to
Yahuḏah.
22 And Yahuḏah was smitten before Yisra’ĕl, and
they each fled to his tent.
23 And Yo’ash the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl caught
Amatsyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, son of Yo’ash, son
of Yaho’aḥaz, at Bĕyth Shemesh, and brought him to
Yerushalayim, and broke down the wall of
16

2133

2 CHRONICLES

Yerushalayim from the Gate of Ephrayim to the
Corner Gate, four hundred ammah,
24 and took all the gold and the silver, and all the
utensils that were found in the House of Elohim with
Oḇĕḏ-Eḏom, and the treasures of the sovereign’s
house, and hostages, and returned to Shomeron.
25 And Amatsyahu son of Yo’ash, sovereign of
Yahuḏah, lived fifteen years after the death of Yo’ash
son of Yaho’aḥaz, sovereign of Yisra’ĕl.
26 And the rest of the acts of Amatsyahu, from the
first to the last, see, are they not written in the book of
the sovereigns of Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl?
27 And from the time that Amatsyahu turned away
from following hWhY, they made a conspiracy against
him in Yerushalayim, and he fled to Laḵish. And they
sent after him to Laḵish and killed him there,
28 and they brought him on horses and buried him
with his fathers in the City of Yahuḏah.

26 And all people of Yahuḏah took Uzziyahu, who
was sixteen years old, and appointed him to reign
instead of his father Amatsyahu.
2 He built Ĕyloth and restored it to Yahuḏah, after
the sovereign slept with his fathers.
3 Uzziyahu was sixteen years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Yerushalayim.
And his mother’s name was Yeḵolyah of
Yerushalayim.
4 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
according to all that his father Amatsyahu did.
5 And he sought Elohim in the days of Zeḵaryahu,
who had understanding in the visions of Elohim. And
while he sought hWhY, Elohim made him prosper.
6 And he went out and fought against the
Pelishtites, and broke down the wall of Gath, and the
2134

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

wall of Yaḇneh, and the wall of Ashdoḏ, and built
cities around Ashdoḏ and among the Pelishtites.
7 And Elohim helped him against the Pelishtites,
and against the Araḇians who lived in Gur Ba’al, and
the Me’unites.
8 And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziyahu. And
his name spread as far as the entrance of Mitsrayim,
for he strengthened himself greatly.
9 And Uzziyahu built towers in Yerushalayim at the
Corner Gate, and at the Valley Gate, and at the
corner buttress, and strengthened them.
10 And he built towers in the wilderness, and dug
many wells, for he had much livestock, both in the low
country and in the plain, farmers and vinedressers in
the mountains and in Karmel, for he loved the soil.
11 And Uzziyahu had an army of fighting men who
went out to battle by divisions, according to the
number on their roll as prepared by Ye’i’ĕl the scribe
and Ma’asĕyahu the officer, under the hand of
Ḥananyahu, one of the sovereign’s commanders.
12 The total number of the clan chiefs of the mighty
brave ones was two thousand six hundred.
13 And under their hand was an army of three
hundred and seven thousand five hundred that fought
with mighty power, to help the sovereign against the
enemy.
14 And Uzziyahu prepared for them, for the entire
army, shields, and spears, and helmets, and body
armour, and bows, and sling stones.
15 And he made machines in Yerushalayim, devised
by skilled men, to be on the towers and the corners,
to shoot arrows and large stones. And his name
spread far and wide, for he was marvellously helped
till he became strong.
2135

2 CHRONICLES

But when he became strong his heart was lifted
up, to his destruction, for he trespassed against hWhY
his Elohim by entering the Hĕyḵal of HWHY to burn
incense on the altar of incense.
17 And Azaryahu the kohĕn went in after him, and
with him were eighty kohenim of hWhY, who were
brave men.
18 And they stood up against Sovereign Uzziyahu,
and said to him, “It is not for you, Uzziyahu, to burn
incense to hWhY, but for the kohenim, the sons of
Aharon, who are qodesh to burn incense. Get out of
the Miqdash, for you have trespassed, and there is no
esteem to you from hWhY Elohim.”
19 And Uzziyahu was wroth. And he had a censer in
his hand to burn incense. And while he was wroth with
the kohenim, leprosy broke out on his forehead,
before the kohenim in the House of hWhY, beside the
incense altar.
20 And Azaryahu the chief kohĕn and all the kohenim
looked at him, and saw that he was leprous on his
forehead. And they hurried him from there. And he
also hurried to get out, because hWhY had struck him.
21 And Sovereign Uzziyahu was a leper until the day
of his death, and dwelt in a separate house, because
he was a leper, for he was cut off from the House of
hWhY. And Yotham his son was over the sovereign’s
house, ruling the people of the land.
22 And the rest of the acts of Uzziyahu, from the first
to the last, the naḇi Yeshayahu the son of Amots
wrote.
23 So Uzziyahu slept with his fathers, and they buried
him with his fathers in the field of burial which
belonged to the sovereigns, for they said, “He is a
leper.” And Yotham his son reigned in his place.
16

2136

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

27 Yotham was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Yerushah
the daughter of Tsaḏoq.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
according to all that his father Uzziyahu had done.
Only, he did not come into the Hĕyḵal of hWhY. And
the people continued to act corruptly.
3 He built the Upper Gate of the House of hWhY, and
he built much on the wall of Ophel.
4 And he built cities in the hill country of Yahuḏah,
and in the forests he built palaces and towers.
5 And he fought with the sovereign of the
Ammonites and prevailed over them. And the children
of Ammon gave him in that year one hundred kiḵars
of silver, and ten thousand kors of wheat, and ten
thousand of barley. This is what the children of
Ammon paid him, also in the second and third years.
6 And Yotham strengthened himself, for he
prepared his ways before hWhY his Elohim.
7 And the rest of the acts of Yotham, and all his
battles and his ways, see, they are written in the book
of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah.
8 He was twenty-five years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Yerushalayim.
9 So Yotham slept with his fathers, and they buried
him in the City of Dawiḏ. And his son Aḥaz reigned in
his place.

28 Aḥaz was twenty years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Yerushalayim.
And he did not do what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
as his father Dawiḏ had done,
2137

2 CHRONICLES

and walked in the ways of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl, and made moulded images for the Ba’als.
3 And he himself burned incense in the Valley of
Bĕn Hinnom, and burned his children in the fire,
according to the abominations of the gentiles whom
hWhY dispossessed from before the children of
Yisra’ĕl,
4 and slaughtered and burned incense on the high
places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.
5 Therefore hWhY his Elohim gave him into the hand
of the sovereign of Aram, and they smote him, and
took many of them away as captives, and brought
them to Dammeseq. And he was also given into the
hand of the sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, who smote him with
a great smiting.
6 And Peqaḥ son of Remalyahu slew one hundred
and twenty thousand in Yahuḏah in one day, all brave
men, because they had forsaken hWhY Elohim of their
fathers.
7 And Ziḵri, a mighty man of Ephrayim, slew
Ma’asĕyahu son of the sovereign, and Azriqam the
officer over the house, and Elqanah who was second
to the sovereign.
8 And the children of Yisra’ĕl took captive from their
brothers two hundred thousand women, sons and
daughters. And they also seized from them much
spoil, and they brought the spoil to Shomeron.
9 But a naḇi of hWhY was there, whose name was
Oḏĕḏ. And he went out before the army that came to
Shomeron, and said to them, “See, because hWhY
Elohim of your fathers was displeased with Yahuḏah,
He has given them into your hand, and you have slain
them in a rage that reaches up to the shamayim.
10 “And now you are planning to make the children of
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim your male and female
2

2138

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

slaves, but are you not also guilty before hWhY your
Elohim?
11 “Now therefore, listen to me, and return the
captives whom you have taken captive from your
brothers, for the heat of the wrath of hWhY is upon
you.”
12 And some of the heads of the children of
Ephrayim: Azaryahu son of Yahoḥanan, Bereḵyahu
son of Meshillĕmoth, and Yeḥizqiyahu son of
Shallum, and Amasa son of Ḥaḏlai, stood up against
those who came from the army,
13 and said to them, “Do not bring the captives here,
to bring on us guilt before hWhY. Are you planning to
add to our sins and to our guilt? For our guilt is great,
and burning is the wrath on Yisra’ĕl.”
14 And the armed men left the captives and the spoil
before the leaders and all the assembly.
15 And the men who were designated by name rose
up and took the captives, and from the spoil they
clothed all the naked among them, dressed them and
gave them sandals, and gave them food and drink,
and anointed them, and let all the weak ones ride on
donkeys, and brought them to their brothers at
Yeriḥo, the city of palm trees, then returned to
Shomeron.
16 At that time Sovereign Aḥaz sent to the sovereigns
of Ashshur to help him.
17 For the Eḏomites had come again, and smote
Yahuḏah, and took away captives.
18 And the Pelishtites invaded the cities of the low
country and of the South of Yahuḏah, and captured
Bĕyth Shemesh, and Ayalon, and Geḏĕroth, and
Soḵo with its villages, and Timnah with its villages,
and Gimzo with its villages, and dwelt there.
2139

2 CHRONICLES

For hWhY had brought Yahuḏah low because of
Aḥaz sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, for he brought about a
lack of restraint in Yahuḏah and trespassed against
hWhY.
20 And Tiḡlath-Pileser the sovereign of Ashshur
came against him and distressed him, and did not
help him,
21 though Aḥaz had taken some of the treasures from
the House of hWhY, from the house of the sovereign,
and from the leaders, and he gave it to the sovereign
of Ashshur, but he did not help him.
22 And in the time of his distress Sovereign Aḥaz
trespassed even more against hWhY - this Sovereign
Aḥaz 23 and he slaughtered to the mighty ones of
Dammeseq, those smiting him, saying, “Because the
mighty ones of the sovereigns of Aram help them, I
offer to them and they help me.” But they were to
cause him and all Yisra’ĕl to stumble.
24 And Aḥaz gathered the utensils of the House of
Elohim, and cut in pieces the utensils of the House of
Elohim, and shut the doors of the House of hWhY, and
made for himself altars in every corner of
Yerushalayim.
25 And in every city, even the cities of Yahuḏah, he
made high places to burn incense to other mighty
ones, and provoked hWhY Elohim of his fathers.
26 And the rest of his acts and all his ways, from first
to last, see, they are written in the book of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl.
27 So Aḥaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him
in the city, in Yerushalayim, but they did not bring him
into the tombs of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl. And
Ḥizqiyahu his son reigned in his place.
19

2140

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

29 Ḥizqiyahu began to reign when he was twentyfive years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in
Yerushalayim. And his mother’s name was Aḇiyah the
daughter of Zeḵaryahu.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY,
according to all that his father Dawiḏ did.
3 In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he
opened the doors of the House of hWhY and repaired
them,
4 and brought in the kohenim and the Lĕwites, and
gathered them in the open place to the east.
5 And he said to them, “Listen to me, O Lĕwites!
Now qadosh yourselves, qadosh the House of hWhY
Elohim of your fathers, and remove the uncleanness
from the qodesh place.
6 “For our fathers have trespassed and have done
evil in the eyes of hWhY our Elohim, and have
forsaken Him, and have turned their faces away from
the Mishkan of hWhY, and have given their backs.
7 “And they have shut the doors of the porch, and
put out the lamps, and they have not burned incense
or offered burnt offerings in the qodesh place to the
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
8 “Therefore the wrath of hWhY fell upon Yahuḏah
and Yerushalayim, and He has given them up for a
trembling, for an astonishment, and for a hissing, as
you see with your eyes.
9 “And see, because of this our fathers have fallen
by the sword. And our sons, and our daughters, and
our wives are in captivity for this.
10 “Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with
hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, so that the heat of His wrath
turns away from us.
2141

2 CHRONICLES

“My sons, do not be slack, for hWhY has chosen
you to stand before Him, to serve Him, and to be
attendants for Him and burn incense.”
12 And the Lĕwites rose up: Maḥath son of Amasai
and Yo’ĕl son of Azaryahu, of the sons of the
Qehathites; and of the sons of Merari, Qish son of
Aḇdi and Azaryahu son of Yehallel’ĕl; and of the
Gĕreshonites, Yo’aḥ son of Zimmah and Ĕḏen son of
Yo’aḥ;
13 and of the sons of Elitsaphan, Shimri and Ye’i’ĕl;
and of the sons of Asaph, Zeḵaryahu and
Mattanyahu;
14 and of the sons of Hĕman, Yeḥi’ĕl and Shim’i and
of the sons of Yeḏuthun, Shemayah and Uzzi’ĕl.
15 And they gathered their brothers, and qadosh
themselves, and went according to the command of
the sovereign, at the words of hWhY, to cleanse the
House of hWhY.
16 And the kohenim came into the inner part of the
House of hWhY to cleanse it, and brought out all the
uncleanness they found in the Hĕyḵal of hWhY to the
courtyard of the House of hWhY. Then the Lĕwites
received it to take it outside to the wadi Qiḏron.
17 And they began to qadosh on the first day of the
first month, and on the eighth day of the month they
came to the porch of hWhY. And they qadosh the
House of hWhY in eight days, and on the sixteenth day
of the first month they had finished.
18 Then they came in to Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu and
said, “We have cleansed all the House of hWhY, and
the altar of burnt offerings with all its utensils, and the
table of the showbread with all its utensils.
19 “And all the utensils which Sovereign Aḥaz in his
reign had pushed aside, when he trespassed, we
11

2142

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

have prepared and qadosh. And see, they are before
the altar of hWhY.”
20 And Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu rose up early, and
gathered the heads of the city, and went up to the
House of HWHY.
21 And they brought seven bulls, and seven rams,
and seven lambs, and seven male goats for a sin
offering for the reign, for the Miqdash, and for
Yahuḏah. And he said to the kohenim, the sons of
Aharon, to offer them on the altar of hWhY.
22 So they slaughtered the bulls, and the kohenim
received the blood and sprinkled it on the altar. And
they slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on
the altar. And they slaughtered the lambs and
sprinkled the blood on the altar.
23 And they brought out the male goats of the sin
offering before the sovereign and the assembly, and
they laid their hands on them,
24 and the kohenim slaughtered them, and with their
blood made a sin offering on the altar, to make an
atonement for all Yisra’ĕl, for the sovereign said that
the burnt offering and the sin offering is for all Yisra’ĕl.
25 And he appointed the Lĕwites in the House of
hWhY with cymbals, with harps, and with lyres,
according to the command of Dawiḏ, and of Gaḏ, seer
of the sovereign, and of Nathan the naḇi, for the
command was by the hand of hWhY, by the hand of
His neḇi’im.
26 And the Lĕwites stood with the instruments of
Dawiḏ, and the kohenim with the trumpets.
27 And Ḥizqiyahu gave the order to offer the burnt
offering on the altar. And when the burnt offering
began, the singing unto hWhY began, with the
trumpets and with the instruments of Dawiḏ sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl.
2143

2 CHRONICLES

And all the assembly were bowing, and the singers
singing, and the trumpeters blowing - all this until the
burnt offering was completed.
29 And at the completion of the offering, the
sovereign and all who were present with him bowed
and worshipped.
30 And Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu and the rulers ordered
the Lĕwites to sing praise to hWhY with the words of
Dawiḏ and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises
with gladness, and they bowed their heads and
worshipped.
31 And Ḥizqiyahu responded and said, “Now that you
have ordained yourselves to hWhY, come near, and
bring slaughterings and thank offerings into the
House of hWhY.” And the assembly brought in
slaughterings and thank offerings, and all those
whose hearts were so moved brought burnt offerings.
32 And the number of the burnt offerings which the
assembly brought was seventy bulls, one hundred
rams, two hundred lambs - all these for a burnt
offering to hWhY.
33 And the qodesh gifts were six hundred bulls and
three thousand sheep.
34 Only, the kohenim were too few, and were unable
to skin all the burnt offerings, so their brothers the
Lĕwites helped them until the work was completed
and until the other kohenim had qadosh themselves,
for the Lĕwites were more upright of heart to qadosh
themselves, than the kohenim.
35 And there were also many burnt offerings, with the
fat of the peace offerings and with the drink offerings
for every burnt offering. Thus the service of the House
of hWhY was reestablished.
28

2144

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And Ḥizqiyahu and all the people rejoiced that
Elohim had prepared the people, because the matter
came about so suddenly.

36

30 And Ḥizqiyahu sent to all Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah,
and he also wrote letters to Ephrayim and
Menashsheh, to come to the House of hWhY at
Yerushalayim, to perform the Pesaḥ to hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
2 But the sovereign and his leaders and all the
assembly in Yerushalayim had taken counsel to
perform the Pesaḥ in the second month.
3 For they were unable to perform it at its time,
because not enough kohenim had qadosh
themselves, and the people had not gathered at
Yerushalayim.
4 And the matter was right in the eyes of the
sovereign and in the eyes of all the assembly.
5 And they settled the matter, to send a call to all
Yisra’ĕl, from Be’ĕrsheḇa to Dan, to come to perform
a Pesaḥ to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl at Yerushalayim,
since they had not done it for a long time, as it is
written.
6 And the runners went to all Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah
with the letters from the sovereign and his leaders,
and spoke according to the command of the
sovereign, “Children of Yisra’ĕl, turn back to hWhY
Elohim of Aḇraham, Yitsḥaq, and Yisra’ĕl, so that He
returns to the remnant of you who have escaped from
the hand of the sovereigns of Ashshur.
7 “And do not be like your fathers and like your
brothers, who trespassed against hWhY Elohim of
their fathers, so that He gave them up to ruin, as you
see.
2145

2 CHRONICLES

“Now do not stiffen your neck, like your fathers,
stretch forth the hand to hWhY, and come to His
Miqdash, which He has qadosh forever, and serve
HWHY your Elohim, so that His burning wrath turns
away from you.
9 “For if you turn back to hWhY, your brothers and
your children shall be shown compassion by their
captors, even to return to this land. For hWhY your
Elohim shows favour and compassion, and does not
turn His face from you if you turn back to Him.”
10 And the runners passed from city to city
throughout the land of Ephrayim and Menashsheh, as
far as Zeḇulun. But they were laughing at them and
mocking them.
11 Some from Ashĕr and Menashsheh and from
Zeḇulun, however, humbled themselves and came to
Yerushalayim.
12 Also the hand of Elohim was on Yahuḏah to give
them one heart to do the command of the sovereign
and the rulers, at the word of HWHY.
13 And many people, a very great assembly,
gathered at Yerushalayim to perform the Festival of
Matstsoth in the second month.
14 And they rose up and removed the altars that were
in Yerushalayim, and they removed all the incense
altars and threw them into the wadi Qiḏron.
15 Then they slaughtered the Pesaḥ on the
fourteenth day of the second month. And the kohenim
and the Lĕwites were ashamed, and qadosh
themselves, and brought the burnt offerings to the
House of hWhY.
16 And they stood in their place according to their
right-ruling. According to the Torah of Mosheh, the
man of Elohim, the kohenim sprinkled the blood from
the hand of the Lĕwites.
8

2146

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

For many in the assembly had not qadosh
themselves. Therefore the Lĕwites were over the
slaughter of the Pesaḥ for everyone who was not
clean, to qadosh them to hWhY.
18 For many of the people, many from Ephrayim and
Menashsheh, Yissasḵar and Zeḇulun, had not been
cleansed, yet they ate the Pesaḥ contrary to what was
written. But Ḥizqiyahu prayed for them, saying, “HWHY
who is good, provide atonement for everyone
19 who has prepared his heart to seek Elohim, hWhY
Elohim of his fathers, though he is not cleansed
according to the cleansing of the qodesh place.”
20 And hWhY listened to Ḥizqiyahu and healed the
people.
21 And the children of Yisra’ĕl who were in
Yerushalayim performed the Festival of Matstsoth
seven days with great joy. And the Lĕwites and the
kohenim praised HWHY day by day, with instruments
of praise before hWhY.
22 And Ḥizqiyahu spoke to the heart of all the
Lĕwites, those having good understanding
concerning hWhY. So they ate what was appointed,
seven days, slaughtering peace offerings and making
confession to hWhY Elohim of their fathers.
23 And all the assembly took counsel to perform
another seven days, and they performed it another
seven days with joy.
24 For Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah presented to
the assembly a thousand bulls and seven thousand
sheep, and the rulers presented to the assembly a
thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep. And a great
number of kohenim qadosh themselves.
25 And all the assembly of Yahuḏah rejoiced, and the
kohenim and Lĕwites, and all the assembly who had
come from Yisra’ĕl, and the sojourners who came
17

2147

2 CHRONICLES

from the land of Yisra’ĕl, and those who dwelt in
Yahuḏah.
26 And there came to be great joy in Yerushalayim,
for since the days of Shelomoh son of Dawiḏ, the
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, the like of this had not been in
Yerushalayim.
27 And the kohenim, the Lĕwites, rose and baraḵ the
people, and their voice was heard. And their prayer
came up to His qodesh dwelling place, to the
shamayim.

31 And at the completion of all this, all Yisra’ĕl who
were present went out to the cities of Yahuḏah and
broke down the pillars, and cut down the Ashĕrim, and
tore down the high places and the altars, from all
Yahuḏah, and Binyamin, and in Ephrayim and
Menashsheh, even to completion. Then all the children
of Yisra’ĕl returned to their own cities, each to his
possession.
2 And Ḥizqiyahu appointed the divisions of the
kohenim and of the Lĕwites according to their
divisions, each according to his service of the
kohenim and Lĕwites for burnt offerings and peace
offerings, to serve and to give thanks, and to praise in
the gates of the camp of hWhY.
3 And the sovereign allotted from his possessions
for the burnt offerings, for the morning and evening
burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the
Shabbathoth and for the New Moons and for the
Appointed Times, as it is written in the Torah of hWhY.
4 And he said to the people, those who dwelt in
Yerushalayim, to give the portion for the kohenim and
the Lĕwites, so that they are strengthened in the
Torah of HWHY.
2148

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And as the word spread, the children of Yisra’ĕl
brought large quantities of the first-fruits of grain and
wine, and oil and honey, and of all the increase of the
field. And they brought in the tithe of all, a large
amount.
6 And the children of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah, those
who dwelt in the cities of Yahuḏah, brought the tithe
of cattle and sheep. Even the tithe of qodesh gifts
which were qadosh to hWhY their Elohim were
brought in, and they gave heaps, heaps.
7 In the third month they began to pile up the heaps,
and they finished in the seventh month.
8 And Ḥizqiyahu and the leaders came and saw the
heaps, and they baraḵ hWhY and His people Yisra’ĕl.
9 And Ḥizqiyahu asked the kohenim and the Lĕwites
about the heaps.
10 And Azaryahu the chief kohĕn, from the house of
Tsaḏoq, answered him and said, “Since they began
to bring the offerings into the House of hWhY, we have
had enough to eat and have plenty left, for hWhY has
baraḵ His people. And this great amount is left over.”
11 And Ḥizqiyahu ordered them to prepare rooms in
the House of hWhY, and they prepared them.
12 Then they brought in the contribution, and the
tithes, and the qodesh gifts, trustworthily. And
Konanyahu the Lĕwite was leader over them, and
Shim’i his brother was the next.
13 And Yeḥi’ĕl, and Azazyahu, and Naḥath, and
Asah’ĕl, and Yerimoth, and Yozaḇaḏ, and Eli’ĕl, and
Yismaḵyahu, and Maḥath, and Benayahu were
overseers under the hand of Konanyahu and Shim’i
his brother, by order of Ḥizqiyahu the sovereign and
Azaryahu the ruler of the House of Elohim.
14 And Qorĕ son of Yimnah the Lĕwite, the keeper of
the East Gate, was over the voluntary offerings to
5

2149

2 CHRONICLES

Elohim, to distribute the offerings of hWhY and the
most qodesh gifts.
15 And under his hand were Ĕḏen, and Minyamin,
and Yĕshua, and Shemayahu, Amaryahu, and
Sheḵanyahu, in the cities of the kohenim, to distribute
trustworthily to their brothers by divisions, to the great
as well as the small.
16 Besides those males from three years old and up
who were written in the genealogy, they distributed to
everyone who entered the House of hWhY his daily
portion for the work of his service, by his division,
17 and to the kohenim who were written in the
genealogy according to their father’s house, and to
the Lĕwites from twenty years old upward, by their
duties in their divisions,
18 and to all listed in the genealogy, their little ones
and their wives, their sons and daughters, all the
company of them. For in their trustworthiness they
qadosh themselves in qodeshah.
19 And for the sons of Aharon the kohenim, who were
in the fields of the open land of their cities, in each
and every city, there were men who were called by
name to distribute portions to all the males among the
kohenim and to all who were listed by genealogies
among the Lĕwites.
20 And Ḥizqiyahu did this in all Yahuḏah, and he did
what was good and what was right and what was true
before hWhY his Elohim.
21 And in every work that he began in the service of
the House of Elohim, in the Torah and in the
Command, to seek his Elohim, with all his heart, he
did and prospered.

32 After these matters and this trustworthiness,
Sanḥĕriḇ sovereign of Ashshur came. And he entered
2150

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

Yahuḏah and encamped against the cities of defence,
and said to break them open to himself.
2 And Ḥizqiyahu saw that Sanḥĕriḇ had come, and
his face turned to fight against Yerushalayim,
3 and he took counsel with his rulers and mighty
men to stop the water from the springs which were
outside the city. And they helped him.
4 And many people were gathered, and they
stopped all the springs and the stream that ran
through the land, saying, “Why should the sovereigns
of Ashshur come and find much water?”
5 And he strengthened himself, and built up all the
wall that was broken, and raised it up to the towers,
and outside of it another wall, and strengthened Millo,
the City of Dawiḏ, and made large numbers of
weapons and shields.
6 And he appointed battle officers over the people,
and gathered them to him in the open space at the
city gate, and spoke to their heart, saying,
7 “Be strong and courageous, do not be afraid nor
be cast down before the sovereign of Ashshur, nor
before all the army that is with him. For with us there
are more than with him.
8 “With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is hWhY
our Elohim, to help us and to fight our battles.” And
the people leaned on the words of Ḥizqiyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah.
9 After this Sanḥĕriḇ the sovereign of Ashshur sent
his servants to Yerushalayim - but he himself, and all
his power with him against Laḵish - to Ḥizqiyahu
sovereign of Yahuḏah, and to all Yahuḏah who were
in Yerushalayim, saying,
10 “Thus said Sanḥĕriḇ the sovereign of Ashshur, ‘On
what are you trusting, that you remain in
Yerushalayim under siege?
2151

2 CHRONICLES

‘Is Ḥizqiyahu not persuading you to give
yourselves over to die by scarcity of food and by
thirst, saying, “hWhY our Elohim shall deliver us from
the hand of the sovereign of Ashshur”?
12 ‘Has not Ḥizqiyahu himself taken away His high
places and His altars, and ordered Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim, saying, “Bow yourselves before one
altar and burn incense on it?”
13 ‘Do you not know what I and my fathers have done
to all the peoples of other lands? Were the mighty
ones of the nations of those lands in any way able to
deliver their lands out of my hand?
14 ‘Who was there among all the mighty ones of
those nations that my fathers put under the ban that
could deliver his people from my hand, that your
Elohim should be able to deliver you from my hand?
15 ‘And now, do not let Ḥizqiyahu deceive you or
persuade you like this, and do not believe him; for no
mighty one of any nation or reign was able to deliver
his people from my hand or the hand of my fathers much less your Elohim, to deliver you from my hand!’
”
16 And his servants spoke even more against hWhY
Elohim and against His servant Ḥizqiyahu.
17 And he wrote letters to reproach hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, and to speak against Him, saying, “As the
mighty ones of the nations of other lands have not
delivered their people from my hand, so the Elohim of
Ḥizqiyahu shall not deliver His people from my hand.”
18 Then they called out with a loud voice in the
language of Yahuḏah to the people of Yerushalayim
who were on the wall, to frighten them and to trouble
them, in order to capture the city.
11

2152

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And they spoke against the Elohim of
Yerushalayim, as against the mighty ones of the
people of the earth, the work of men’s hands.
20 And
Sovereign Ḥizqiyahu and the naḇi
Yeshayahu, son of Amots, prayed about this, and
cried out to the shamayim.
21 And hWhY sent a messenger who cut down every
mighty brave one, both the leader and the
commander in the camp of the sovereign of Ashshur,
and he returned shamefaced to his own land, and
went into the house of his mighty one, and there some
of his own offspring caused him to fall by the sword.
22 Thus hWhY saved Ḥizqiyahu and the inhabitants
of Yerushalayim from the hand of Sanḥĕriḇ the
sovereign of Ashshur, and from the hand of all others,
and guided them on every side.
23 And many brought gifts to hWhY at Yerushalayim,
and presents to Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yahuḏah, and
he was exalted in the eyes of all nations thereafter.
24 In those days Ḥizqiyahu was sick and near death,
and he prayed to hWhY. And He spoke to him and
appointed a sign for him.
25 However, Ḥizqiyahu did not repay according to the
good done to him, for his heart was lifted up, therefore
wrath came upon him and upon Yahuḏah and
Yerushalayim.
26 Then Ḥizqiyahu humbled himself for the pride of
his heart, he and the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, so
that the wrath of hWhY did not come upon them in the
days of Ḥizqiyahu.
27 And Ḥizqiyahu had much riches and esteem. And
he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold,
and for precious stones, and for spices, and for
shields, and for all desirable utensils;
19

2153

2 CHRONICLES

and storehouses for the harvest of grain, and wine,
and oil, and stalls for all kinds of livestock, and folds
for flocks.
29 And he made cities for himself, and possessions
of great numbers of flocks and herds, for Elohim gave
him much property.
30 And Ḥizqiyahu himself had stopped the upper
outlet of the waters of Giḥon, and directed them to the
west side of the City of Dawiḏ. And Ḥizqiyahu
prospered in all his work.
31 However with the envoys of the princes of Baḇel,
whom they sent to ask him about the wonder that was
done in the land, Elohim left him, in order to try him,
to know all that was in his heart.
32 And the rest of the acts of Ḥizqiyahu, and his
kindness, see, they are written in the vision of
Yeshayahu the naḇi, son of Amots, in the book of the
sovereigns of Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl.
33 So Ḥizqiyahu slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in the upper tombs of the sons of Dawiḏ.
And all Yahuḏah and the inhabitants of Yerushalayim
esteemed him at his death. And Menashsheh his son
reigned in his place.
28

33 Menashsheh was twelve years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in
Yerushalayim.
2 But he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, according to
the abominations of the gentiles whom hWhY
dispossessed from before the children of Yisra’ĕl.
3 For again he rebuilt the high places which
Ḥizqiyahu his father had broken down, and raised up
altars for the Ba’alim, and made Ashĕroth, and bowed
himself to all the host of the heavens and served
them.
2154

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he built altars in the House of hWhY, of which
hWhY had said, “In Yerushalayim is My Name,
forever.”
5 And he built altars for all the host of the heavens
in the two courtyards of the House of HWHY.
6 And he made his sons pass through the fire in the
Valley of Bĕn Hinnom, and practised magic, and used
divination and witchcraft, and consulted mediums and
spiritists. He did much evil in the eyes of hWhY, to
provoke Him.
7 And he placed a carved image of the idol which he
had made, in the House of Elohim, of which Elohim
had said to Dawiḏ and to Shelomoh his son, “In this
house and in Yerushalayim, which I have chosen out
of all the tribes of Yisra’ĕl, I put My Name forever,
8 and no more shall I remove the foot of Yisra’ĕl
from the land which I have appointed for your fathers
- only if they guard to do all that I have commanded
them, according to all the Torah and the Laws and the
Right-Rulings by the hand of Mosheh.”
9 Thus
Menashsheh led Yahuḏah and the
inhabitants of Yerushalayim astray, to do more evil
than the gentiles whom hWhY had destroyed before
the children of Yisra’ĕl.
10 And hWhY spoke to Menashsheh and to his
people, but they did not listen.
11 Therefore
hWhY brought upon them the
commanders of the army of the sovereign of Ashshur,
who captured Menashsheh with hooks, bound him
with bronze shackles, and made him go to Baḇel.
12 And when he was in distress, he sought the face
of hWhY his Elohim, and humbled himself greatly
before the Elohim of his fathers,
13 and prayed to Him. And He was moved by his
entreaty and heard his supplication, and brought him
4

2155

2 CHRONICLES

back to Yerushalayim into his reign. And Menashsheh
knew that hWhY was Elohim.
14 And after this he built a wall outside the City of
Dawiḏ on the west of Giḥon, in the wadi, and as far
as the entrance of the Fish Gate, and it went round
Ophel, and he made it exceedingly high. And he put
army commanders in all the walled cities of Yahuḏah.
15 And he removed the foreign mighty ones and the
idol from the House of hWhY, and all the altars that he
had built in the mount of the House of hWhY and in
Yerushalayim, and he threw them out of the city.
16 And he built the altar of hWhY, and brought peace
offerings and thank offerings on it, and ordered
Yahuḏah to serve hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
17 But the people were still offering on the high
places, though only to hWhY their Elohim.
18 And the rest of the acts of Menashsheh, his prayer
to his Elohim, and the words of the seers who spoke
to him in the Name hWhY of Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, see,
they are written in the book of the sovereigns of
Yisra’ĕl.
19 And his prayer, and his entreaty, and all his sin,
and his trespass, and the places where he built high
places and stood up the Ashĕrim and the carved
images, before he was humbled, see, they are written
among the words of the seers.
20 So Menashsheh slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in his own house. And his son Amon
reigned in his place.
21 Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned two years in Yerushalayim.
22 But he did evil in the eyes of hWhY, as his father
Menashsheh had done. And Amon offered to all the
carved images which his father Menashsheh had
made, and served them.
2156

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he did not humble himself before hWhY as his
father Menashsheh had humbled himself, for Amon
trespassed more and more.
24 And his servants conspired against him, and killed
him in his own house.
25 But the people of the land smote all those who had
conspired against Sovereign Amon, and the people
of the land appointed his son Yoshiyahu to reign in
his place.
23

34 Yoshiyahu was eight years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Yerushalayim.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of hWhY, and
walked in the ways of his father Dawiḏ, and did not
turn aside, right or left.
3 And in the eighth year of his reign, while he was
still young, he began to seek the Elohim of his father
Dawiḏ. And in the twelfth year he began to cleanse
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim from the high places, and
the Ashĕrim, and the carved images, and the
moulded images.
4 And they broke down the altars of the Ba’als in his
presence, and the sun-pillars which were above them
he cut down. And the Ashĕrim, and the carved
images, and the moulded images he destroyed, and
ground them up and scattered it on the graves of
those who had offered to them.
5 And he burned the bones of the priests on their
altars, and cleansed Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim,
6 and in the cities of Menashsheh, and Ephrayim,
and Shim’on, as far as Naphtali, in their ruins all
around.
7 And he broke down the altars and the Ashĕrim,
and ground the carved images into dust, and cut
2157

2 CHRONICLES

down all the sun-pillars throughout all the land of
Yisra’ĕl, and returned to Yerushalayim.
8 And in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he
had cleansed the land and the House, he sent
Shaphan son of Atsalyahu, and Ma’asĕyahu the head
of the city, and Yo’aḥ son of Yo’aḥaz the recorder, to
repair the House of hWhY his Elohim.
9 And they went to Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn ha’gadol,
and they gave the silver that was brought into the
House of Elohim, which the Lĕwites who kept the
doors had gathered from the hand of Menashsheh
and Ephrayim, and from all the remnant of Yisra’ĕl,
and from all Yahuḏah and Binyamin, and which they
had brought back to Yerushalayim,
10 and they gave it in the hand of the workmen, those
appointed over the House of hWhY. And they gave it
to the workmen who worked in the House of hWhY, to
repair and strengthen the House.
11 And they gave it to the craftsmen and to the
builders, to buy hewn stone and timber for couplings
and for beams for the houses which the sovereigns of
Yahuḏah had destroyed.
12 And the men did the work trustworthily. And over
them were appointed Yaḥath and Oḇaḏyahu the
Lĕwites, of the sons of Merari, and Zeḵaryah and
Meshullam, of the sons of the Qehathites, to oversee;
and of the Lĕwites, all of whom were skilled in
instruments of song,
13 and over the burden bearers, and overseers of all
who did work in any kind of service. And of the
Lĕwites were scribes, and officers, and gatekeepers.
14 And when they brought out the silver that was
brought into the House of hWhY, Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn
found the Book of the Torah of hWhY given by
Mosheh.
2158

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

Then Ḥilqiyahu responded and said to Shaphan
the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Torah in the
House of hWhY.” And Ḥilqiyahu gave the Book to
Shaphan.
16 And Shaphan brought the Book to the sovereign,
and brought the sovereign word, saying, “All that has
been given into the hand of your servants, they are
doing.
17 “And they have poured out the silver that was
found in the House of hWhY, and have given it into the
hand of those appointed and the workmen.”
18 And Shaphan the scribe informed the sovereign,
saying, “Ḥilqiyahu the kohĕn has given me a Book.”
And Shaphan read it before the sovereign.
19 And it came to be when the sovereign heard the
words of the Torah, that he tore his garments.
20 And the sovereign commanded Ḥilqiyahu, Aḥiqam
son of Shaphan, and Aḇdon son of Miḵah, and
Shaphan the scribe, and Asayah a servant of the
sovereign, saying,
21 “Go, inquire of hWhY for me, and for him who is left
in Yisra’ĕl and in Yahuḏah, concerning the words of
the Book that is found. For great is the wrath of hWhY
that is poured out on us, because our fathers have not
guarded the Word of hWhY, to do according to all that
is written in this Book.”
22 Then Ḥilqiyahu and those of the sovereign went to
Ḥuldah the neḇiyah, the wife of Shallum son of
Toqhath, son of Ḥasrah, keeper of the wardrobe, who
was dwelling in Yerushalayim in the Second Quarter.
And they spoke to her about this.
23 And she said to them, “Thus said hWhY Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘Say to the man who sent you to Me,
24 “Thus said hWhY, ‘See, I am bringing evil on this
place and on its inhabitants, all the curses that are
15

2159

2 CHRONICLES

written in the Book which they have read before the
sovereign of Yahuḏah,
25 because they have forsaken Me and burned
incense to other mighty ones, to provoke Me with all
the works of their hands. Therefore My wrath is
poured out on this place, and is not quenched.’ ” ’
26 “And to the sovereign of Yahuḏah, who sent you
to inquire of hWhY, say this to him, ‘Thus said hWhY
Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, whose words you have heard,
27 “Because your heart was tender, and you humbled
yourself before Elohim when you heard His words
against this place and against its inhabitants, and you
humbled yourself before Me, and you tore your
garments and wept before Me, I also have heard,”
declares HWHY.
28 “See, I am gathering you to your fathers, and you
shall be gathered to your grave in peace, so that your
eyes would not see all the evil that I am bringing on
this place and its inhabitants.” ’ ” So they brought back
word to the sovereign.
29 And the sovereign sent and gathered all the elders
of Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim.
30 And the sovereign went up to the House of hWhY
with all the men of Yahuḏah and the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim, and the kohenim and the Lĕwites, and
all the people, both great and small. And he read in
their hearing all the words of the Book of the
Covenant which had been found in the House of
hWhY.
31 And the sovereign stood in his place and made a
covenant before hWhY, to follow hWhY and to guard
His Commands and His Witnesses and His Laws,
with all his heart and all his being, to do the words of
the Covenant that were written in this Book.
2160

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

And he made stand all who were present in
Yerushalayim and Binyamin. And the inhabitants of
Yerushalayim did according to the Covenant of
Elohim, the Elohim of their fathers.
33 And Yoshiyahu removed all the abominations from
all the lands that belonged to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
and made all who were present in Yisra’ĕl diligently
serve hWhY their Elohim. All his days they did not turn
away from following hWhY Elohim of their fathers.
32

35 And Yoshiyahu performed a Pesaḥ to hWhY in
Yerushalayim, and they slaughtered the Pesaḥ on the
fourteenth day of the first month.
2 And he appointed the kohenim in their duties and
strengthened them for the service of the House of
HWHY,
3 and said to the Lĕwites who were teaching all
Yisra’ĕl, who were qodesh to hWhY, “Put the qodesh
ark in the House which Shelomoh son of Dawiḏ,
sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, built. It is no longer to be a
burden on your shoulders. Now serve hWhY your
Elohim and His people Yisra’ĕl,
4 and prepare by the fathers’ houses, according to
your divisions, by the writing of Dawiḏ sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl and by the writing of Shelomoh his son.
5 “And stand in the qodesh place by the divisions of
the fathers’ houses of your brothers the lay people,
and the portion of the father’s house of the Lĕwites.
6 “And
slaughter the Pesaḥ, and qadosh
yourselves, and prepare for your brothers, to do
according to the Word of hWhY by the hand of
Mosheh.”
7 And Yoshiyahu gave the lay people lambs and
young goats from the flock, all for Pesaḥ for everyone
present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three
2161

2 CHRONICLES

thousand cattle - these were from the sovereign’s
possessions.
8 And his leaders contributed a voluntary offering to
the people, to the kohenim, and to the Lĕwites.
Ḥilqiyah, and Zeḵaryahu, and Yeḥi’ĕl, leaders of the
House of Elohim, gave to the kohenim for the Pesaḥ
two thousand six hundred, and three hundred cattle;
9 and Konanyahu, his brothers Shemayahu and
Nethan’ĕl, and Ḥashaḇyahu and Ye’i’ĕl and Yozaḇaḏ,
chiefs of the Lĕwites, gave to the Lĕwites for Pesacḥ
offerings five thousand, and five hundred cattle.
10 And the service was prepared, and the kohenim
stood in their places, and the Lĕwites in their
divisions, according to the command of the sovereign,
11 and they slaughtered the Pesaḥ. And the kohenim
sprinkled out of their hands, while the Lĕwites were
skinning.
12 And they removed the burnt offerings, to give them
to the divisions of the fathers’ houses of the lay
people, to bring to hWhY, as it is written in the Book of
Mosheh, and the same with the cattle.
13 So they roasted the Pesaḥ with fire according to
the Right-Ruling, and they boiled the qodesh offerings
in pots, and in cauldrons, and in bowls, and brought
them speedily to all the lay people.
14 And afterward they prepared for themselves and
for the kohenim, because the kohenim, the sons of
Aharon, were offering burnt offerings and fat until
night. So the Lĕwites prepared for themselves and for
the kohenim, the sons of Aharon.
15 And the singers, the sons of Asaph, were in their
places, according to the command of Dawiḏ, and
Asaph, and Hĕman, and Yeḏuthun the seer of the
sovereign. And the gatekeepers at each gate did not
2162

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

have to leave their position, because their brothers
the Lĕwites prepared for them.
16 And all the service of hWhY was prepared that day,
to perform the Pesaḥ and to offer burnt offerings on
the altar of hWhY, according to the command of
Sovereign Yoshiyahu.
17 And the children of Yisra’ĕl who were present
performed the Pesaḥ at that time, and the Festival of
Matstsoth for seven days.
18 There had not been a Pesaḥ performed in Yisra’ĕl
like it since the days of Shemu’ĕl the naḇi. And none
of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl had performed such a
Pesaḥ as Yoshiyahu performed, with the kohenim
and the Lĕwites, and all Yahuḏah and Yisra’ĕl who
were present, and the inhabitants of Yerushalayim.
19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Yoshiyahu
this Pesaḥ was performed.
20 After all this, when Yoshiyahu had prepared the
House, Neḵo sovereign of Mitsrayim came up to fight
against Karkemish by Perath. And Yoshiyahu went
out against him.
21 And he sent messengers to him, saying, “What
have I to do with you, sovereign of Yahuḏah? I am not
coming against you this day, but against the house
with which I am fighting, for Elohim commanded me
to make haste. Leave Elohim alone, who is with me,
lest He destroy you.”
22 However, Yoshiyahu would not turn his face from
him, but disguised himself to fight against him, and
did not listen to the words of Neḵo from the mouth of
Elohim, and came to fight in the Valley of Meḡiddo.
23 And the archers shot at Sovereign Yoshiyahu. And
the sovereign said to his servants, “Take me away,
for I am severely wounded.”
2163

2 CHRONICLES

And his servants took him out of that chariot and
put him in the second chariot that he had, and they
brought him to Yerushalayim. And he died, and was
buried in one of the tombs of his fathers. And all
Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim were mourning for
Yoshiyahu.
25 And Yirmeyahu lamented Yoshiyahu. And to this
day all the singing men and the singing women speak
of Yoshiyahu in their lamentations, and made it a law
in Yisra’ĕl. And see, they are written in the Laments.
26 And the rest of the acts of Yoshiyahu and his
kindness, according to what was written in the Torah
of hWhY,
27 and his acts from the first to the last, see, they are
written in the book of the sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl and
Yahuḏah.
24

36 And the people of the land took Yaho’aḥaz son
of Yoshiyahu, and appointed him to reign in his father’s
place in Yerushalayim.
2 Yaho’aḥaz was twenty-three years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned three months in
Yerushalayim.
3 And the sovereign of Mitsrayim turned him aside
in Yerushalayim, and imposed on the land a levy of
one hundred kiḵars of silver and a kiḵar of gold.
4 And the sovereign of Mitsrayim made his brother
Elyaqim sovereign over Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim,
and changed his name to Yahoyaqim. And Neḵo took
Yaho’aḥaz his brother and brought him to Mitsrayim.
5 Yahoyaqim was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in
Yerushalayim. And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY his
Elohim.
2164

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sovereign of Baḇel came up
against him, and bound him in bronze shackles to
take him away to Baḇel.
7 And Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar brought some of the
utensils from the House of hWhY to Baḇel, and put
them in his temple at Baḇel.
8 And the rest of the acts of Yahoyaqim, the
abominations which he did, and what was found
against him, see, they are written in the book of the
sovereigns of Yisra’ĕl and Yahuḏah. Then Yahoyaḵin
his son reigned in his place.
9 Yahoyaḵin was eight years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned in Yerushalayim three months
and ten days. And he did evil in the eyes of hWhY.
10 And
at the turn of the year Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar sent and brought him to Baḇel, with
the valuable utensils from the House of HWHY, and
made Tsiḏqiyahu, Yahoyaqim’s brother, sovereign
over Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim.
11 Tsiḏqiyahu was twenty-one years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in
Yerushalayim.
12 And he did evil in the eyes of HWHY his Elohim. He
did not humble himself before Yirmeyahu the naḇi,
who spoke from the mouth of hWhY.
13 And
he also rebelled against Sovereign
Neḇuḵaḏnetstsar, who had made him swear by
Elohim, but he stiffened his neck and hardened his
heart against turning to hWhY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl.
14 Also, all the heads of the kohenim and the people
trespassed more and more, according to all the
abominations of the gentiles, and they defiled the
House of hWhY which He had qadosh in
Yerushalayim.
6

2165

2 CHRONICLES

And hWhY Elohim of their fathers sent to them, by
His messengers, rising up early and sending them,
for He had compassion on His people and on His
dwelling place.
16 But they were mocking the messengers of Elohim
and despising His words and scoffing at His neḇi’im,
until the wrath of hWhY arose against His people, until
there was no healing.
17 Therefore He brought against them the sovereign
of the Kasdites, and he slew their young men with the
sword in the House of their Miqdash, and had no
compassion on young man or maiden, on the aged or
the weak - He gave all into his hand.
18 And all the utensils from the House of Elohim,
great and small, and the treasures of the House of
hWhY, and the treasures of the sovereign and of his
leaders, all these he brought to Baḇel.
19 And they burned the House of Elohim, and broke
down the wall of Yerushalayim, and burned all its
palaces with fire, and destroyed all its valuable
utensils.
20 And those who escaped from the sword he exiled
to Baḇel, where they became servants to him and his
sons until the reign of the reign of Paras,
21 in order to fill the word of hWhY by the mouth of
Yirmeyahu, until the land had enjoyed her
Shabbathoth. As long as she lay waste she kept
Shabbath, until seventy years were completed.
22 And in the first year of Koresh sovereign of Paras,
in order to accomplish the word of hWhY by the mouth
of Yirmeyahu, hWhY stirred up the spirit of Koresh
sovereign of Paras, so that he called out in all his
reign, and also put it in writing, saying,
23 “Thus said Koresh sovereign of Paras, ‘hWhY
Elohim of the shamayim has given me all the reigns
15

2166

DIḆRĔY HA’YAMIM 2

of the earth. And He has commanded me to build Him
a House in Yerushalayim, which is in Yahuḏah.
Whoever is among you of all His people, hWhY his
Elohim be with him, and let him go up!’ ”

2167

B’RIT
ḤAḎASHAH
(Renewed Covenant)

2168

MATTHEW

MATTIHYAHU
‫ מתתיהו‬WhYttm

1 The book of the genealogy of {vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
Bĕn of Dawiḏ, Bĕn of Aḇraham:
2 Aḇraham brought forth Yitsḥaq, and Yitsḥaq
brought forth Ya’aqoḇ, and Ya’aqoḇ brought forth
Yahuḏah and his brothers.
3 And Yahuḏah brought forth Perets and Zeraḥ by
Tamar, and Perets brought forth Ḥetsron, and
Ḥetsron brought forth Ram.
4 And
Ram brought forth Amminaḏaḇ, and
Amminaḏaḇ brought forth Naḥshon, and Naḥshon
brought forth Salmon.
5 And Salmon brought forth Bo’az by Raḥaḇ, and
Bo’az brought forth Oḇĕḏ by Ruth, and Oḇĕḏ brought
forth Yishai.
6 And Yishai brought forth Dawiḏ the sovereign, and
Dawiḏ the sovereign brought forth Shelomoh by
Uriyah’s wife.
7 And Shelomoh brought forth Reḥaḇ’am, and
Reḥaḇ’am brought forth Aḇiyah, and Aḇiyah brought
forth Asa.
8 And Asa brought forth Yahoshaphat, and
Yahoshaphat brought forth Yoram, and Yoram
brought forth Uzziyah.
9 And Uzziyah brought forth Yotham, and Yotham
brought forth Aḥaz, and Aḥaz brought forth
Ḥizqiyahu.
10 And Ḥizqiyahu brought forth Menashsheh, and
Menashsheh brought forth Amon, and Amon brought
forth Yoshiyahu.
11 And Yoshiyahu brought forth Yeḵonyah and his
brothers at the time of the exile to Baḇel.
2169

MATTITHYAHU

And after the exile to Baḇel, Yeḵonyah brought
forth She’alti’ĕl, and She’alti’ĕl brought forth
Zerubbaḇel.
13 And Zerubbaḇel brought forth Aḇihuḏ, and Aḇihuḏ
brought forth Elyaqim, and Elyaqim brought forth
Azor.
14 And Azor brought forth Tsaḏoq, and Tsaḏoq
brought forth Aqim, and Aqim brought forth Elihuḏ.
15 And Elihuḏ brought forth El’azar, and El’azar
brought forth Mattan, and Mattan brought forth
Ya’aqoḇ.
16 And Ya’aqoḇ brought forth Yosĕph the husband of
Miryam, of whom was born {vWHY who is called
Mashiaḥ.
17 So all the generations from Aḇraham to Dawiḏ
were fourteen generations, and from Dawiḏ until the
exile to Baḇel were fourteen generations, and from
the exile to Baḇel until Mashiaḥ were fourteen
generations.
18 And the birth of {vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ was as follows:
After His mother Miryam was engaged to Yosĕph,
before they came together, she was found to be
pregnant from the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
19 And Yosĕph her husband, being righteous, and
not wanting to make a show of her, had in mind to put
her away secretly.
20 But while he thought about this, see, a messenger
of hWhY appeared to him in a dream, saying,
“Yosĕph, son of Dawiḏ, do not be afraid to take
Miryam as your wife, for that which is in her was
brought forth from the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
21 “And she shall give birth to a Bĕn, and you shall
call His Name {vWHY for He shall save His people
from their sins.”
12

2170

MATTHEW

And all this came to be in order to fill what was
spoken by hWhY through the naḇi, saying,
23 “See, a maiden shall conceive, and she shall give
birth to a Bĕn, and they shall call His Name
Immanu’ĕl,” which translated, means, “Ĕl with us.”
24 And Yosĕph, awaking from his sleep, did as the
messenger of hWhY commanded him and took his
wife,
25 but knew her not until she gave birth to her Bĕn,
the first-born. And he called His Name {vWHY.
22

2 And {vWHY having been born in Bĕyth Leḥem of
Yahuḏah in the days of Hĕrodĕs the sovereign, see,
Magi from the East came to Yerushalayim,
2 saying, “Where is He who has been born
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim? For we saw His star in the
East and have come to do reverence to Him.”
3 And Hĕrodĕs the sovereign, having heard, was
troubled, and all Yerushalayim with him.
4 And having gathered all the chief kohenim and
scribes of the people together, he asked them where
ha’Mashiaḥ was to be born.
5 And they said to him, “In Bĕyth Leḥem of
Yahuḏah, for thus it has been written by the naḇi,
6 ‘But you, Bĕyth Leḥem, in the land of Yahuḏah,
you are by no means least among the rulers of
Yahuḏah, for out of you shall come a Ruler who shall
shepherd My people Yisra’ĕl.’ ”
7 Then Hĕrodĕs, having called the Magi secretly,
learned exactly from them what time the star
appeared.
8 And having sent them to Bĕyth Leḥem, he said,
“Go and search diligently for the Child, and when you
have found Him, bring back word to me, so that I too
might go and do reverence to Him.”
2171

MATTITHYAHU

And having heard the sovereign, they went. And
see, the star which they had seen, in the East went
before them, until it came and stood over where the
Child was.
10 And
seeing the star, they rejoiced with
exceedingly great joy.
11 And coming into the house, they saw the Child
with Miryam His mother, and fell down and did
reverence to Him, and opening their treasures, they
presented to Him gifts of gold, and frankincense, and
myrrh.
12 And having been warned in a dream that they
should not return to Hĕrodĕs, they departed for their
own country by another way.
13 And when they had left, see, a messenger of hWhY
appeared to Yosĕph in a dream, saying, “Arise, take
the Child and His mother, and flee to Mitsrayim, and
remain there until I bring you word, for Hĕrodĕs is
about to seek the Child to destroy Him.”
14 And rising up, he took the Child and His mother by
night and departed for Mitsrayim,
15 and remained there until the death of Hĕrodĕs, to
fill what was spoken by hWhY through the naḇi,
saying, “Out of Mitsrayim I have called My Bĕn.”
16 Then Hĕrodĕs, having seen that he was fooled by
the Magi, was greatly enraged, and he sent forth and
slew all the male children in Bĕyth Leḥem and in all
its borders, from two years old and under, according
to the time which he had exactly learnt from the Magi.
17 Then was filled what was spoken by Yirmeyahu
the naḇi, saying,
18 “A voice was heard in Ramah, wailing and
weeping, and great mourning Raḥĕl weeping for her
children, refusing to be comforted, because they were
no more.”
9

2172

MATTHEW

And Hĕrodĕs having died, see, a messenger of
hWhY appeared in a dream to Yosĕph in Mitsrayim,
20 saying, “Arise, take the Child and His mother, and
go into the land of Yisra’ĕl, for those seeking the life
of the Child are dead.”
21 And rising up, he took the Child and His mother,
and came into the land of Yisra’ĕl.
22 But hearing that Arḵelaos was reigning over
Yahuḏah instead of his father Hĕrodĕs, he was afraid
to go there. And having been warned in a dream, he
departed to the parts of Galil,
23 and came and dwelt in a city called Natsareth thus to fill what was spoken by the neḇi’im, “He shall
be called a Natsarene.”
19

3 And in those days Yoḥanan the Immerser came
proclaiming in the wilderness of Yahuḏah,
2 and saying, “Repent, for the reign of the shamayim
has come near!”
3 For this is he who was spoken of by the naḇi
Yeshayahu, saying, “A voice of one crying in the
wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of hWhY, make His
paths straight.’ ”
4 And Yoḥanan had a garment of camel’s hair, and
a leather girdle around his waist. And his food was
locusts and wild honey.
5 Then Yerushalayim, and all Yahuḏah, and all the
country around the Yardĕn went out to him,
6 and they were immersed by him in the Yardĕn,
confessing their sins.
7 And
seeing many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming to his immersion, he said to them,
“Brood of adders! Who has warned you to flee from
the coming wrath?
8 “Bear, therefore, fruits worthy of repentance,
2173

MATTITHYAHU

and do not think to say to yourselves, ‘We have
Aḇraham as father.’ For I say to you that Elohim is
able to raise up children to Aḇraham from these
stones.
10 “And the axe is already laid to the root of the trees.
Every tree, then, which does not bear good fruit is cut
down and thrown into the fire.
11 “I indeed immerse you in water unto repentance,
but He who is coming after me is mightier than I,
whose sandals I am not worthy to bear. He shall
immerse you in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh and fire.
12 “His winnowing fork is in His hand, and He shall
thoroughly cleanse His threshing-floor, and gather
His wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff He shall
burn with unquenchable fire.”
13 Then {vWHY came from Galil to Yoḥanan at the
Yardĕn to be immersed by him.
14 But Yoḥanan was hindering Him, saying, “I need
to be immersed by You, and You come to me?”
15 But {vWHY answering, said to him, “Permit it now,
for thus it is fitting for us to fill all righteousness.” Then
he permitted Him.
16 And having been immersed, {vWHY went up
immediately from the water, and see, the shamayim
were opened, and He saw the Ruaḥ of hWhY
descending like a dove and coming upon Him,
17 and see, a voice out of the shamayim, saying,
“This is My Bĕn, the Beloved, in whom I delight.”
9

4 Then {vWHY was led up by the Ruaḥ into the
wilderness to be tried by the devil.
2 And after having fasted forty days and forty nights,
He was hungry.

2174

MATTHEW

And the trier came and said to Him, “If You are the
Bĕn of hWhY, command that these stones become
bread.”
4 But He answering, said, “It has been written, ‘Man
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
comes from the mouth of hWhY.’ ”
5 Then the devil took Him up into the qodesh city,
put Him on the edge of the Miqdash,
6 and said to Him, “If You are the Bĕn of HWHY, throw
Yourself down. For it has been written, ‘He shall
command His messengers concerning you,’ and, ‘In
their hands they shall bear you up, so that you do not
dash your foot against a stone.’ ”
7 {vWHY said to him, “It has also been written, ‘You
shall not try hWhY your Elohim.’ ”
8 Again, the devil took Him up on a very high
mountain, and showed Him all the reigns of the world,
and their esteem,
9 and said to Him, “All these I shall give You if You
fall down and worship me.”
10 Then {vWHY said to him, “Go, Satan! For it has
been written, ‘You shall worship hWhY your Elohim,
and Him alone you shall serve.’ ”
11 Then the devil left Him, and see, messengers
came and attended Him.
12 And {vWHY, having heard that Yoḥanan had been
put in prison, withdrew into Galil.
13 And leaving Natsareth, He came and dwelt in
Kephar Naḥum, which is by the sea, in the borders of
Zeḇulun and Naphtali,
14 to fill what was spoken by Yeshayahu the naḇi,
saying,
15 “Land of Zeḇulun and land of Naphtali, the way of
the sea, beyond the Yardĕn, Galil of the gentiles 3

2175

MATTITHYAHU

the people who sat in darkness saw a great light,
and upon those who sat in the land and shadow of
death, light arose to them.”
17 From that time {vWHY began to proclaim and to
say, “Repent, for the reign of the shamayim has
drawn near.”
18 And {vWHY, walking by the Sea of Galil, saw two
brothers, Shim’on called Kĕpha, and Andri his
brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were
fishermen.
19 And He said to them, “Follow Me, and I shall make
you fishers of men.”
20 And immediately they left their nets and followed
Him.
21 And going on from there, He saw two other
brothers, Ya’aqoḇ of Zaḇdai, and Yoḥanan his
brother, in the boat with Zaḇdai their father, mending
their nets. And He called them,
22 and immediately they left the boat and their father,
and followed Him.
23 And {vWHY went about all Galil, teaching in their
congregations, and proclaiming the Good News of the
reign, and healing every disease and every bodily
weakness among the people.
24 And news about Him went out into all Suria. And
they brought to Him all who were sick, afflicted with
various diseases and pains, and those who were
demon-possessed, and epileptics, and paralytics.
And He healed them.
25 And large crowds - from Galil, and Dekapolis, and
Yerushalayim, and Yahuḏah, and beyond the Yardĕn
- followed Him.
16

2176

MATTHEW

5 But when He saw the crowds, He went up on a
mountain. And when He was seated His talmidim
came to Him.
2 And having opened His mouth, He was teaching
them, saying,
3 “Baruḵ are the poor in spirit, because theirs is the
reign of the shamayim.
4 “Baruḵ are those who mourn, because they shall
be comforted.
5 “Baruḵ are the meek, because they shall inherit
the earth.
6 “Baruḵ are those who hunger and thirst for
righteousness, because they shall be filled.
7 “Baruḵ are the compassionate, because they shall
obtain compassion.
8 “Baruḵ are the clean in heart, because they shall
see Elohim.
9 “Baruḵ are the peacemakers, because they shall
be called sons of Elohim.
10 “Baruḵ are those persecuted for righteousness’
sake, because theirs is the reign of the shamayim.
11 “Baruḵ are you when they reproach and persecute
you, and falsely say every wicked word against you,
for My sake.
12 “Rejoice and be glad, because your reward in the
shamayim is great. For in this way they persecuted
the neḇi’im who were before you.
13 “You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt
becomes tasteless, how shall it be seasoned? For it
is no longer of any use but to be thrown out and to be
trodden down by men.
14 “You are the light of the world. It is impossible for
a city to be hidden on a mountain.
2177

MATTITHYAHU

“Nor do they light a lamp and put it under a basket,
but on a lampstand, and it shines to all those in the
house.
16 “Let your light so shine before men, so that they
see your good works and praise your Father who is in
the shamayim.
17 “Do not think that I came to destroy the Torah or
the Neḇi’im. I did not come to destroy but to complete.
18 “For truly, I say to you, till the shamayim and the
earth pass away, one yod or one tittle shall by no
means pass from the Torah till all be done.
19 “Whoever, then, breaks one of the least of these
Commands, and teaches men so, shall be called
least in the reign of the shamayim; but whoever does
and teaches them, he shall be called great in the reign
of the shamayim.
20 “For I say to you, that unless your righteousness
exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall
by no means enter into the reign of the shamayim.
21 “You heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You
shall not murder,’ and whoever murders shall be
liable to judgment.
22 “But I say to you that whoever is wroth with his
brother without a cause shall be liable to judgment.
And whoever says to his brother, ‘Raka!’ shall be
liable to the Sanhedrin. But whoever says, ‘You fool!’
shall be liable to fire of Gĕy-Hinnom.
23 “If, then, you bring your gift to the altar, and there
remember that your brother holds whatever against
you,
24 leave your gift there before the altar, and go, first
make peace with your brother, and then come and
offer your gift.
25 “Be well-minded with your opponent, promptly,
while you are on the way with him, lest your opponent
15

2178

MATTHEW

deliver you to the judge, and the judge to the officer,
and you be thrown into prison.
26 “Truly, I say to you, you shall by no means get out
of there till you have paid the last quarter.
27 “You heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You
shall not commit adultery.’
28 “But I say to you that everyone looking at a woman
to lust for her has already committed adultery with her
in his heart.
29 “And if your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck
it out and throw it away from you. For it is better for
you that one of your members perish, than for your
entire body to be thrown into Gĕy-Hinnom.
30 “And if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut
it off and throw it away from you. For it is better for
you that one of your members perish, than for your
entire body to be thrown into Gĕy-Hinnom.
31 “And it has been said, ‘Whoever puts away his
wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’
32 “But I say to you that whoever puts away his wife,
except for the matter of whoring, makes her commit
adultery. And whoever marries a woman who has
been put away commits adultery.
33 “Again, you heard that it was said to those of old,
‘You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform your
oaths to hWhY.’
34 “But I say to you, do not swear falsely at all, neither
by the shamayim, because it is Elohim’s throne;
35 nor by the earth, for it is His footstool; nor by
Yerushalayim, for it is the city of the great Sovereign;
36 nor swear by your head, because you are not able
to make one hair white or black.
37 “But let your word ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ and your ‘No’ be
‘No.’ And what goes beyond these is from the wicked
one.
2179

MATTITHYAHU

“You heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye and
a tooth for a tooth,’
39 but I say to you, do not resist the wicked. But
whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn the other
to him also.
40 “And he who wants to sue you and take away your
inner garment, let him have your outer garment as
well.
41 “And whoever compels you to go one miliyon, go
with him two.
42 “Give to him who asks of you, and from him who
wants to borrow from you, do not turn away.
43 “You heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your
neighbour and hate your enemy.’
44 “But I say to you, love your enemies, baraḵ those
cursing you, do good to those hating you, and pray
for those insulting you and persecuting you,
45 so that you become sons of your Father in the
shamayim. Because He makes His sun rise on the
wicked and on the good, and sends rain on the
righteous and on the unrighteous.
46 “For if you love those loving you, what reward have
you? Are the tax collectors not doing the same too?
47 “And if you greet your brothers only, what do you
do more? Are the tax collectors not doing so too?
48 “Therefore, be perfect, as your Father in the
shamayim is perfect.
38

6 “Beware of doing your kind deeds before men, in
order to be seen by them. Otherwise you have no
reward from your Father in the shamayim.
2 “Thus, when you do a kind deed, do not sound a
trumpet before you as the hypocrites do, in the
congregations and in the streets, to be praised by
men. Truly, I say to you, they have their reward.
2180

MATTHEW

“But when you do a kind deed, do not let your left
hand know what your right hand is doing,
4 so that your kind deed shall be in secret. And your
Father who sees in secret shall Himself reward you
openly.
5 “And when you pray, you shall not be like the
hypocrites. For they love to pray standing in the
congregations and on the corners of the streets, to be
seen by men. Truly, I say to you, they have their
reward.
6 “But you, when you pray, go into your room, and
having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in
the secret place. And your Father who sees in secret
shall reward you openly.
7 “And when praying, do not keep on babbling like
the gentiles. For they think that they shall be heard for
their many words.
8 “Therefore do not be like them, for your Father
knows what you need before you ask Him.
9 “This, then, is the way you should pray: ‘Our
Father who is in the shamayim, let Your Name be
qodesh,
10 let Your reign come, let Your desire be done on
earth as it is in the shamayim.
11 ‘Give us today our daily bread.
12 ‘And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors.
13 ‘And do not lead us into trial, but deliver us from
the wicked one - because Yours is the reign and the
power and the esteem, forever. Amĕn.’
14 “For if you forgive men their trespasses, your
Father of the shamayim shall also forgive you.
15 “But if you do not forgive men their trespasses,
neither shall your Father forgive your trespasses.
3

2181

MATTITHYAHU

“And when you fast, do not be sad-faced like the
hypocrites. For they disfigure their faces so that they
appear to be fasting to men. Truly, I say to you, they
have their reward.
17 “But you, when you fast, anoint your head and
wash your face,
18 so that you do not appear to men to be fasting, but
to your Father who is in the secret place. And your
Father who sees in secret shall reward you openly.
19 “Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth,
where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break
in and steal,
20 but lay up for yourselves treasures in the
shamayim, where neither moth nor rust destroys and
where thieves do not break in and steal.
21 “For where your treasure is, there your heart shall
be also.
22 “The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your
eye is good, all your body shall be enlightened.
23 “But if your eye is evil, all your body shall be
darkened. If, then, the light that is within you is
darkness, how great is that darkness!
24 “No one is able to serve two masters, for either he
shall hate the one and love the other, or else he shall
cling to the one and despise the other. You are not
able to serve Elohim and wealth.
25 “Because of this I say to you, do not worry about
your life, what you shall eat or drink, or about your
body, what you shall put on. Is not life more than the
food and the body more than the clothing?
26 “Look at the birds of the shamayim, for they neither
sow nor reap nor gather into storehouses, yet your
Father of the shamayim feeds them. Are you not
worth more than they?
16

2182

MATTHEW

“And which of you by worrying is able to add one
pĕḵus to his life’s span?
28 “So why do you worry about clothing? Note well
the lilies of the field, how they grow. They neither toil
nor spin,
29 and I say to you that even Shelomoh in all his
esteem was not dressed like one of these.
30 “But if Elohim so clothes the grass of the field,
which exists today, and tomorrow is thrown into the
furnace, how much more you, O you of little belief?
31 “Do not worry then, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or
‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’
32 “For all these the gentiles seek for. And your
Father of the shamayim knows that you need all
these.
33 “But seek first the reign of Elohim, and His
righteousness, and all these shall be added to you.
34 “Do not, then, worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow
shall have its own worries. Each day has enough evil
of itself.
27

7 “Do not judge, lest you be judged.
“For with what judgment you judge, you shall be
judged. And with the same measure you use, it shall
be measured to you.
3 “And why do you look at the splinter in your
brother’s eye, but do not notice the plank in your own
eye?
4 “Or how is it that you say to your brother, ‘Let me
remove the splinter out of your eye,’ and see, a plank
is in your own eye?
5 “Hypocrite! First remove the plank from your own
eye, and then you shall see clearly to remove the
splinter out of your brother’s eye.
2

2183

MATTITHYAHU

“Do not give what is qodesh to the dogs, nor throw
your pearls before the pigs, lest they trample them
under their feet, and turn and tear you in pieces.
7 “Ask and it shall be given to you, seek and you
shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you.
8 “For everyone who asks receives, and he who
seeks finds, and to him who knocks it shall be
opened.
9 “Or is there a man among you who, if his son asks
for bread, shall give him a stone?
10 “Or if he asks for a fish, shall he give him a snake?
11 “If you then, being wicked, know how to give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your
Father who is in the shamayim give what is good to
those who ask Him!
12 “Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you,
do also to them, for this is the Torah and the Neḇi’im.
13 “Enter in through the narrow gate! Because the
gate is wide - and the way is broad - that leads to
destruction, and there are many who enter in through
it.
14 “Because the gate is narrow and the way is hard
pressed which leads to ḥai, and there are few who
find it.
15 “But beware of the false prophets, who come to
you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are savage
wolves.
16 “By their fruits you shall know them. Are grapes
gathered from thornbushes or figs from thistles?
17 “So every good tree yields good fruit, but a rotten
tree yields wicked fruit.
18 “A good tree is unable to yield wicked fruit, and a
rotten tree to yield good fruit.
19 “Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut
down and thrown into the fire.
6

2184

MATTHEW

“So then, by their fruits you shall know them 21 “Not everyone who says to Me, ‘Aḏonai, Aḏonai,’
shall enter into the reign of the shamayim, but he who
is doing the desire of My Father in the shamayim.
22 “Many shall say to Me in that day, ‘Aḏonai, Aḏonai,
have we not naḇu in Your Name, and cast out
demons in Your Name, and done many mighty works
in Your Name?’
23 “And then I shall declare to them, ‘I never knew
you, depart from Me, you who work lawlessness!’
24 “Therefore everyone who hears these words of
Mine, and does them, shall be like a wise man who
built his house on the rock,
25 and the rain came down, and the floods came, and
the winds blew and beat on that house, and it did not
fall, for it was founded on the rock.
26 “And everyone who hears these words of Mine,
and does not do them, shall be like a foolish man who
built his house on the sand,
27 and the rain came down, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and they beat on that house, and it
fell, and great was its fall.”
28 And it came to be, when {vWHY had ended these
words, that the people were astonished at His
teaching,
29 for He was teaching them as one possessing
authority, and not as the scribes.
20

8 And when He came down from the mountain, large
crowds followed Him.
2 And see, a leper came, and bowed before Him,
saying, “Aḏonai, if You desire, You are able to make
me clean.”

2185

MATTITHYAHU

And stretching out His hand {vWHY touched him,
saying, “I desire it. Be cleansed!” And immediately his
leprosy was cleansed.
4 And {vWHY said to him, “See, mention it to no one.
But go your way, show yourself to the kohĕn, and
offer the gift that Mosheh commanded, as a witness
to them.”
5 And when {vWHY had entered Kephar Naḥum, a
captain came to Him, appealing to Him,
6 saying, “Aḏonai, my servant is lying in the house
paralysed, grievously tortured.”
7 And {vWHY said to him, “I shall come and heal
him.”
8 And the captain answering, said, “Aḏonai, I am not
worthy that You should come under my roof. But only
say a word, and my servant shall be healed.
9 “For I too am a man under authority, having
soldiers under me. And I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he
goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and to
my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
10 And when {vWHY heard, He marvelled, and said
to those who followed, “Truly, I say to you, not even
in Yisra’ĕl have I found such great belief!
11 “And I say to you that many shall come from east
and west, and sit down with Aḇraham, and Yitsḥaq,
and Ya’aqoḇ in the reign of the shamayim,
12 but the sons of the reign shall be cast out into outer
darkness - there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.”
13 And {vWHY said to the captain, “Go, and as you
have believed, so let it be done for you.” And his
servant was healed that hour.
14 And when {vWHY had come into the house of
Kĕpha, He saw his wife’s mother lying sick with
inflammation.
3

2186

MATTHEW

And He touched her hand, and the inflammation
left her. And she arose and served them.
16 And when evening had come, they brought to Him
many who were demon-possessed. And He cast out
the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick,
17 that it might be filled what was spoken by
Yeshayahu the naḇi, saying, “He Himself took our
weaknesses and bore our sicknesses.”
18 And when {vWHY saw large crowds about Him, He
gave a command to go off to the other side.
19 And a certain scribe, having come near, said to
Him, “Teacher, I shall follow You wherever You go.”
20 And {vWHY said to him, “The foxes have holes and
the birds of the shamayim nests, but the Bĕn of Aḏam
has nowhere to lay His head.”
21 And another of His talmidim said to Him, “Aḏonai,
first let me go and bury my father.”
22 But {vWHY said to him, “Follow Me, and leave the
dead to bury their own dead.”
23 And when He entered into a boat, His talmidim
followed Him.
24 And see, a great gale arose on the sea, so that the
boat was covered by the waves. But He was sleeping.
25 And His talmidim came to Him and woke Him up,
saying, “Aḏonai, save us! We are perishing!”
26 And He said to them, “Why are you afraid, O you
of little belief?” Then, having risen, He rebuked the
winds and the sea. And there was a great calm.
27 And the men marvelled, saying, “What is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey Him?”
28 And when He came to the other side, to the
country of the Girgashites, two demon-possessed
ones met Him, coming out of the tombs, very fierce,
so that no one was able to pass that way.
15

2187

MATTITHYAHU

And see, they cried out, saying, “What have we to
do with You, {vWHY Bĕn of Elohim? Have You come
here to torture us, before the appointed time?”
30 And at a distance from them there was a herd of
many pigs feeding,
31 and the demons begged Him, saying, “If You cast
us out, send us into the herd of pigs.”
32 And He said to them, “Go.” And they, coming out,
went into the herd of pigs. And see, the entire herd of
pigs rushed down the steep place into the sea, and
died in the water.
33 And the herdsmen fled, and went away into the
city and reported all this, and about those possessed
by demons.
34 And see, all the city came out to meet {vWHY. And
when they saw Him, they begged Him to leave their
borders.
29

9 And entering into a boat, He passed over, and came
to His own city.
2 And see, they were bringing to Him a paralytic
lying on a bed. And {vWHY, seeing their belief, said to
the paralytic, “Take courage, son, your sins have
been forgiven.”
3 And see, some of the scribes said to themselves,
“This One blasphemes!”
4 And {vWHY, knowing their thoughts, said, “Why do
you think wickedness in your hearts?
5 “For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins have been
forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk’?
6 “But in order for you to know that the Bĕn of Aḏam
possesses authority on earth to forgive sins...” He
then said to the paralytic, “Rise, take up your bed, and
go to your house.”
7 And he rose and went to his house.
2188

MATTHEW

And when the crowds saw it, they marvelled and
praised Elohim who had given such authority to men.
9 And as {vWHY passed on from there, He saw a
man called Mattithyahu sitting at the tax office. And
He said to him, “Follow Me.” And he rose and followed
Him.
10 And it came to be, as {vWHY sat at the table in the
house, that see, many tax collectors and sinners
came and sat down with Him and His talmidim.
11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to His
talmidim, “Why does your Teacher eat with tax
collectors and sinners?”
12 And {vWHY hearing this, said to them, “Those who
are strong have no need of a physician, but those who
are sick.
13 “But go and learn what this means, ‘I desire
compassion and not offering.’ For I did not come to
call the righteous to repentance, but sinners.”
14 Then the talmidim of Yoḥanan came to Him,
saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but
Your talmidim do not fast?”
15 And {vWHY said to them, “Are the friends of the
bridegroom able to mourn as long as the bridegroom
is with them? But the days shall come when the
bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they
shall fast.
16 “And no one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an
old garment, for the patch pulls away from the
garment, and the tear is made worse.
17 “Neither do they put new wine into old wineskins,
or else the wineskins burst, and the wine is spilled,
and the wineskins are ruined. But they put new wine
into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.”
18 While He was saying all this to them, see, a ruler
came and bowed down to Him, saying, “My daughter
8

2189

MATTITHYAHU

is dead by now, but come and lay Your hand on her
and she shall live.”
19 And {vWHY rose and followed him, His talmidim
too.
20 And see, a woman who had a flow of blood for
twelve years came from behind and touched the tsitsit
of His garment.
21 For she said to herself, “If I only touch His
garment, I shall be healed.”
22 But {vWHY turned, and when He saw her He said,
“Take courage, daughter, your belief has healed you.”
And the woman was healed from that hour.
23 And when {vWHY came into the ruler’s house, and
saw the flute players and the crowd making a noise,
24 He said to them, “Go back, for the girl is not dead,
but sleeping.” And they laughed at Him.
25 But when the crowd was put outside, He went in
and took her by the hand, and the girl arose.
26 And this report went out into all that land.
27 And as {vWHY passed on from there, two blind
men followed Him, crying out and saying, “Bĕn of
Dawiḏ, have compassion on us!”
28 And when He came into the house, the blind men
came to Him. And {vWHY said to them, “Do you
believe that I am able to do this?” They said to Him,
“Yes, Aḏonai.”
29 Then He touched their eyes, saying, “According to
your belief let it be to you.”
30 And their eyes were opened. And {vWHY strictly
ordered them, saying, “See, let no one know.”
31 But when they went out, they made Him known in
all that land.
32 And as they were going out, see, they brought to
Him a man, dumb and demon-possessed.
2190

MATTHEW

And when the demon was cast out, the dumb one
spoke. And the crowds marvelled, saying, “It was
never seen like this in Yisra’ĕl!”
34 But the Pharisees said, “He cast out demons by
the ruler of the demons.”
35 And {vWHY went about all the cities and villages,
teaching in their congregations, and proclaiming the
Good News of the reign, and healing every disease
and every bodily weakness among the people.
36 And having seen the crowds, He was moved with
compassion for them, because they were weary and
scattered, as sheep having no shepherd.
37 Then He said to His talmidim, “The harvest truly is
great, but the workers are few.
38 “Pray then that the Aḏon of the harvest would send
out workers to His harvest.”
33

10 And having called His twelve talmidim near, He
gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them
out, and to heal every disease and every bodily
weakness.
2 And these are the names of the twelve emissaries:
first, Shim’on, who is called Kĕpha, and Andri his
brother; Ya’aqoḇ the son of Zaḇdai, and Yoḥanan his
brother;
3 Philippos and Bartholomi; T’oma and Mattithyahu
the tax collector; Ya’aqoḇ of Ḥĕleph, and Laḇai whose
last name was Taddai;
4 Shim’on the Kena’anite, and Yahuḏah from
Qeriyoth, who also delivered Him up.
5 {vWHY sent these twelve out, having commanded
them, saying, “Do not go into the way of the gentiles,
and do not enter a city of the Shomeronites,
6 but rather go to the lost sheep of the house of
Yisra’ĕl.
2191

MATTITHYAHU

“And as you go, proclaim, saying, ‘The reign of the
shamayim has drawn near.’
8 “Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead,
cast out demons. You have received without paying,
give without being paid.
9 “Do not acquire gold or silver or copper for your
moneybelts,
10 or a bag for the journey, or two undergarments, or
sandals, or staffs, for the worker is worthy of his food.
11 “And into whatever city or village you enter, ask
who is worthy in it, and stay there until you leave.
12 “And as you enter into a house, greet it.
13 “And if the house is worthy, let your peace come
upon it. But if it is not worthy, let your peace return to
you.
14 “And whoever does not receive you nor hear your
words, when you leave that house or city, shake off
the dust from your feet.
15 “Truly, I say to you, it shall be more bearable for
the land of Seḏom and Amorah in the day of judgment
than for that city!
16 “See, I send you out as sheep in the midst of
wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents and innocent
as doves.
17 “But beware of men, for they shall deliver you up
to sanhedrins and flog you in their congregations.
18 “And you shall be brought before governors and
sovereigns for My sake, as a witness to them and to
the gentiles.
19 “But when they deliver you up, do not worry about
how or what you should speak. For it shall be given
to you in that hour what you shall speak,
20 for it is not you who speak, but the Ruaḥ of your
Father speaking in you.
7

2192

MATTHEW

“And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and
a father his child. And children shall rise up against
parents and shall put them to death.
22 “And you shall be hated by all for My Name’s sake.
But he who shall have endured to the end shall be
saved.
23 “And when they persecute you in this city, flee to
another. For truly, I say to you, you shall by no means
have gone through the cities of Yisra’ĕl before the
Bĕn of Aḏam comes.
24 “A talmid is not above his teacher, nor a servant
above his master.
25 “It is enough for the talmid to become like his
teacher, and a servant like his master. If they have
called the master of the house Be’elzebul, how much
more those of his household!
26 “Therefore do not fear them. For whatever is
covered shall be revealed, and whatever is hidden
shall be made known.
27 “What I say to you in the dark, speak in the light.
And what you hear in the ear, proclaim on the housetops.
28 “And do not fear those who kill the body but are
unable to kill the being. But rather fear Him who is
able to destroy both being and body in Gĕy-Hinnom.
29 “Are not two sparrows sold for a copper coin? And
not one of them falls to the ground without your
Father.
30 “And even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
31 “So do not fear, you are worth more than many
sparrows.
32 “Everyone, therefore, who shall confess Me before
men, him I shall also confess before My Father who
is in the shamayim.
21

2193

MATTITHYAHU

“But whoever shall deny Me before men, him I
shall also deny before My Father who is in the
shamayim.
34 “Do not think that I have come to bring peace on
earth. I did not come to bring peace but a sword,
35 for I have come to bring division, a man against his
father, a daughter against her mother, and a
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law 36 and a man’s enemies are those of his own
household.
37 “He who loves father or mother more than Me is
not worthy of Me, and he who loves son or daughter
more than Me is not worthy of Me.
38 “And he who does not take up his stake and follow
after Me is not worthy of Me.
39 “He who has found his life shall lose it, and he that
has lost his life for My sake shall find it.
40 “He who receives you receives Me, and he who
receives Me receives Him who sent Me.
41 “He who receives a naḇi in the name of a naḇi shall
receive a naḇi’s reward. And he who a receives a
righteous one in the name of a righteous one shall
receive a righteous one’s reward.
42 “And whoever gives one of these little ones a cold
cupful only in the name of a talmid, truly, I say to you,
he shall by no means lose his reward.”
33

11 And it came to be, when {vWHY ended
instructing His twelve talmidim, that He departed from
there to teach and to proclaim in their cities.
2 And when Yoḥanan had heard in the prison of the
works of Mashiaḥ, he sent two of his talmidim
3 and said to Him, “Are you the Coming One, or do
we look for another?”
2194

MATTHEW

And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Go, report
to Yoḥanan what you hear and see:
5 “Blind receive sight and lame walk, lepers are
cleansed and deaf hear, dead are raised up and poor
are brought the Good News.
6 “And baruḵ is he who does not stumble in Me.”
7 And as these were going, {vWHY began to say to
the crowds concerning Yoḥanan, “What did you go
out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the
wind?
8 “But what did you go out to see? A man dressed
in soft garments? Look, those wearing fine softness
are in the houses of sovereigns.
9 “But what did you go out to see? A naḇi? Yes, I
say to you, and more than a naḇi.
10 “For this is he of whom it was written, ‘See, I send
My messenger before Your face, who shall prepare
Your way before You.’
11 “Truly, I say to you, among those born of women
there has not risen one greater than Yoḥanan the
Immerser, yet the least one in the reign of the
shamayim is greater than he.
12 “And from the days of Yoḥanan the Immerser till
now, the reign of the shamayim is violated, and the
violent seize it.
13 “For all the Neḇi’im and the Torah naḇu till
Yoḥanan.
14 “And if you want to accept it, he is Ĕliyahu who was
about to come.
15 “He who has ears to hear, let him hear!
16 “And to what shall I compare this generation? It is
like children sitting in the market-places and calling to
their companions,
4

2195

MATTITHYAHU

and saying, ‘We played the flute for you, and you
did not dance; we lamented to you, and you did not
beat the breast.’
18 “For Yoḥanan came neither eating nor drinking,
and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
19 “The Bĕn of Aḏam came eating and drinking, and
they say, ‘See, a man, a glutton and a wine drinker, a
friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ And wisdom was
declared right by her works.”
20 Then He began to reproach the cities in which
most of His miracles had been done, because they
did not repent:
21 “Woe to you, Ḵorazin! Woe to you, Bĕyth Tsaiḏa!
Because if the miracles which were done in you had
been done in Tsor and Tsiḏon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
22 “But I say to you, it shall be more bearable for Tsor
and Tsiḏon in the day of judgment than for you.
23 “And you, Kephar Naḥum, who were exalted to the
shamayim, shall be brought down to the grave!
Because if the miracles which were done in you had
been done in Seḏom, it would have remained until
this day.
24 “But I say to you that it shall be more bearable for
the land of Seḏom in the day of judgment than for
you.”
25 At that time {vWHY responding, said, “I thank You,
Father, Aḏon of the shamayim and earth, because
You have hidden these from clever and learned ones
and have revealed them to children.
26 “Yes, Father, because so it was well-pleasing in
Your sight.
27 “All have been handed over to Me by My Father,
and no one knows the Bĕn except the Father. Nor
17

2196

MATTHEW

does anyone know the Father except the Bĕn, and he
to whom the Bĕn wants to reveal Him.
28 “Come to Me, all you who labour and are
burdened, and I shall give you rest.
29 “Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I
am meek and humble in heart, and you shall find rest
for your beings.
30 “For My yoke is gentle and My burden is light.”

12 At that time {vWHY went through the grain fields
on the Shabbath. And His talmidim were hungry, and
began to pluck heads of grain, to eat.
2 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to Him,
“Look, Your talmidim are doing what is not right to do
on the Shabbath!”
3 But He said to them, “Have you not read what
Dawiḏ did when he was hungry, he and those who
were with him:
4 how he went into the House of Elohim and ate the
showbread which was not right for him to eat, nor for
those who were with him, but only for the kohenim?
5 “Or did you not read in the Torah that on the
Shabbath the kohenim in the Miqdash profane the
Shabbath, and are blameless?
6 “But I say to you that in this place there is One
greater than the Miqdash.
7 “And if you had known what this means, ‘I desire
compassion and not offering,’ you would not have
condemned the blameless.
8 “For the Bĕn of Aḏam is Aḏon of the Shabbath.”
9 And having left there, He went into their
congregation.
10 And see, there was a man having a withered hand.
And they asked Him, saying, “Is it right to heal on the
Shabbath?” - so as to accuse Him.
2197

MATTITHYAHU

And He said to them, “What man is there among
you who has one sheep, and if it falls into a pit on the
Shabbath, shall not take hold of it and lift it out?
12 “How much more worth is a man than a sheep! So
it is right to do good on the Shabbath.”
13 Then He said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.”
And he stretched it out, and it was restored, as
healthy as the other.
14 But the Pharisees went out and took counsel
against Him, so as to destroy Him.
15 But {vWHY, knowing it, withdrew from there. And
large crowds followed Him, and He healed them all,
16 and warned them not to make Him known,
17 in order that what was spoken by Yeshayahu the
naḇi, might be filled, saying,
18 “See, My Servant whom I have chosen, My
Beloved in whom My being delights. I shall put My
Ruaḥ upon Him, and He shall declare Right-Ruling to
the nations.
19 “He shall not strive nor cry out, nor shall anyone
hear His voice in the streets.
20 “A crushed reed He shall not break, and smoking
flax He shall not quench, till He brings forth RightRuling forever.
21 “And the nations shall trust in His Name.”
22 Then they brought to Him one who was demonpossessed, blind and dumb. And He healed him, so
that the blind and dumb man both spoke and saw.
23 And all the crowds were amazed and said, “Is this
the Bĕn of Dawiḏ?”
24 But when the Pharisees heard it they said, “This
one does not cast out demons except by Be’elzebul,
the ruler of the demons.”
25 And {vWHY knew their thoughts, and said to them,
“Every reign divided against itself is laid waste, and
11

2198

MATTHEW

every city or house divided against itself shall not
stand.
26 “And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against
himself. How then does his reign stand?
27 “And if I, by Be’elzebul, cast out demons, by whom
do your sons cast them out? Because of this they
shall be your judges.
28 “But if I cast out demons by the Ruaḥ of Elohim,
then the reign of Elohim has come upon you.
29 “Or how is one able to enter a strong man’s house
and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong
man? And then he shall plunder his house.
30 “He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who
does not gather with Me scatters abroad.
31 “Because of this I say to you, all sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven men, but the blasphemy
against the Ruaḥ shall not be forgiven men.
32 “And whoever speaks a word against the Bĕn of
Aḏam, it shall be forgiven him, but whoever speaks
against the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, it shall not be forgiven
him, either in this age or in the age to come.
33 “Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or
else make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten, for a tree
is known by its fruit.
34 “Brood of adders! How are you able to speak what
is good - being wicked? For the mouth speaks from
the overflow of the heart.
35 “The good man brings forth what is good from the
good treasures of his heart, and the wicked man
brings forth what is wicked from the wicked treasure.
36 “And I say to you that for every idle word men
speak, they shall give an account of it in the day of
judgment.

2199

MATTITHYAHU

“For by your words you shall be declared
righteous, and by your words you shall be declared
unrighteous.”
38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees
answered, saying, “Teacher, we want to see a sign
from You.”
39 But He answering, said to them, “A wicked and
adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and no sign
shall be given to it except the sign of the naḇi Yonah.
40 “For as Yonah was three days and three nights in
the stomach of the great fish, so shall the Bĕn of
Aḏam be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth.
41 “Men of Ninewĕh shall stand up in the judgment
with this generation and condemn it, because they
repented at the preaching of Yonah, and look, a
greater than Yonah is here.
42 “The sovereigness of the South shall rise up in the
judgment with this generation and shall condemn it,
for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Shelomoh, and look, a greater than
Shelomoh is here.
43 “Now when the unclean spirit goes out of a man,
he goes through dry places, seeking rest, and finds
none.
44 “Then it says, ‘I shall return to my house from
which I came.’ And when it comes, it finds it empty,
swept, and decorated.
45 “Then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits
more wicked than itself, and they enter and dwell
there. And the last of that man is worse than the first.
So shall it also be with this wicked generation.”
46 And while He was still talking to the crowds, see,
His mother and brothers stood outside, seeking to
speak with Him.
37

2200

MATTHEW

And one said to Him, “See, Your mother and Your
brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak with
You.”
48 But He answering, said to the one who spoke to
Him, “Who is My mother and who are My brothers?”
49 And having stretched out His hand toward His
talmidim, He said, “See My mother and My brothers!
50 “For whoever does the desire of My Father who is
in the shamayim is My brother and sister and mother.
47

13 And on that day {vWHY went out of the house
and sat by the sea.
2 And large crowds were gathered together to Him,
so that He went into a boat and sat down. And all the
crowd stood on the beach.
3 And He spoke to them much in parables, saying,
“See, the sower went out to sow.
4 “And as he sowed, some indeed fell by the
wayside, and the birds came and devoured them.
5 “And others fell on rocky places, where they did
not have much soil, and immediately they sprang up,
because they had no depth of soil.
6 “But when the sun was up they were scorched,
and because they had no root they withered.
7 “And others fell among thorns, and the thorns
came up and choked them.
8 “And others fell on good soil and yielded a crop,
some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
9 “He who has ears to hear, let him hear!”
10 And the talmidim came and said to Him, “Why do
You speak to them in parables?”
11 And He answering, said to them, “Because it has
been given to you to know the secrets of the reign of
the shamayim, but to them it has not been given.
2201

MATTITHYAHU

“For whoever possesses, to him more shall be
given, and he shall have overflowingly; but whoever
does not possess, even what he possesses shall be
taken away from him.
13 “Because of this I speak to them in parables,
because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do
not hear, nor do they understand.
14 “And in them the neḇuah of Yeshayahu is
completely filled, which says, ‘Hearing you shall hear
and by no means understand, and seeing you shall
see and by no means perceive,
15 for the heart of this people has become thickened,
and their ears are hard of hearing, and their eyes they
have closed, lest they should see with their eyes and
hear with their ears, lest they should understand with
their heart, and turn back, and I heal them.’
16 “And baruḵ are your eyes because they see, and
your ears because they hear,
17 for truly I say to you, that many neḇi’im and
righteous ones longed to see what you see, and did
not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear
it.
18 “You, then, hear the parable of the sower:
19 “When anyone hears the Word of the reign, and
does not understand it, then the wicked one comes
and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This
is that sown by the wayside.
20 “And that sown on rocky places, this is he who
hears the Word and immediately receives it with joy,
21 yet he has no root in himself, but is short-lived, and
when pressure or persecution arises because of the
Word, immediately he stumbles.
22 “And that sown among the thorns is he who hears
the Word, and the worry of this age and the deceit of
riches choke the Word and it becomes fruitless.
12

2202

MATTHEW

“And that sown on the good soil is he who hears
the Word and understands it, who indeed bears fruit
and yields - some a hundredfold, some sixty, some
thirty.”
24 Another parable He put before them, saying, “The
reign of the shamayim has become like a man who
sowed good seed in his field,
25 but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed
darnel among the wheat and went away.
26 “And when the blade sprouted and bore fruit, then
the darnel also appeared.
27 “And the servants of the master of the house came
and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow good seed
in your field? From where then does it have the
darnel?’
28 “And he said to them, ‘A man, an enemy did this.’
And the servants said to him, ‘Do you want then, that
we go and gather them up?’
29 “But he said, ‘No, lest while you gather up the
darnel you also uproot the wheat with them.
30 ‘Let both grow together until the harvest, and at
the time of harvest I shall say to the reapers, “First
gather the darnel and bind them in bundles to burn
them, but gather the wheat into my granary.” ’ ”
31 Another parable He put before them, saying, “The
reign of the shamayim is like a mustard seed, which
a man took and sowed in his field,
32 which indeed is less than all the seeds, but when
it is grown it is greater than the plants and becomes
a tree, so that the birds of the shamayim come and
dwell in its branches.”
33 Another parable He spoke to them “The reign of
the shamayim is like leaven, which a woman took and
hid in three measures of meal until all was leavened.”
23

2203

MATTITHYAHU

{vWHY said all this to the crowds in parables, and
He did not speak to them without a parable,
35 so that what was spoken by the naḇi might be
filled, saying, “I shall open My mouth in parables, I
shall pour forth what has been hidden from the
foundation of the world.”
36 Then, having sent the crowds away, {vWHY went
into the house. And His talmidim came to Him, saying,
“Explain to us the parable of the darnel of the field.”
37 And He answering, said to them, “He who is
sowing the good seed is the Bĕn of Aḏam,
38 and the field is the world. And the good seed,
these are the sons of the reign, but the darnel are the
sons of the wicked one,
39 and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. And
the harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are
the messengers.
40 “As the darnel, then, is gathered and burned in the
fire, so it shall be at the end of this age.
41 “The Bĕn of Aḏam shall send out His messengers,
and they shall gather out of His reign all the
stumbling-blocks, and those doing lawlessness,
42 and shall throw them into the furnace of fire - there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
43 “Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in
the reign of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let
him hear!
44 “Again, the reign of the shamayim is like treasure
hidden in a field, which a man having found it, hid,
and for joy over it he goes and sells all that he has
and buys that field.
45 “Again, the reign of the shamayim is like a man, a
merchant, seeking fine pearls,
46 who, when he had found one pearl of great price,
went and sold all that he had and bought it.
34

2204

MATTHEW

“Again, the reign of the shamayim is like a dragnet
that was thrown into the sea and gathered some of
every kind,
48 which, when it was filled, they drew to shore. And
they sat down and gathered the good into containers,
but threw the rotten away.
49 “Thus shall it be at the end of the age: the
messengers shall come forth, and separate the
wicked out of the midst of the righteous,
50 and shall throw them into the furnace of fire - there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.”
51 {vWHY said to them, “Have you understood all
this?” They said to Him, “Yes, Aḏonai.”
52 And He said to them, “Therefore every scholar
taught in the reign of the shamayim is like a
householder who brings out of his treasure, renewed,
and old.”
53 And it came to be, when {vWHY had ended these
parables, that He left there,
54 And when He had come to His own country, He
taught them in their congregation, so that they were
astonished and said, “Where did this One get this
wisdom and miracles?
55 “Is this not the son of the carpenter? Is not His
mother called Miryam? And His brothers Ya’aqoḇ and
Yosĕph and Shim’on and Yahuḏah?
56 “And His sisters, are they not all with us? Where
then did this One get all this?”
57 And they stumbled at Him. But {vWHY said to
them, “A naḇi is not unappreciated except in his own
country and in his own house.’’
58 And He did not do many miracles there because
of their unbelief.
47

2205

MATTITHYAHU

14 At that time Hĕrodĕs the district ruler heard the
report about {vWHY,
2 and said to his servants, “This is Yoḥanan the
Immerser. He has risen from the dead, and that is
why these mighty powers are at work in him.”
3 For Hĕrodĕs had arrested Yoḥanan, bound him
and put him in prison because of Hĕrodias, his
brother Philippes’ wife,
4 for Yoḥanan had said to him, “It is not right for you
to have her.”
5 And wanting to kill him, he feared the crowd,
because they held him as a naḇi.
6 But as Hĕrodĕs’ birthday was being held, the
daughter of Hĕrodias danced before them and
pleased Hĕrodĕs,
7 so he promised with an oath to give her whatever
she asked.
8 And she, being urged on by her mother, said,
“Give me here the head of Yoḥanan the Immerser on
a dish.”
9 And the sovereign was sad, but because of the
oaths and the guests he commanded it to be given,
10 and sent and beheaded Yoḥanan in prison.
11 And his head was brought on a dish and given to
the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
12 And his talmidim came and took away the body
and buried it, and went and reported to {vWHY.
13 Now when {vWHY heard it, He withdrew from there
by boat to a deserted place, by Himself. And when the
crowds heard it, they followed Him on foot from the
cities.
14 And when {vWHY came out, He saw a large crowd
and was moved with compassion for them, and
healed their sick.
2206

MATTHEW

And when evening came, His talmidim came to
Him, saying, “This is a deserted place, and the hour
is already late. Dismiss the crowds, so that they might
go into the villages and buy food for themselves.”
16 But {vWHY said to them, “They do not need to go
away, give them to eat yourselves.”
17 And they said to Him, “We have here only five
loaves and two fish.”
18 And He said, “Bring them here to Me.”
19 And commanding the crowds to sit down on the
grass, and taking the five loaves and the two fish, and
looking up to the shamayim, He baraḵ and broke and
gave the loaves to the talmidim. And the talmidim
gave to the crowds,
20 and all ate and were satisfied. And they picked up
the pieces left over - twelve baskets, filled.
21 And those who ate were about five thousand men,
besides women and children.
22 And immediately {vWHY made His talmidim enter
into the boat and go before Him to the other side,
while He dismissed the crowds.
23 And having dismissed the crowds, He went up to
the mountain by Himself to pray. And when evening
had come, He was alone there.
24 But the boat was now in the middle of the sea,
agitated by the waves, for the wind was against it.
25 And in the fourth watch of the night {vWHY went to
them, walking on the sea.
26 And when the talmidim saw Him walking on the
sea, they were troubled, saying, “It is a phantom!” And
from fear they cried.
27 But immediately {vWHY spoke to them, saying,
“Take courage, it is I, do not be afraid.”
28 And Kĕpha answered Him and said, “Aḏonai, if it
is You, command me to come to You on the water.”
15

2207

MATTITHYAHU

And He said, “Come.” And when Kĕpha had come
down out of the boat, he walked on the water to go to
{vWHY.
30 But when he saw that the wind was strong, he was
afraid. And beginning to sink, he cried out, saying,
“Aḏonai, save me!”
31 And immediately {vWHY stretched out His hand
and took hold of him, and said to him, “O you of little
belief, why did you doubt?”
32 And when they came into the boat, the wind
ceased.
33 And those in the boat came and bowed to Him,
saying, “Truly You are the Bĕn of hWhY.”
34 And having passed over, they came to the land of
Gennĕsar.
35 And when the men of that place recognised Him,
they sent out into all that surrounding country, and
brought to Him all who were sick,
36 and begged Him to let them only touch the tsitsit
of His garment. And as many as touched it were
completely healed.
29

15 Then there came to {vWHY scribes and
Pharisees from Yerushalayim, saying,
2 “Why do Your talmidim transgress the tradition of
the elders? For they do not wash their hands when
they eat bread.”
3 But He answering, said to them, “Why do you also
transgress the Command of Elohim because of your
tradition?
4 “For Elohim has commanded, saying, ‘Respect
your father and your mother,’ and, ‘He who curses
father or mother, let him be put to death.’

2208

MATTHEW

“But you say, ‘Whoever says to his father or
mother, “Whatever profit you might have received
from me has been dedicated,”
6 is certainly released from respecting his father or
mother.’ So you have nullified the Command of
Elohim by your tradition.
7 “Hypocrites! Yeshayahu rightly naḇu about you,
saying,
8 ‘This people draw near to Me with their mouth, and
respect Me with their lips, but their heart is far from
Me.
9 ‘But in vain do they worship Me, teaching as
teachings the commands of men.’ ”
10 And calling the crowd near, He said to them, “Hear
and understand:
11 “Not that which goes into the mouth defiles the
man, but that which comes out of the mouth, this
defiles the man.”
12 Then His talmidim came and said to Him, “Do You
know that the Pharisees stumbled when they heard
this word?”
13 But He answering, said, “Every plant which My
Father of the shamayim has not planted shall be
uprooted.
14 “Leave them alone. They are blind leaders of the
blind. And if the blind leads the blind, both shall fall
into a ditch.”
15 And Kĕpha answering, said to Him, “Explain this
parable to us.”
16 And {vWHY said, “Are you also still without
understanding?
17 “Do you not understand that whatever enters into
the mouth goes into the stomach, and is cast out in
the sewer?
5

2209

MATTITHYAHU

“But what comes out of the mouth comes from the
heart, and these defile the man.
19 “For out of the heart come forth wicked
reasonings, murders, adulteries, whorings, thefts,
false witnessings, slanders.
20 “These defile the man, but to eat with unwashed
hands does not defile the man.”
21 And {vWHY went out from there and withdrew to
the parts of Tsor and Tsiḏon.
22 And see, a woman of Kena’an came from those
borders and cried out to Him, saying, “Have
compassion on me, O Aḏonai, Bĕn of Dawiḏ! My
daughter is badly demon-possessed.”
23 But He did not answer her a word. And His
talmidim came and asked Him, saying, “Send her
away, because she cries after us.”
24 And He answering, said, “I was not sent except to
the lost sheep of the house of Yisra’ĕl.”
25 But she came and was bowing to Him, saying,
“Aḏonai, help me!”
26 And He answering, said, “It is not good to take the
children’s bread and throw it to the little dogs.”
27 But she said, “Yes Aḏonai, for even the little dogs
eat the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.”
28 And {vWHY answering, said to her, “O woman,
your belief is great! Let it be to you as you desire.”
And her daughter was healed from that hour.
29 And moving from there, {vWHY came toward the
Sea of Galil, and going up on the mountain, He was
sitting there.
30 And large crowds came to Him, having with them
those who were lame, blind, dumb, crippled, and
many others. And they laid them down at the feet of
{vWHY, and He healed them,
18

2210

MATTHEW

so that the crowd marvelled when they saw the
dumb speaking, the crippled well, the lame walking,
and the blind seeing. And they praised the Elohim of
Yisra’ĕl.
32 And {vWHY, having called His talmidim near, said,
“I have compassion on the crowd, because they have
now continued with Me three days and do not have
whatever to eat. And I do not want to send them away
hungry, lest they faint on the way.”
33 And His talmidim said to Him, “Where are we to
get enough bread in the desert to satisfy such a large
crowd?”
34 And {vWHY said to them, “How many loaves do
you have?” And they said, “Seven, and a few little
fish.”
35 And He commanded the crowd to sit down on the
ground,
36 and taking the seven loaves and the fish, giving
thanks, He broke them and gave to His talmidim, and
the talmidim to the crowd.
37 And all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up
what was left over of the broken pieces - seven large
baskets, filled.
38 And those who ate were four thousand men,
besides women and children.
39 And dismissing the crowd, He went into the boat,
and came to the borders of Maḡdala.
31

16 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came, and
trying Him asked that He would show them a sign from
the shamayim.
2 And He answering, said to them, “When it is
evening you say, ‘Fair weather, for the shamayim is
red,’
2211

MATTITHYAHU

and in the morning, ‘Stormy weather today, for the
shamayim is red and overcast.’ You hypocrites know
how to discern the face of the shamayim, but not the
signs of the times!
4 “A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a
sign, and no sign shall be given to it except the sign
of the naḇi Yonah.” And He left them and went away.
5 And His talmidim came to the other side, and had
forgotten to take bread.
6 And {vWHY said to them, “Mind! And beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.”
7 And they reasoned among themselves, saying,
“Because we brought no bread!”
8 But {vWHY aware of this, said to them, “O you of
little belief, why do you reason among yourselves
because you brought no bread?
9 “Do you still not understand, neither remember the
five loaves of the five thousand and how many
baskets you picked up?
10 “Or the seven loaves of the four thousand and how
many large baskets you picked up?
11 “How is it that you do not understand that I did not
speak to you concerning bread, but to beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?”
12 Then they understood that He did not say to
beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of
the Pharisees and the Sadducees.
13 Now when {vWHY came into the parts of Kaisereia
Philippos, He asked His talmidim, saying, “Who do
men say the Bĕn of Aḏam is?”
14 And they said, “Some Yoḥanan the Immerser, and
others Ĕliyahu, and others, Yirmeyahu or one of the
neḇi’im.”
15 He said to them, “And you, who do you say I am?”
3

2212

MATTHEW

And Shim’on Kĕpha answering, said, “You are
ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of the living Elohim.”
17 And {vWHY answering, said to him, “Baruḵ are
you, Shim’on Bar-Yonah, for flesh and blood has not
revealed this to you, but My Father in the shamayim.
18 “And I also say to you that you are Kĕpha, and on
this rock I shall build My assembly, and the gates of
the grave shall not overcome it.
19 “And I shall give you the keys of the reign of the
shamayim, and whatever you bind on earth shall be,
having been bound in the shamayim, and whatever
you loosen on earth shall be, having been loosened
in the shamayim.”
20 Then He warned His talmidim that they should say
to no one that He is {vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
21 From that time {vWHY began to show to His
talmidim that it was necessary for Him to go to
Yerushalayim, and to suffer much from the elders and
chief kohenim and scribes, and be killed, and to be
raised again the third day.
22 And Kĕpha took Him aside and began to rebuke
Him, saying, “Be kind to Yourself, Aḏonai, this shall
not be to You!”
23 But He turned and said to Kĕpha, “Get behind Me,
Satan! You are a stumbling-block to Me, for your
thoughts are not those of Elohim, but those of men.”
24 Then {vWHY said to His talmidim, “If anyone wants
to come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up
his stake, and follow Me.
25 “For whoever wants to save his life shall lose it,
and whoever loses his life for My sake shall find it.
26 “For what is a man profited if he gains all the world,
and loses his own life? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his life?
16

2213

MATTITHYAHU

“For the Bĕn of Aḏam is going to come in the
esteem of His Father with His messengers, and then
He shall reward each according to his works.
28 “Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here
who shall not taste death at all until they see the Bĕn
of Aḏam coming in His reign:”
27

17 And after six days {vWHY took Kĕpha, and
Ya’aqoḇ, and Yoḥanan his brother, and brought them
up on a high mountain by themselves,
2 and He was transformed before them, and His
face shone like the sun, and His garments became as
white as the light.
3 And see, Mosheh and Ĕliyahu appeared to them,
talking with Him.
4 And Kĕpha answering, said to {vWHY, “Aḏonai, it
is good for us to be here. If You want, let us make
here three booths: one for You, one for Mosheh, and
one for Ĕliyahu.”
5 While he was still speaking, see, a bright cloud
overshadowed them. And see, a voice came out of
the cloud, saying, “This is My Bĕn, the Beloved, in
whom I delight. Hear Him!”
6 And when the talmidim heard, they fell on their
faces and were much afraid.
7 But {vWHY came near and touched them and said,
“Rise, and do not be afraid.”
8 And having lifted up their eyes, they saw no one
but {vWHY only.
9 And as they were coming down from the mountain,
{vWHY commanded them, saying, “Do not mention
the vision to anyone until the Bĕn of Aḏam is raised
from the dead.”
10 And His talmidim asked Him, saying, “Why then do
the scribes say that Ĕliyahu has to come first?”
2214

MATTHEW

And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Ĕliyahu is
indeed coming first, and shall restore all.
12 “But I say to you that Ĕliyahu has already come,
and they did not recognise him but did to him
whatever they wanted. In this way the Bĕn of Aḏam
is also about to suffer by them.”
13 Then the talmidim understood that He had spoken
to them about Yoḥanan the Immerser.
14 And when they came to the crowd, a man came
up to Him, kneeling down to Him and saying,
15 “Aḏonai, have compassion on my son, for he is an
epileptic and suffers badly, for he often falls into the
fire and often into the water.
16 “And I brought him to Your talmidim, but they were
unable to heal him.”
17 And {vWHY answering, said, “O generation,
unbelieving and corrupted, how long shall I be with
you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring him here
to Me.”
18 And {vWHY rebuked the demon, and it came out
of him. And the child was healed from that hour.
19 Then the talmidim came to {vWHY by Himself and
said, “Why were we unable to cast it out?”
20 And {vWHY said to them, “Because of your
unbelief, for truly, I say to you, if you have belief as a
mustard seed, you shall say to this mountain, ‘Move
from here to there,’ and it shall move. And no matter
shall be impossible for you.
21 “But this kind does not go out except through
prayer and fasting.”
22 And while they were staying in Galil, {vWHY said
to them, “The Bĕn of Aḏam is about to be delivered
up into the hands of men,
23 and they shall kill Him, and the third day He shall
be raised up.” And they were deeply grieved.
11

2215

MATTITHYAHU

And when they came into Kephar Naḥum, those
who received the tax came to Kĕpha and said, “Does
your Teacher not pay the tax?”
25 He said, “Yes.” And when he came into the house,
{vWHY spoke to him first, saying, ‘What do you think,
Shim’on? From whom do the sovereigns of the earth
take toll or tax, from their own sons or from the
strangers?”
26 Kĕpha said to Him, “From the strangers.” {vWHY
said to him, “Then the sons are exempt.
27 “But, lest we cause them to stumble, go to the sea,
cast in a hook, and take the fish that comes up first.
And when you have opened its mouth, you shall find
a coin. Take that and give it to them for Me and you.”
24

18 At that time the talmidim came to {vWHY, saying,
“Who, then, is greatest in the reign of the shamayim?”
2 And {vWHY called a little child to Him, put him in
their midst,
3 and said, “Truly, I say to you, unless you turn and
become as little children, you shall by no means enter
into the reign of the shamayim.
4 “Whoever then humbles himself as this little child
is the greatest in the reign of the shamayim.
5 “And whoever receives one little child like this in
My Name receives Me.
6 “But whoever causes one of these little ones who
believe in Me to stumble, it is better for him that a
millstone be hung around his neck, and that he be
drowned in the depth of the sea.
7 “Woe to the world because of stumbling-blocks!
For it is necessary that stumbling-blocks come, but
woe to that man by whom the stumbling-block comes!
8 “And if your hand or foot causes you to stumble,
cut it off and throw it away from you. It is better for you
2216

MATTHEW

to enter into life lame or crippled, rather than having
two hands or two feet, to be thrown into the
everlasting fire.
9 “And if your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it
out and throw it away from you. It is better for you to
enter into life with one eye, rather than having two
eyes, to be thrown into the fire of Gĕy-Hinnom.
10 “See that you do not despise one of these little
ones, for I say to you that in the shamayim their
messengers always see the face of My Father who is
in the shamayim.
11 “For the Bĕn of Aḏam has come to save what was
lost.
12 “What do you think? If a man has a hundred
sheep, and one of them goes astray, would he not
leave the ninety-nine on the mountains, going to seek
the one that is straying?
13 “And if he should find it, truly, I say to you, he
rejoices more over that sheep than over the ninetynine that did not go astray.
14 “Thus it is not the desire of your Father who is in
the shamayim that one of these little ones should be
lost.
15 “And if your brother sins against you, go and
reprove him, between you and him alone. If he hears
you, you have gained your brother.
16 “But if he does not hear, take with you one or two
more, that ‘by the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word might be established.’
17 “And if he refuses to hear them, say it to the
assembly. And if he refuses even to hear the
assembly, let him be to you like a gentile and a tax
collector.
18 “Truly, I say to you, whatever you bind on earth
shall be having been bound in the shamayim, and
2217

MATTITHYAHU

whatever you loosen on earth shall be having been
loosened in the shamayim.
19 “Again I say to you that if two of you agree on earth
concerning any matter that they ask, it shall be done
for them by My Father in the shamayim.
20 “For where two or three are gathered together in
My Name, there I am in their midst.”
21 Then Kĕpha came to Him and said, “Aḏonai, how
often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive
him? Up to seven times?”
22 {vWHY said to him, “I do not say to you, up to
seven times, but up to seventy times seven.
23 “Because of this the reign of the shamayim is like
a certain man, a sovereign who wanted to settle
accounts with his servants.
24 “And when he had begun to settle, one was
brought to him who owed him ten thousand talanton,
25 but as he was unable to pay, his master
commanded that he be sold, with his wife and
children and all that he had, and payment to be made.
26 “Then the servant fell down before him, saying,
‘Master, have patience with me, and I shall pay you
all.’
27 “And the master of that servant was moved with
compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.
28 “And that servant went out and found one of his
fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver
pieces. And he laid hands on him and took him by the
throat, saying, ‘Pay me what you owe!’
29 “Then his fellow servant fell down at his feet and
begged him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I
shall, pay you all.’
30 “But he would not, and went and threw him into
prison till he should pay the debt.
2218

MATTHEW

“And when his fellow servants saw what had been
done, they were deeply grieved, and came and
reported to their master all that had taken place.
32 “Then his master called him and said to him,
‘Wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt seeing you
begged me.
33 ‘Should you not also have had compassion on
your fellow servant, as I also had compassion on
you?’
34 “And his master was wroth, and delivered him to
the torturers until he should pay all that was due to
him.
35 “So also My Father of the shamayim shall do to
you if each of you, from his heart, does not forgive his
brother his trespasses.”
31

19 And it came to be, when {vWHY had ended these
words, that He left Galil and came to the borders of
Yahuḏah beyond the Yardĕn.
2 And large crowds followed Him, and He healed
them there.
3 And the Pharisees came to Him, trying Him, and
saying to Him, “Is it right for a man to put away his
wife for every reason?”
4 And He answering, said to them, “Did you not read
that He who made them at the beginning made them
male and female,
5 and said, ‘For this cause a man shall leave his
father and mother and join unto his wife, and the two
shall become one flesh’?
6 “So that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore, what Elohim has joined together, let man
not separate.”

2219

MATTITHYAHU

They said to Him, “Why then did Mosheh
command to give a certificate of divorce, and to put
her away?”
8 He said to them, “Because of the hardness of your
hearts, Mosheh allowed you to put away your wives,
but from the beginning it was not so.
9 “And I say to you, whoever puts away his wife,
except on the grounds of whoring, and marries
another, commits adultery. And whoever marries her
who has been put away commits adultery.”
10 His talmidim said to Him, “If such is the case of the
man with his wife, it is good not to marry.”
11 And He said to them, “Not all receive this word, but
only those to whom it has been given,
12 for there are eunuchs who were so born from their
mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs who were
made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who
have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the
reign of the shamayim. He who is able to receive it,
let him receive it.”
13 Then young children were brought to Him to lay
His hands on them and pray, and the talmidim
rebuked them.
14 But {vWHY said, “Allow the young children and do
not stop them from coming to Me, for of such is the
reign of the shamayim.”
15 And having laid hands on them He went from
there.
16 And see, one came and said to Him, “Good
Teacher, what good shall I do to have everlasting
ḥai?”
17 And He said to him, “Why do you call Me good?
No one is good except One - Elohim. But if you want
to enter into ḥai, guard the Commands.”
7

2220

MATTHEW

He said to Him, “Which?” And {vWHY said,
“
‘You shall not murder,’ ‘You shall not commit
adultery,’ ‘You shall not steal,’ ‘You shall not bear
false witness,’
19 ‘Respect your father and your mother,’ and ‘You
shall love your neighbour as yourself.’ ”
20 The young man said to Him, “All these I have
watched over from my youth, what do I still lack?”
21 {vWHY said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go,
sell what you have and give to the poor, and you shall
have treasure in the shamayim. And come, follow
Me.”
22 And when the young man heard the word, he went
away sad, because he had many possessions.
23 And {vWHY said to His talmidim, “Truly, I say to
you that it is hard for a rich man to enter into the reign
of the shamayim.
24 “And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to
enter into the reign of Elohim.”
25 And when His talmidim heard it, they were very
astonished, saying, “Who then is able to be saved?”
26 And looking intently {vWHY said to them, “With
men this is impossible, but with Elohim all is possible.”
27 Then Kĕpha answering, said to Him, “See, we
have left all and followed You. What then shall we
have?”
28 And {vWHY said to them, “Truly I say to you, when
the Bĕn of Aḏam sits on the throne of His esteem, you
who have followed Me in the restoration, shall also sit
on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Yisra’ĕl.
29 “And everyone who has left houses or brothers or
sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands,
18

2221

MATTITHYAHU

for My Name’s sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and
shall inherit everlasting ḥai.
30 “But many who are first shall be last, and the last
first.

20 “For reign of the shamayim is like a man, a
householder who went out early in the morning to hire
workers for his vineyard.
2 “And when he had agreed with the workers for a
silver piece a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
3 “And he went out about the third hour and saw
others standing idle in the market-place,
4 and said to them, ‘You too go into the vineyard,
and whatever is right I shall give you.’ And they went.
5 “Having gone out again about the sixth and the
ninth hour, he did likewise.
6 “And about the eleventh hour, having gone out, he
found others standing idle, and said to them, ‘Why do
you stand here idle all day?’
7 “They said to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He
said to them, ‘You too go into the vineyard, and
whatever is right you shall receive.’
8 “And when evening came, the master of the
vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the workers and
pay them their wages, beginning with the last to the
first.’
9 “And when those came who were hired about the
eleventh hour, they each received a silver piece.
10 “And when the first came, they thought they would
receive more. But they too received each a silver
piece.
11 “And when they received it, they grumbled against
the householder,

2222

MATTHEW

saying, ‘These last have worked one hour, and
you made them equal to us who have borne the
burden and the heat of the day.’
13 “But he answering, said to one of them, ‘Friend, I
do you no wrong. Did you not agree with me for a
silver piece?
14 ‘Take yours and go. But I want to give to this last
man as also to you.
15 ‘Is it not right for me to do what I want with my
own? Or is your eye evil because I am good?’
16 “Thus the last shall be first, and the first last. For
many are called, but few chosen.”
17 And {vWHY, going up to Yerushalayim, took the
twelve talmidim aside on the way and said to them,
18 “See, we are going up to Yerushalayim, and the
Bĕn of Aḏam shall be delivered up to the chief
kohenim and to the scribes. And they shall condemn
Him to death,
19 and deliver Him to the gentiles to mock and to flog
and to impale. And the third day He shall be raised.”
20 Then the mother of the sons of Zaḇdai came to
Him with her sons, bowing down and making a
request of Him.
21 And He said to her, “What do you want?” She said
to Him, “Command that these two sons of mine might
sit, one on Your right hand and the other on the left,
in Your reign.”
22 But {vWHY answering, said, “You not know what
you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about
to drink, and to be immersed with the immersion that
I am immersed with?” They said to Him, “We are
able.”
23 And He said to them, “You shall indeed drink My
cup, and you shall be immersed with the immersion
that I am immersed with. But to sit on My right hand
12

2223

MATTITHYAHU

and on My left is not Mine to give, but it is for those
for whom it has been prepared by My Father.”
24 And when the ten heard it, they were displeased
at the two brothers.
25 But {vWHY called them near and said, “You know
that the rulers of the gentiles are masters over them,
and those who are great exercise authority over them.
26 “But it shall not be so among you, but whoever
wants to become great among you, let him be your
servant.
27 “And whoever wants to be first among you, let him
be your servant,
28 even as the Bĕn of Aḏam did not come to be
served, but to serve, and to give His ḥai as a ransom
for many.”
29 And as they were leaving Yeriḥo, a large crowd
followed Him.
30 And see, two blind men sitting by the way, having
heard that {vWHY was passing by, cried out, saying,
“Have compassion on us, O Aḏonai, Bĕn of Dawiḏ!”
31 And the crowd rebuked them that they should be
silent, but they cried out all the more, saying, “Have
compassion on us, O Aḏonai, Bĕn of Dawiḏ!”
32 And {vWHY stopped and called them, and said,
“What do you want Me to do for you?”
33 They said to Him, “Aḏonai, that our eyes be
opened.”
34 And having been moved with compassion, {vWHY
touched their eyes. And immediately their eyes
received sight, and they followed Him.

21 And when they came near to Yerushalayim, and
came to Bĕyth Phaḡi, at the Mount of Olives, then
{vWHY sent two talmidim,
2224

MATTHEW

saying to them, “Go into the village opposite you,
and straightaway you shall find a donkey tied, and a
colt with her, loosen, and bring them to Me.
3 “And if anyone says whatever to you, you shall
say, ‘The Aḏon needs them,’ and immediately he
shall send them.”
4 And all this took place that it might be filled what
was spoken by the naḇi, saying,
5 “Say to the daughter of Tsiyon, ‘See, your
Sovereign is coming to you, meek, and sitting on a
donkey, even a colt, the foal of a donkey.’ ”
6 And the talmidim went, and having done as {vWHY
ordered them,
7 they brought the donkey and the colt, and laid their
garments on them, and He sat on them.
8 And most of the crowd spread their garments on
the way, while others cut down branches from the
trees and spread them on the way.
9 And the crowds who went before and those who
followed cried out, saying, “Hoshia-na to the Bĕn of
Dawiḏ! Baruḵ is He who is coming in the Name of
hWhY! Hoshia-na in the highest!”
10 And as He entered into Yerushalayim, all the city
was stirred, saying, “Who is this?”
11 And the crowds said, “This is {vWHY, the Naḇi
from Natsareth of Galil.”
12 And {vWHY went into the Miqdash of Elohim and
drove out all those buying and selling in the Miqdash,
and overturned the tables of the money changers and
the seats of those who sold doves.
13 And He said to them, “It has been written, ‘My
House shall be called a house of prayer,’ but you
have made it a ‘den of robbers.’ ”
14 And blind and lame ones came to Him in the
Miqdash, and He healed them.
2

2225

MATTITHYAHU

But when the chief kohenim and scribes saw the
wonders which He did, and the children crying out in
the Miqdash and saying, “Hoshia-na to the Bĕn of
Dawiḏ!” they were greatly displeased,
16 and said to Him, “Do You hear what these say?”
And {vWHY said to them, “Yes, have you never read,
‘Out of the mouth of children, and nurslings You have
perfected praise’?”
17 And having left them He went out of the city to
Bĕyth Anyah, and spent the night there.
18 And returning to the city early in the morning, He
became hungry.
19 And seeing a single fig tree by the way, He came
to it and found naught on it but leaves, and said to it,
“Let no fruit grow on you ever again.” And
immediately the fig tree withered.
20 And the talmidim, seeing it, marvelled, saying,
“How did the fig tree wither so soon?”
21 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Truly, I say
to you, if you have belief and do not doubt, you shall
not only do what was done to the fig tree, but even if
you say to this mountain, ‘Be removed and be thrown
into the sea,’ it shall be done.
22 “And whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you
shall receive.”
23 And when He had come into the Miqdash, the
chief kohenim and the elders of the people came to
Him as He was teaching, and said, “By what authority
are You doing these? And who gave You this
authority?”
24 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “I shall ask
you one question too, which if you answer Me, I also
shall say to you by what authority I do these:
25 “The immersion of Yoḥanan, where did it come
from? From the shamayim or from men?” So they
15

2226

MATTHEW

reasoned among themselves, saying, “If we say,
‘From the shamayim,’ He shall say to us, ‘Then why
did you not believe him?’
26 “But if we say, ‘From men,’ we fear the crowd, for
all hold Yoḥanan as a naḇi.”
27 And they answered {vWHY and said, “We do not
know.” And He said to them, “Neither do I say to you
by what authority I do these.
28 “But what do you think? A man had two sons, and
he came to the first and said, ‘Son, go, work today in
my vineyard.’
29 “And he answering, said, ‘I do not want to,’ but
afterwards he repented and went.
30 “And having come to the second, he said similarly.
And he answering, said, ‘I go, master,’ but he did not
go.
31 “Which of the two did the desire of the father?”
They said to Him, “The first.” {vWHY said to them,
“Truly, I say to you that tax collectors and whores are
entering into the reign of Elohim before you,
32 for Yoḥanan came to you in the Way of
righteousness, and you did not believe him, but tax
collectors and whores believed him. And when you
saw it, you did not repent afterwards, to believe him.
33 “Hear another parable: There was a certain man,
a householder who planted a vineyard and placed a
hedge around it, and dug a winepress in it and built a
watchtower. And he leased it to farmers and went
abroad.
34 “And when the season of the fruits drew near, he
sent his servants to the farmers, to receive its fruit.
35 “And the farmers took his servants and beat one,
and they killed one, and they stoned another.
36 “Again he sent other servants, more than the first,
and they did likewise to them.
2227

MATTITHYAHU

“And at last he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They
shall respect my son.’
38 “But when the farmers saw the son, they said
among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill
him, and let us possess his inheritance.’
39 “And they took him, and threw him out of the
vineyard, and killed him.
40 “Therefore, when the master of the vineyard
comes, what shall he do to those farmers?”
41 They said to Him, “Evil ones! He shall bring them
to evil destruction, and lease the vineyard to other
farmers who shall give to him the fruits in their
seasons.”
42 {vWHY said to them, “Did you never read in the
Scriptures, ‘The Stone which the builders rejected
has become the chief Corner-Stone. This was from
hWhY, and it is marvellous in our eyes’?
43 “Because of this I say to you: the reign of Elohim
shall be taken from you and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits of it.
44 “And he who falls on this stone shall be broken,
but on whomever it falls, he shall be pulverised.”
45 And the chief kohenim and Pharisees, having
heard His parables, knew that He was speaking of
them.
46 And seeking to lay hands on Him, they feared the
crowds, seeing they held Him to be a naḇi.
37

22 And {vWHY responded and spoke to them again
by parables and said,
2 “The reign of the shamayim is like a man, a
sovereign, who made a wedding feast for his son,
3 and sent out his servants to call those who were
invited to the wedding feast. But they would not come.
2228

MATTHEW

“Again he sent out other servants, saying, ‘Say to
those who are invited, “See, I have prepared my
dinner. My oxen and fattened cattle are slaughtered,
and all is ready. Come to the wedding feast.” ’
5 “But they disregarded it and went their way - this
one to his field, that one to his trade.
6 “And the rest, having seized his servants, insulted
and killed them.
7 “But when the sovereign heard, he was wroth, and
sent out his soldiers, destroyed those murderers, and
lit their city on fire.
8 “Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding feast,
indeed, is ready, but those who were invited were not
worthy.
9 ‘Therefore go into the street corners, and as many
as you find, invite to the wedding feast.’
10 “And those servants went out into the street
corners and gathered all whom they found, both
wicked and good. And the wedding hall was filled with
guests.
11 “And when the sovereign came in to view the
guests, he saw there a man who had not put on a
wedding garment,
12 and he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you come in
here not having a wedding garment?’ And he was
speechless.
13 “Then the sovereign said to the servants, ‘Bind him
hand and foot, take him away, and throw him out into
the outer darkness - there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.
14 “For many are called, but few are chosen.”
15 Then the Pharisees went and plotted how to trap
Him in His words.
16 And they sent to Him their talmidim with the
Hĕrodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that You are
4

2229

MATTITHYAHU

true, and teach the way of Elohim in truth, and it does
not concern You about anyone, for You are not partial
to any man.
17 “Then say to us, what do You think? Is it right to
pay taxes to Kaisar, or not?”
18 But knowing their wickedness, {vWHY said, “Why
do you try Me, you hypocrites?
19 “Show Me the coin of the tax.” And they brought
Him a silver piece.
20 And He said to them, “Whose likeness and
inscription is this?”
21 They said to Him, “Kaisar’s.” And He said to them,
“Then give to Kaisar what is Kaisar’s, and to Elohim
what is Elohim’s.”
22 And having heard, they marvelled, and left Him
and went away.
23 On that day Sadducees, who say there is no
resurrection, came to Him and asked Him,
24 saying, “Teacher, Mosheh said that if anyone
should die, having no children, his brother shall marry
his wife and raise offspring for his brother.
25 “And there were with us seven brothers, and the
first died after he had married, and having no children,
left his wife to his brother.
26 “In the same way the second also, and the third,
unto the seventh.
27 “And last of all the woman died too.
28 “At the resurrection, then, whose wife of the seven
shall she be - for all had her?”
29 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “You go
astray, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of
Elohim.
30 “For in the resurrection they do not marry, nor are
they given in marriage, but are as messengers of
Elohim in the shamayim.
2230

MATTHEW

“And concerning the resurrection of the dead,
have you not read what was spoken to you by Elohim,
saying,
32 ‘I am the Elohim of Aḇraham, and the Elohim of
Yitsḥaq, and the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ’? hWhY is not the
Elohim of the dead, but of the living.”
33 And when the crowds heard, they were astonished
at His teaching.
34 But the Pharisees, having heard that He had
silenced the Sadducees, were gathered together,
35 and one of them, one learned in the Torah,
questioned, trying Him, and saying,
36 “Teacher, which is the great Command in the
Torah?”
37 And {vWHY said to him, “‘You shall love hWhY your
Elohim with all your heart, and with all your being, and
with all your mind.’
38 “This is first and great Command.
39 “And the second is like it, ‘You shall love your
neighbour as yourself.’
40 “On these two Commands hang all the Torah and
the Neḇi’im.”
41 And when the Pharisees were gathered together,
{vWHY asked them,
42 saying,
“What do you think concerning
ha’Mashiaḥ? Whose Bĕn is He?” They said to Him,
“Of Dawiḏ.”
43 He said to them, “Then how does Dawiḏ in the
Ruaḥ call Him ‘Aḏoni,’ saying,
44 ‘hWhY said to Aḏoni, “Sit at My right hand, until I
make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet” ’?
45 “If then Dawiḏ calls Him ‘Aḏoni,’ how is He his
Bĕn?”
31

2231

MATTITHYAHU

And no one was able to answer Him a word, and
from that day on no one asked Him any more
questions.

46

23 Then {vWHY spoke to the crowds and to His
talmidim,
2 saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees sit on the
seat of Mosheh.
3 “Therefore, whatever he says to you to guard,
guard and do. But do not do according to their works,
for they say, and do not do.
4 “For they bind heavy burdens, hard to bear, and
lay them on men’s shoulders, but with their finger they
do not want to move them.
5 “And they do all their works to be seen by men,
and they make their t’fillen wide and lengthen the
tsitsit of their garments,
6 and they love the best place at feasts, and the best
seats in the congregations,
7 and the greetings in the market-places, and to be
called by men, ‘Rabbi, Rabbi.’
8 “But you, do not be called ‘Rabbi,’ for One is your
Teacher, ha’Mashiaḥ, and you are all brothers.
9 “And call none on earth your father, for One is your
Father, He who is in the shamayim.
10 “Neither be called leaders, for One is your Leader,
ha’Mashiaḥ.
11 “But the greatest among you shall be your servant.
12 “And whoever exalts himself shall be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself shall be exalted.
13 “But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! Because you shut up the reign of the
shamayim before men, for you do not go in, nor do
you allow those who are entering to go in.
2232

MATTHEW

“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you eat up widows’ houses, and for a show
make long prayers. Because of this you shall receive
greater judgment.
15 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you go about the land and the sea to win
one convert, and when he is won, you make him a
son of Gĕy-Hinnom twofold more than yourselves.
16 “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘Whoever
swears by the Mishkan, it does not matter, but
whoever swears by the gold of the Mishkan, is bound
by oath.’
17 “Fools and blind! For which is greater, the gold, or
the Mishkan that makes the gold qodesh?
18 “And, ‘Whoever swears by the altar, does not
matter, but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, is
bound by oath.’
19 “Fools and blind! For which is greater, the gift or
the altar that makes the gift qodesh?
20 “He, then, who swears by the altar, swears by it
and by all that is upon it.
21 “And he who swears by the Mishkan, swears by it
and by Him who is dwelling in it.
22 “And he who swears by the shamayim, swears by
the throne of Elohim and by Him who is sitting upon
it.
23 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you tithe the mint and the anise and the
cumin, and have neglected the weightier of the Torah:
the Right-Ruling and the compassion and the belief.
These need to have been done, without neglecting
the others.
24 “Blind guides - straining out a gnat and swallowing
a camel!
14

2233

MATTITHYAHU

“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you clean the outside of the cup and dish,
but inside they are filled with plunder and
unrighteousness.
26 “Blind Pharisee, first clean the inside of the cup
and dish, so that the outside of them becomes clean
too.
27 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you are like whitewashed tombs which
outwardly indeed look well, but inside are filled with
dead men’s bones and all uncleanness.
28 “So you too outwardly indeed appear righteous to
men, but inside you are filled with hypocrisy and
lawlessness.
29 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
Because you build the tombs of the neḇi’im and
decorate the monuments of the righteous,
30 and say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our fathers,
we would not have taken part with them in the blood
of the neḇi’im.’
31 “Thus you bear witness against yourselves that
you are sons of those who murdered the neḇi’im 32 and you fill up the measure of your fathers!
33 “Serpents, brood of adders! How would you
escape the judgment of Gĕy-Hinnom?
34 “Because of this, see, I send you neḇi’im, and wise
men, and scholars. Some of them you shall kill and
impale, and some of them you shall flog in your
congregations and persecute from city to city,
35 so that on you should come all the righteous blood
shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Heḇel
to the blood of Zeḵaryah, son of Bereḵyah, whom you
murdered between the Mishkan and the altar.
36 “Truly, I say to you, all this shall come upon this
generation.
25

2234

MATTHEW

“Yerushalayim, Yerushalayim, killing the neḇi’im
and stoning those who are sent to her! How often I
wanted to gather your children together, the way a
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but you
would not!
38 “See! Your house is left to you laid waste,
39 for I say to you, from now on you shall by no
means see Me, until you say, ‘Baruḵ is He who is
coming in the Name of hWhY!’ ”
37

24 And going out, {vWHY went away from the
Miqdash, and His talmidim came near to point out to
Him the buildings of the Miqdash.
2 And {vWHY said to them, “Do you not see all
these? Truly, I say to you, not one stone shall be left
here upon another, at all, which shall not be thrown
down.”
3 And as He sat on the Mount of Olives, the talmidim
came to Him separately, saying, “Say to us, when
shall this be, and what is the sign of Your coming, and
of the end of the age?”
4 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Take heed
that no one leads you astray.
5 “For many shall come in My Name, saying, ‘I am
ha’Mashiaḥ,’ and they shall lead many astray.
6 “And you shall begin to hear of fightings and
reports of fightings. See that you are not troubled, for
these have to take place, but the end is not yet.
7 “For nation shall rise against nation, and reign
against reign. And there shall be scarcities of food,
and deadly diseases, and earthquakes in places.
8 “And all these are the beginning of birth pains.
9 “Then they shall deliver you up to affliction and kill
you, and you shall be hated by all nations for My
Name’s sake.
2235

MATTITHYAHU

“And then many shall stumble, and they shall
deliver up one another, and shall hate one another.
11 “And many false prophets shall rise up and lead
many astray.
12 “And because of the increase in lawlessness, the
love of many shall become cold.
13 “But he who shall have endured to the end shall
be saved.
14 “And this Good News of the reign shall be
proclaimed in all the world as a witness to all the
nations, and then the end shall come.
15 “So when you see the ‘abomination that lays
waste,’ spoken of by Dani’ĕl the naḇi, put up in the
Miqdash” - he who reads, let him understand 16 “then let those who are in Yahuḏah flee to the
mountains.
17 “Let him who is on the house-top not come down
to take whatever out of his house.
18 “And let him who is in the field not turn back to get
his garments.
19 “And woe to those who are pregnant and to those
who are nursing children in those days!
20 “And pray that your flight does not take place in
winter or on the Shabbath.
21 “For then there shall be great distress, such as has
not been since the beginning of the world until this
time, no, nor ever shall be.
22 “And if those days were not shortened, no flesh
would be saved, but for the sake of the chosen ones
those days shall be shortened.
23 “If anyone then says to you, ‘Look, here is
ha’Mashiaḥ!’ or ‘There!’ do not believe.
24 “For false messiahs and false prophets shall arise,
and they shall show great signs and wonders, so as
to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.
10

2236

MATTHEW

“See, I have forewarned you.
26 “So if they say to you, ‘Look, He is in the desert!’
do not go out; or ‘Look, He is in the inner rooms!’ do
not believe.
27 “For as the lightning comes from the east and
shines to the west, so also shall the coming of the Bĕn
of Aḏam be.
28 “For wherever the dead body is, there the vultures
shall be gathered together.
29 “And immediately after the distress of those days
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not
give its light, and the stars shall fall from the
shamayim, and the powers of the shamayim shall be
shaken.
30 “And then the sign of the Bĕn of Aḏam shall
appear in the shamayim, and then all the tribes of the
earth shall mourn, and they shall see the Bĕn of
Aḏam coming on the clouds of the shamayim with
power and much esteem.
31 “And He shall send His messengers with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together His
chosen ones from the four winds, from one end of the
shamayim to the other.
32 “And learn this parable from the fig tree: When its
branch has already become tender and puts forth
leaves, you know that the summer is near.
33 “So you also, when you see all these, know that
He is near, at the doors.
34 “Truly, I say to you, this generation shall by no
means pass away until all this takes place.
35 “The shamayim and the earth shall pass away, but
My Words shall by no means pass away.
36 “But concerning that day and the hour no one
knows, not even the messengers of the shamayim,
but My Father only.
25

2237

MATTITHYAHU

“And as the days of Noaḥ, so also shall the coming
of the Bĕn of Aḏam be.
38 “For as they were in the days before the flood,
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
until the day that Noaḥ entered into the ark,
39 and they did not know until the flood came and
took them all away, so also shall the coming of the
Bĕn of Aḏam be.
40 “Then two shall be in the field, the one is taken and
the one is left.
41 “Two shall be grinding at the mill, one is taken and
one is left.
42 “Watch therefore, for you do not know what hour
your Aḏon is coming.
43 “And know this, that if the master of the house had
known what hour the thief would come, he would
have watched and not allowed his house to be broken
into.
44 “Because of this, be ready too, for the Bĕn of
Aḏam is coming at an hour when you do not expect
Him.
45 “Who then is a trustworthy and wise servant,
whom his master put over his household, to give them
food in season?
46 “Baruḵ is that servant whom his master, having
come, shall find so doing.
47 “Truly, I say to you that he shall put him over all
his possessions.
48 “But if that evil servant says in his heart, ‘My
master is delaying his coming,’
49 and begins to beat his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunkards,
50 the master of that servant shall come on a day
when he does not expect it, and at an hour he does
not know,
37

2238

MATTHEW

and shall cut him in two and appoint him his
portion with the hypocrites - there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

51

25 “Then the reign of the shamayim shall be
compared to ten maidens who took their lamps and
went out to meet the bridegroom.
2 “And five of them were wise, and five foolish.
3 “Those who were foolish, having taken their
lamps, took no oil with them,
4 but the wise took oil in their containers with their
lamps.
5 “Now while the bridegroom took time, they all
slumbered and slept.
6 “And at midnight a cry was heard, ‘See, the
bridegroom is coming, go out to meet him!’
7 “Then all those maidens rose up and trimmed their
lamps.
8 “And the foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us of your
oil, because our lamps are going out.’
9 “But the wise answered, saying, ‘No, indeed, there
would not be enough for us and you. Instead, go to
those who sell, and buy for yourselves.’
10 “And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came,
and those who were ready went in with him to the
wedding feast, and the door was shut.
11 “And later the other maidens also came, saying,
‘Aḏonai, Aḏonai, open up for us!’
12 “But he answering, said, ‘Truly, I say to you, I do
not know you.’
13 “Watch therefore, because you do not know the
day nor the hour in which the Bĕn of Aḏam is coming,
14 for it is like a man going from home, who called his
own servants and delivered his possessions to them.
2239

MATTITHYAHU

“And to one he gave five talanton, and to another
two, and to another one, to each according to his own
ability, and went from home.
16 “And he who had received the five talanton went
and worked with them, and made another five
talanton.
17 “In the same way, he with the two also, he gained
two more.
18 “But he who had received the one went away and
dug in the ground, and hid the silver of his master.
19 “And after a long time the master of those servants
came and settled accounts with them.
20 “And he who had received five talanton came and
brought five other talanton, saying, ‘Master, you
delivered to me five talanton. See, I have gained five
more talanton besides them.’
21 “And his master said to him, ‘Well done, good and
trustworthy servant. You were trustworthy over a little,
I shall put you over much. Enter into the joy of your
master.’
22 “Then he who had received two talanton came and
said, ‘Master, you delivered to me two talanton. See,
I have gained two more talanton besides them.’
23 “His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and
trustworthy servant. You were trustworthy over a little,
I shall put you over much. Enter into the joy of your
master.’
24 “And the one who had received the one talanton
also came and said, ‘Master, I knew you to be a hard
man, reaping where you have not sown, and
gathering where you have not scattered seed,
25 and being afraid, I went and hid your talanton in
the ground. See, you have what is yours.’
26 “And his master answering, said to him, ‘You
wicked and lazy servant, you knew that I reap where
15

2240

MATTHEW

I have not sown, and gather where I have not
scattered seed.
27 ‘Then you should have put my silver with the
bankers, and at my coming I would have received
back my own with interest.
28 ‘Therefore take away the talanton from him, and
give it to him who possesses ten talanton.
29 ‘For to everyone who possesses, more shall be
given, and he shall have overflowingly; but from him
who does not possess, even what he possesses shall
be taken away.
30 ‘And throw the worthless servant out into the outer
darkness - there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.’
31 “And when the Bĕn of Aḏam comes in His esteem,
and all the qodesh messengers with Him, then He
shall sit on the throne of His esteem.
32 “And all the nations shall be gathered before Him,
and He shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd separates his sheep from the goats.
33 “And He shall put the sheep on His right hand, but
the goats on the left.
34 “Then the Sovereign shall say to those on His right
hand, ‘Come, you baruḵ of My Father, inherit the reign
prepared for you from the foundation of the world 35 for I was hungry and you gave Me food, I was
thirsty and you gave Me drink, I was a stranger and
you took Me in,
36 was naked and you clothed Me, I was sick and you
visited Me, I was in prison and you came to Me.’
37 “Then the righteous shall answer Him, saying,
‘Aḏonai, when did we see You hungry and we fed, or
thirsty and gave to drink?
38 ‘And when did we see You a stranger and took in,
or naked and clothed?
2241

MATTITHYAHU

‘And when did we see You sick, or in prison, and
we came to You?’
40 “And the Sovereign shall answer and say to them,
‘Truly, I say to you, in so far as you did it to one of the
least of these My brothers, you did it to Me.’
41 “He shall then also say to those on the left hand,
‘Go away from Me, accursed ones, into the
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
messengers 42 for I was hungry and you gave Me no food, I was
thirsty and you gave Me no drink,
43 ‘I was a stranger and you did not take Me in, was
naked and you did not clothe Me, sick and in prison
and you did not visit Me.’
44 “Then they also shall answer Him, saying, ‘Aḏonai,
when did we see You hungry or thirsty or a stranger
or naked or sick or in prison, and did not serve You?’
45 “Then He shall answer them, saying, ‘Truly, I say
to you, in so far as you did not do it to one of the least
of these, you did not do it to Me.’
46 “And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into everlasting ḥai.”
39

26 And it came to be, when {vWHY ended all these
words, He said to His talmidim,
2 “You know that after two days the Pesaḥ takes
place, and the Bĕn of Aḏam is to be delivered up to
be impaled.”
3 Then the chief kohenim, and the scribes, and the
elders of the people came together at the court of the
kohĕn ha’gadol, who was called Qayapha,
4 and plotted to seize {vWHY by trickery and kill.
5 But they said, “Not at the Festival lest there be an
uproar among the people.”
2242

MATTHEW

And when {vWHY was in Bĕyth Anyah at the house
of Shim’on the leper,
7 a woman came to Him, having an alabaster flask
of costly perfume, and she poured it on His head as
He sat at the table.
8 And when His talmidim saw it, they were much
displeased saying, “To what purpose is this waste?
9 “For this perfume could have been sold for much
and given to the poor.”
10 However, when {vWHY noticed it, He said to them,
“Why do you trouble the woman? For she has done a
good work toward Me.
11 “For you always have the poor with you, but Me
you do not have always.
12 “For in pouring this perfume on My body, she did
it for My burial.
13 “Truly, I say to you, wherever this Good News is
proclaimed in all the world, what this woman has done
shall be spoken of also, to her remembrance.”
14 Then one of the twelve, called Yahuḏah from
Qeriyoth, went to the chief kohenim,
15 and said, “What would you give me to deliver Him
to you?” And they counted out to him thirty pieces of
silver.
16 And from then on he was seeking an occasion to
deliver Him up.
17 And on the first of Matstsoth the talmidim came to
{vWHY, saying to Him, “Where do You want us to
prepare for You to eat the Pesaḥ?”
18 And He said, “Go into the city to a certain man,
and say to him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is near.
I am to observe the Pesaḥ at your house with My
talmidim.” ’ ”
19 And the talmidim did as {vWHY had ordered them,
and prepared the Pesaḥ.
6

2243

MATTITHYAHU

And when evening came, He sat down with the
twelve.
21 And while they were eating, He said, “Truly, I say
to you, one of you shall deliver Me up.”
22 And they were deeply grieved, and began to say
to Him, each of them, “Aḏonai, is it I?”
23 And He answering, said, “He who has dipped his
hand with Me in the dish, he shall deliver Me up.
24 “Indeed, the Bĕn of Aḏam goes as it has been
written concerning Him, but woe to that man by whom
the Bĕn of Aḏam is delivered up! It would have been
good for that man if he had not been born.”
25 And Yahuḏah - he who delivered Him up answering, said, “Rabbi, is it I?” He said to him, “You
have said it.”
26 And as they were eating, {vWHY took bread, and
having baraḵ, broke and gave it to the talmidim and
said, “Take, eat, this is My body.”
27 And taking the cup, and giving thanks, He gave it
to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you.
28 “For this is My blood, that of the Renewed
Covenant, which is shed for many for the forgiveness
of sins.
29 “But I say to you, I shall certainly not drink of this
fruit of the vine from now on till that day when I drink
it anew with you in the reign of My Father.”
30 And having sung a song, they went out to the
Mount of Olives.
31 Then {vWHY said to them, “All of you shall stumble
in Me this night, for it has been written, ‘I shall strike
the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered.’
32 “But after I have been raised, I shall go before you
into Galil.”
20

2244

MATTHEW

And Kĕpha answering, said to Him, “Even if all
stumble in You, I shall never stumble.”
34 {vWHY said to him, “Truly, I say to you that this
night, before the cock crows, you shall deny Me three
times.”
35 Kĕpha said to Him, “Even if I have to die with You,
I shall not deny You!” All the talmidim said the same
too.
36 Then {vWHY came with them to a place called
Gath Shemen, and said to the talmidim, “Sit here
while I go over there and pray.”
37 And He took with Him Kĕpha and the two sons of
Zaḇdai, and He began to be grieved and deeply
distressed.
38 Then He said to them, “My being is exceedingly
grieved, even to death. Stay here and watch with Me.”
39 And going forward a little, He fell on His face, and
prayed, saying, “O My Father, if it is possible, let this
cup pass from Me. Yet not as I desire, but as You.”
40 And He came to the talmidim and found them
asleep, and said to Kĕpha, “So, were you not able to
watch with Me one hour?
41 “Watch and pray, lest you enter into trial. The spirit
indeed is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
42 Again He went away, a second time, and prayed,
saying, “O My Father, if it is impossible for this to pass
unless I drink it, let Your desire be done.”
43 And He came and found them asleep again, for
their eyes were heavy.
44 And He left them, went away again, and prayed
the third time, saying the same words.
45 Then He came to His talmidim and said to them,
“Still sleeping and taking rest? See, the hour has
come near, and the Bĕn of Aḏam is delivered up into
the hands of sinners.
33

2245

MATTITHYAHU

“Rise, let us go. See, he who delivers Me up has
come near.”
47 And while He was still speaking, see, Yahuḏah,
one of the twelve, with a large crowd with swords and
clubs, came from the chief kohenim and elders of the
people.
48 And he who was delivering Him up gave them a
sign, saying, “Whomever I kiss, it is He, seize Him.”
49 And going straight up to {vWHY he said,
“Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed Him.
50 And {vWHY said to him, “Friend, why have you
come?” Then they came and laid hands on {vWHY
and seized Him.
51 And look, one of those with {vWHY put out his
hand and drew his sword, and striking the servant of
the kohĕn ha’gadol he cut off his ear.
52 Then {vWHY said to him, “Return your sword to its
place, for all who take the sword shall die by the
sword.
53 “Or do you think that I am not able to pray to My
Father now, and He shall provide Me with more than
twelve legions of messengers?
54 “How then would the Scriptures be filled that it has
to be this way?”
55 In that hour {vWHY said to the crowds, “Have you
come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs
to arrest Me? Daily I sat with you, teaching in the
Miqdash, and you did not seize Me.
56 “But all this came to be, so that the Scriptures of
the Neḇi’im might be filled.” Then all the talmidim left
Him and fled.
57 And those who had seized {vWHY led Him away
to Qayapha the kohĕn ha’gadol, where the scribes
and the elders were gathered together.
46

2246

MATTHEW

But Kĕpha followed Him at a distance to the
courtyard of the kohĕn ha’gadol, and he went in and
sat with the servants to see the end.
59 And the chief kohenim, and the elders, and all the
council were seeking false witness against {vWHY to
put Him to death,
60 but found none. Although many false witnesses
came forward, they found none. But at last two false
witnesses came forward,
61 and said, “This one said, ‘I am able to destroy the
Mishkan of Elohim and to build it in three days.’ ”
62 And the kohĕn ha’gadol stood up and said to Him,
“Have You no answer to make? What do these
witness against You?”
63 But {vWHY remained silent. So the kohĕn ha’gadol
said to Him, “I put You to oath, by the living Elohim
that You say to us if You are ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of
hWhY.”
64 {vWHY said to him, “You have said it. Besides I say
to you, from now you shall see the Bĕn of Aḏam sitting
at the right hand of the Almighty, and coming on the
clouds of the shamayim.”
65 Then the kohĕn ha’gadol tore his garments,
saying, “He has blasphemed! Why do we need any
more witnesses? See, now you have heard His
blasphemy!
66 “What do you think?” And they answering, said,
“He is liable to death.”
67 Then they spat in His face and beat Him, and
others slapped Him,
68 saying, “Naḇa to us, Mashiaḥ! Who is the one who
struck You?”
69 And Kĕpha sat outside in the courtyard, and a
servant girl came to him, saying, “And you were with
{vWHY of Galil.”
58

2247

MATTITHYAHU

But he denied it before them all, saying, “I do not
know what you say.”
71 And as he was going out into the porch, another
girl saw him and said to those there, “And this one
was with {vWHY of Natsareth.”
72 But again he denied with an oath, “I do not know
the Man!”
73 And after a while those who stood by came to him
and said to Kĕpha, “Truly you are one of them too, for
even your speech gives you away.”
74 Then he began to curse and to swear, saying, “I
do not know the Man!” And immediately a cock
crowed.
75 And Kĕpha remembered the word of {vWHY who
had said to him, “Before a cock crows, you shall deny
Me three times.” And going out, he wept bitterly.
70

27 And morning having come, all the chief kohenim
and elders of the people took counsel against {vWHY,
so as to put Him to death.
2 And having bound Him, they led Him away and
delivered Him to Pontius Pilatus the governor.
3 Then Yahuḏah - he who delivered Him up - having
seen that He had been condemned, repented,
returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief kohenim
and to the elders,
4 saying, “I have sinned in delivering up innocent
blood.” And they said, “What is that to us? You see to
it!”
5 And throwing down the pieces of silver in the
Mishkan he left, and went and hanged himself.
6 And the chief kohenim took the silver pieces and
said, “It is not right to put them into the treasury,
seeing they are the price of blood.”
2248

MATTHEW

So they took counsel and bought with them the
potter’s field, for the burial of strangers.
8 Therefore that field has been called the Field of
Blood, until today.
9 Then was filled what was spoken by Yirmeyahu
the naḇi, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of Him who was pierced, on whom
they of the children of Yisra’ĕl put a price,
10 and gave them for the potter’s field, as hWhY had
ordered me.”
11 And {vWHY stood before the governor, and the
governor asked Him, saying, “You are the Sovereign
of the Yahuḏim?” And {vWHY said to him, “You say
it.”
12 And as He was accused by the chief kohenim and
the elders, He answered not.
13 Then Pilatus said to Him, “Do You not hear how
much they witness against You?”
14 And He did not answer him, not one word, so that
the governor wondered much.
15 And at the Festival the governor used to release
to the crowd one prisoner whom they wanted.
16 And they had then a well-known prisoner called
Barabba.
17 So when they were assembled, Pilatus said to
them, “Whom do you want that I release to you?
Barabba, or {vWHY who is called Mashiaḥ?”
18 For he knew that because of envy they had
delivered Him up.
19 And as he was sitting on the judgment seat, his
wife sent to him, saying, “Have naught to do with that
righteous Man, for I have suffered much today in a
dream because of Him.”
7

2249

MATTITHYAHU

But the chief kohenim and elders persuaded the
crowds that they should ask for Barabba and to
destroy {vWHY.
21 And the governor answering, said to them, “Which
of the two do you want that I release to you?” They
said, “Barabba!”
22 Pilatus said to them, “What then shall I do with
{vWHY who is called Mashiaḥ?” They all said to him,
“Let Him be impaled!”
23 And the governor said, “Indeed, what evil has He
done?” And they were crying out all the more, saying,
“Let Him be impaled!”
24 And when Pilatus saw that he was getting
nowhere, but rather an uproar was starting, he took
water and washed his hands before the crowd,
saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this Righteous
One. You shall see to it.”
25 And all the people answering, said, “His blood be
on us and on our children.”
26 Then he released Barabba to them, but having
{vWHY whipped, he delivered Him over to be impaled.
27 Then the soldiers of the governor took {vWHY into
the court and gathered the entire squad around Him.
28 And having stripped Him, they put a scarlet robe
on Him.
29 And plaiting a crown of thorns, they put it on His
head, and a reed in His right hand. And they kneeled
down before Him and mocked Him, saying,
“Greetings, Sovereign of the Yahuḏim!”
30 And spitting on Him they took the reed and struck
Him on the head.
31 And when they had mocked Him, they took the
robe off Him, then put His own garments on Him, and
led Him away to be impaled.
20

2250

MATTHEW

And as they were going out, they found a man of
Kurĕnĕ, Shim’on by name - they compelled him to
bear His stake.
33 And when they came to a place called Golgotha,
that is to say, Place of a Skull,
34 they gave Him wine mixed with bile to drink. And
after tasting, He would not drink it.
35 And having impaled Him, they divided His
garments, casting lots, that it might be filled what was
spoken by the naḇi, “They divided My garments
among them, and for My clothing they cast lots.”
36 And sitting down, they guarded Him there.
37 And they put up over His head the written charge
against Him: THIS IS {vWHY, THE SOVEREIGN OF
THE YAHUḎIM.
38 Then two robbers were impaled with Him, one on
the right and another on the left.
39 And those passing by were blaspheming Him,
shaking their heads,
40 and saying, “You who destroy the Mishkan and
build it in three days, save Yourself! If You are the
Bĕn of Elohim, come down from the stake.”
41 And likewise the chief kohenim, with the scribes
and elders, mocking, said,
42 “He saved others - He is unable to save Himself.
If He is the Sovereign of Yisra’ĕl, let Him now come
down from the stake, and we shall believe Him.
43 “He trusted in Elohim, let Him rescue Him now if
He desires Him, for He said, ‘I am the Bĕn of Elohim.’
”
44 And also the robbers who were impaled with Him,
reviled Him the same.
45 And from the sixth hour there was darkness over
all the land, until the ninth hour.
32

2251

MATTITHYAHU

And about the ninth hour {vWHY cried out with a
loud voice, saying, “Ĕli, Ĕli, lamah sheḇaqtani?” that
is, “My Ĕl, My Ĕl, why have You forsaken Me?”
47 Some of those standing there, having heard, said,
“This One calls Ĕliyahu!”
48 And immediately one of them ran and took a
sponge, and filled it with vinegar and put it on a reed,
and gave it to Him to drink.
49 But the rest said, “Leave it, let us see if Ĕliyahu
comes to save Him.”
50 And {vWHY cried out again with a loud voice, and
gave up His spirit.
51 And see, the veil of the Mishkan was torn in two
from top to bottom, and the earth was shaken, and
the rocks were split,
52 and the tombs were opened, and many bodies of
the qodeshim who had fallen asleep were raised,
53 and coming out of the tombs after His resurrection,
they went into the qodesh city and appeared to many.
54 And when the captain and those with him, who
were guarding {vWHY, saw the earthquake and all
that took place, they feared exceedingly, saying,
“Truly this was the Bĕn of Elohim!”
55 And many women who followed {vWHY from Galil,
attending Him, were there, watching from a distance,
56 among whom were Miryam from Maḡdala, and
Miryam the mother of Ya’aqoḇ and Yosĕph, and the
mother of Zaḇdai’s sons.
57 And when evening came, there came a rich man
from Ramathayim, named Yosĕph, who himself had
also become a talmid of {vWHY.
58 He went to Pilatus and asked for the body of
{vWHY. Then Pilatus commanded the body to be
given.
46

2252

MATTHEW

And having taken the body, Yosĕph wrapped it in
clean linen,
60 and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out
of the rock. And he rolled a large stone against the
door of the tomb, and went away.
61 And Miryam from Maḡdala was there, and the
other Miryam, sitting opposite the tomb.
62 On the next day, which was after the preparation,
the chief kohenim and Pharisees gathered together
to Pilatus,
63 saying, “Master, we remember, while He was still
alive, how that deceiver said, ‘After three days I am
raised.’
64 “Command, then, that the tomb be safeguarded
until the third day, lest His talmidim come by night and
steal Him away, and should say to the people, ‘He
was raised from the dead.’ And the last deception
shall be worse than the first.”
65 So Pilatus said to them, “You have a watch, go,
safeguard it as you know how.”
66 And they went and safeguarded the tomb, sealing
the stone after posting sentries.
59

28 Now after the Shabbath, toward dawn on one of
the shabbathoth, Miryam from Maḡdala and the other
Miryam came to see the tomb.
2 And see, there was a great earthquake, for a
messenger of hWhY came down out of the shamayim,
and came and rolled back the stone from the door,
and sat on it.
3 And his appearance was like lightning, and his
garments as white as snow.
4 And the guards trembled for fear of him, and
became like dead men.
2253

MATTITHYAHU

And the messenger responding, said to the
women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you seek
{vWHY who was impaled.
6 “He is not here, for He was raised, as He said.
Come, see the place where the Aḏon lay.
7 “And go quickly, say to His talmidim that He was
raised from the dead, and see, He is going before you
to Galil. There you shall see Him. See, I have told
you.”
8 And they left the tomb quickly, with fear and great
joy, and ran to report to His talmidim.
9 And as they were going to report to His talmidim,
see, {vWHY met them, saying, “Greetings!” And they
came and held Him by the feet and bowed to Him.
10 Then {vWHY said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go,
report to My brothers, to go to Galil, and they shall
see Me there.”
11 And while they were going, see, some of the
sentries having gone into the city, reported to the
chief kohenim all that took place.
12 And when they came together with the elders and
taken counsel, they gave enough silver to the
soldiers,
13 saying, “Say that His talmidim came at night and
stole Him away while we slept.
14 “And if this should be reported to the governor, we
shall win him over and keep you out of trouble.”
15 And having taken the silver they did as they were
instructed. And this account was widely spread
among the Yahuḏim, to this day.
16 And the eleven talmidim went away into Galil, to
the mountain which {vWHY had appointed for them.
17 And when they saw Him, they bowed to Him, but
some doubted.
5

2254

MATTHEW

And {vWHY came up and spoke to them, saying,
“All authority has been given to Me in the shamayim
and on earth.
19 “Therefore, go and instruct all the nations,
immersing them in the Name of the Father and of the
Bĕn and of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
20 teaching them to guard all that I have commanded
you. And see, I am with you always, until the end of
the age.” Amĕn.
18

2255

MARK

MARQOS
‫ מרקוס‬sWqRm

1 The beginning of the Good News of {vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of hWhY.
2 As it has been written in the Neḇi’im, “See, I send
My messenger before Your face, who shall prepare
Your way before You,
3 a voice of one crying in the wilderness, ‘Prepare
the way of HWHY, make His paths straight.’ ”
4 Yoḥanan came immersing in the wilderness and
proclaiming an immersion of repentance for the
forgiveness of sins.
5 And all the country of Yahuḏah, and those of
Yerushalayim, went out to him and were all immersed
by him in the Yardĕn River, confessing their sins.
6 And Yoḥanan was clothed with camel’s hair and a
leather girdle around his waist, and eating locusts and
wild honey.
7 And he proclaimed, saying, “After me comes One
who is mightier than I, whose sandal strap I am not
worthy to stoop down and loosen.
8 “I indeed immersed you in water, but He shall
immerse you in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.”
9 And it came to be in those days that {vWHY came
from Natsareth of Galil, and was immersed by
Yoḥanan in the Yardĕn.
10 And immediately, coming up from the water, He
saw the shamayim being torn open and the Ruaḥ
coming down on Him like a dove.
11 And a voice came out of the shamayim, “You are
My Bĕn, the Beloved, in whom I delight.”
12 And immediately the Ruaḥ drove Him into the
wilderness.
2256

MARQOS

And He was there in the wilderness forty days,
tried by Satan, and was with the wild beasts. And the
messengers attended Him.
14 And after Yoḥanan was delivered up, {vWHY came
to Galil, proclaiming the Good News of the reign of
Elohim,
15 and saying, “The time has been filled, and the
reign of Elohim has come near. Repent, and believe
in the Good News.”
16 And walking by the Sea of Galil, He saw Shim’on,
and Andri his brother, casting a net into the sea, for
they were fishers.
17 And {vWHY said to them, “Come, follow Me, and I
shall make you become fishers of men.”
18 And immediately they left their nets and followed
Him.
19 And having gone on a little from there, He saw
Ya’aqoḇ, of Zaḇdai, and Yoḥanan his brother, and
they were in the boat mending their nets.
20 And immediately He called them, and leaving their
father Zaḇdai in the boat with the hired servants, they
went after Him.
21 And they went into Kephar Naḥum, and
immediately on the Shabbath He went into the
congregation and taught.
22 And they were astonished at His teaching, for He
was teaching them as possessing authority, and not
as the scribes.
23 And there was a man in their congregation with an
unclean spirit, and he cried out,
24 saying, “Ha! What have we to do with You, {vWHY
of Natsareth? Did You come to destroy us? I know
who You are: the Qadosh One of Elohim!”
25 And {vWHY rebuked him, saying, “Be silenced,
and come out of him!”
13

2257

MARK

And throwing him into convulsions, the unclean
spirit called out with a loud voice, and came out of
him.
27 And they were all so amazed, as to reason among
themselves, saying, “What is this, a fresh teaching?
With authority He commands even the unclean
spirits, and they obey Him!”
28 And news about Him immediately spread into all
the country around Galil.
29 And coming out of the congregation, they went
straight to the house of Shim’on and Andri, with
Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan.
30 And the mother-in-law of Shim’on lay sick with
inflammation, and immediately they spoke to Him
about her.
31 And having come, He took her by the hand and
lifted her up, and immediately the inflammation left
her, and she served them.
32 And when evening came, when the sun was down,
they brought to Him all who were sick and those who
were demon-possessed.
33 And the entire city had gathered at the door.
34 And He healed many who were sick with various
diseases, and cast out many demons, and was not
allowing the demons to speak, because they knew
Him.
35 And having risen very early in the morning, while
still dim, He went out, and went away to a lonely
place, and there He prayed.
36 And Shim’on and those who were with Him
searched for Him,
37 and when they found Him, they said to Him, “All
are seeking You.”
26

2258

MARQOS

And He said to them, “Let us go into the
neighbouring towns, so that I proclaim there also,
because for this I have come forth.”
39 And He was proclaiming in their congregations, in
all Galil, and casting out demons.
40 And a leper came to Him, calling upon Him,
kneeling down to Him and saying to Him, “If You
desire, You are able to make me clean.”
41 And {vWHY, moved with compassion, stretched
out His hand and touched him, and said to him, “I
desire it. Be cleansed.”
42 And immediately the leprosy left him, and he was
cleansed.
43 And having strictly warned him, He immediately
sent him away,
44 and said to him, “See, say naught to anyone, but
go show yourself to the kohĕn, and offer for your
cleansing what Mosheh ordered, as a witness to
them.”
45 But he went out and began to publish it so much,
and to spread the word, that {vWHY was no longer
able to openly enter the city, but was outside in lonely
places. Yet they came to Him from all directions.
38

2 And some days later He again entered into Kephar
Naḥum, and it was heard that He was in the house.
2 And so many gathered together, that there was no
more room, not even at the door. And He spoke the
Word to them.
3 And they came to Him, bringing a paralytic, carried
by four.
4 And not being able to come near Him because of
the crowd, they uncovered the roof where He was.
And when they had broken through, they let down the
bed on which the paralytic was lying.
2259

MARK

And when {vWHY saw their belief, He said to the
paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven you.”
6 Now some of the scribes were sitting there, and
reasoning in their hearts,
7 “Why does this One talk like this? He is
blaspheming! Who is able to forgive sins but Elohim
alone?”
8 And immediately {vWHY, knowing in His spirit that
they were reasoning that way within themselves, said
to them, “Why do you reason about all this in your
hearts?
9 “Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins
are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise, take up your bed and
walk’?
10 “But in order for you to know that the Bĕn of Aḏam
possesses authority on earth to forgive sins...” He
said to the paralytic,
11 “I say to you, rise, take up your bed, and go to your
house.”
12 And he rose straightaway, and took up the bed,
and went out before all, so that all were amazed and
praised Elohim, saying, “We have never seen the like
of it!”
13 And He went out again by the sea, and all the
crowd was coming to Him, and He taught them.
14 And passing by, He saw Lĕwi of Ḥĕleph sitting at
the tax office, and said to him, “Follow Me.” And
having risen he followed Him.
15 And it came to be, as He sat at the table at his
house, that many tax collectors and sinners also sat
with {vWHY and His talmidim, for there were many,
and they followed Him.
16 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw Him
eating with the tax collectors and sinners, they said to
5

2260

MARQOS

His talmidim, “Why does He eat and drink with tax
collectors and sinners?”
17 And hearing this, {vWHY said to them, “Those who
are strong have no need of a physician, but those who
are sick. I did not come to call the righteous to
repentance, but sinners.”
18 And the talmidim of Yoḥanan and of the Pharisees
were fasting. And they came and said to Him, “Why
do the talmidim of Yoḥanan and of the Pharisees fast,
but Your talmidim do not fast?”
19 And {vWHY said to them, “Are the friends of the
bridegroom able to fast while the bridegroom is with
them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them
they are not able to fast.
20 “But the days shall come when the bridegroom
shall be taken away from them, and then they shall
fast in those days.
21 “And no one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an
old garment, otherwise, the renewed piece pulls away
from the old, and the tear is made worse.
22 “And no one puts new wine into old wineskins,
otherwise the new wine bursts the wineskins, and the
wine runs out, and the wineskins are ruined. But new
wine is to be put into fresh wineskins.”
23 And it came to be that He went through the
grainfields on the Shabbath. And as they went His
talmidim began to pluck heads of grain,
24 and the Pharisees said to Him, “Look, why do they
do what is not right on the Shabbath?”
25 And He said to them, “Have you never read what
Dawiḏ did when he had need and was hungry, he and
those with him?
26 “How he went into the House of hWhY, while
Eḇyathar was kohĕn ha’gadol, and ate the
showbread, which is not right to eat, except for the
2261

MARK

kohenim, and he gave it also to those who were with
him?”
27 And He said to them, “The Shabbath was made
for man, and not man for the Shabbath.
28 “So the Bĕn of Aḏam is also Aḏon of the
Shabbath.”

3 And He went into the congregation again, and a
man who had a withered hand was there.
2 And they were closely watching Him, whether He
would heal him on the Shabbath, so as to accuse
Him.
3 And He said to the man who had the withered
hand, “Get up to the middle.”
4 And He said to them, “Is it right to do good on the
Shabbath, or to do evil, to save life or to kill?” But they
remained silent.
5 And having looked around on them with
displeasure, being grieved at the hardness of their
hearts, He said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.”
And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored as
healthy as the other.
6 And the Pharisees went out and immediately
plotted with the Hĕrodians against Him, how to
destroy Him.
7 But {vWHY withdrew with His talmidim to the sea.
And a great crowd from Galil followed Him, and from
Yahuḏah.
8 Even from Yerushalayim, and from Eḏom and
beyond the Yardĕn, and those around Tsor and
Tsiḏon, a large crowd came to Him when they heard
how much He was doing.
9 And He spoke to His talmidim, that a small boat
should be kept ready for Him because of the crowd,
lest they should press upon Him.
2262

MARQOS

For He healed many, so that as many as had
afflictions fell upon Him to touch Him.
11 And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw Him,
fell down before Him and cried out, saying, “You are
the Bĕn of Elohim.”
12 But He warned them many times that they should
not make Him known.
13 And He went up on the mountain and called to Him
whom He wanted, and they came to Him.
14 And He appointed twelve to be with Him, and to
be sent out to proclaim,
15 and to possess authority to heal sicknesses and to
cast out demons.
16 And He appointed the twelve: Shim’on, to whom
He added the name Kĕpha;
17 and Ya’aqoḇ of Zaḇdai, and Yoḥanan the brother
of Ya’aqoḇ, to whom He added the name, Beni
Reḡes, that is, “Sons of Thunder,”
18 and Andri, and Philippos, and Bartholomi, and
Mattithyahu, and T’oma, and Ya’aqoḇ of Ḥĕleph, and
Taddai, and Shim’on the Kena’anite;
19 and Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth, who also delivered
Him up. And they went into a house,
20 and again the crowd came together, so that they
were unable even to eat bread.
21 And when His relatives heard about this, they went
out to seize Him, for they said, “He is out of His mind.”
22 And
the scribes who came down from
Yerushalayim said, “He has Be’elzebul,” and, “He
casts out demons by the ruler of the demons.”
23 And calling them near He said to them in parables,
“How is Satan able to cast out Satan?
24 “And if a reign is divided against itself, that reign is
unable to stand.
10

2263

MARK

“And if a house is divided against itself, that house
is unable to stand.
26 “And if Satan has risen up against himself, and is
divided, he is unable to stand, but has an end.
27 “No one is able to enter a strong man’s house and
plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong
man, and then he shall plunder his house.
28 “Truly, I say to you, all the sins shall be forgiven
the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they
speak,
29 but he who blasphemes against the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh has no forgiveness forever, but is subject
to everlasting judgment,”
30 because they said, “He has an unclean spirit.”
31 And His brothers and His mother came, and
standing outside they sent to Him, calling Him.
32 And a crowd was sitting around Him. And they said
to Him, “See, Your mother and Your brothers are
outside seeking You.”
33 But He answered them, saying, “Who is My
mother, or My brothers?”
34 And looking about on those sitting round Him, He
said, “See My mother and My brothers!
35 “For whoever does the desire of Elohim is My
brother and My sister and mother.”
25

4 And He began to teach again by the sea, and a
large crowd was gathered to Him, so that He entered
into a boat, to sit in the sea. And all the crowd was on
the land facing the sea.
2 And He taught them much in parables, and said to
them in His teaching:
3 “Listen! See, a sower went out to sow.

2264

MARQOS

“And it came to be, as he sowed, some fell by the
wayside, and the birds of the shamayim came and
devoured it.
5 “And other fell on rocky places, where it had not
much soil. And immediately it sprang up because it
had no depth of soil.
6 “But when the sun was up it was scorched, and
because it had no root it withered away.
7 “And other fell among thorns. And the thorns grew
up and choked it, and it yielded no crop.
8 “And other fell on good soil and yielded a crop that
came up, grew and yielded a crop, some thirtyfold,
and some sixty, and some a hundred.”
9 And He said to them, “He who has ears to hear,
let him hear!”
10 And when He was alone, those about Him, with
the twelve, asked Him about the parable.
11 And He said to them, “To you it has been given to
know the secret of the reign of Elohim, but to those
who are outside, all are done in parables,
12 so that ‘seeing they see but do not perceive, and
hearing they hear but do not understand, lest they
should turn and their sins be forgiven them.’ ”
13 And He said to them, “Do you not understand this
parable? How then shall you understand all the
parables?
14 “The sower sows the Word.
15 “These, then, are the ones by the wayside where
the Word is sown. And when they hear, Satan comes
immediately and takes away the Word that was sown
in their hearts.
16 “And likewise these are the ones sown on rocky
places, who, when they hear the Word, immediately
receive it with joy,
4

2265

MARK

and they have no root in themselves, but are shortlived. Then when pressure or persecution arises
because of the Word, immediately they stumble.
18 “And others are those sown among thorns, these
are they who hear the Word,
19 and the worries of this age, and the deceit of
riches, and the desires for other matters, entering in,
choke the Word, and it becomes fruitless.
20 “And those sown on good soil, are those who hear
the Word, and accept it, and bear fruit, some
thirtyfold, and some sixty, and some a hundred.”
21 And He said to them, “Would a lamp be brought to
be put under a basket or under a bed? Is it not to be
put on a lampstand?
22 “For whatever is hidden shall be revealed, and
whatever has been kept secret, shall come to light.
23 “If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
24 And He said to them, “Take heed what you hear.
With the same measure you use, it shall be measured
to you, and more shall be added to you who hear.
25 “For whoever possesses, to him more shall be
given; but whoever does not possess, even what he
possesses shall be taken away from him.”
26 And He said, “The reign of Elohim is as when a
man scatters seed on the ground,
27 then sleeps by night and rises by day, while the
seed sprouts and grows, he himself does not know
how.
28 “For the soil yields crops by itself: first the blade,
then the head, after that the completed grain in the
head.
29 “And when the crop is ready, immediately he puts
in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”
30 And He said, “To what shall we compare the reign
of Elohim? Or with what parable shall we present it?
17

2266

MARQOS

“Like a mustard seed, which, when it is sown on
the ground, is smaller than all the seeds on earth,
32 and when it is sown, it grows up and becomes
greater than all plants, and forms large branches, so
that the birds of the shamayim are able to nest under
its shade.”
33 And with many such parables He was speaking to
them the Word as they were able to hear,
34 and He was not speaking to them without
parables. And when they were alone, He explained
all to His talmidim.
35 And on the same day, when evening had come,
He said to them, “Let us pass over to the other side.”
36 And having left the crowd, they took Him along in
the boat, as He was. And other little boats were also
with Him.
37 And there came a great windstorm, and the waves
beat into the boat, so that it was already being filled.
38 And He was in the stern, asleep on a cushion. And
they woke Him up and said to Him, “Teacher, is it no
concern to You that we perish?”
39 And having been awakened He rebuked the wind,
and said to the sea, “Peace, be still!” And the wind
ceased and there was a great calm.
40 And He said to them, “Why are you so afraid?
Have you not yet belief?”
41 And they feared exceedingly, and asked each
other, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the
sea obey Him!”
31

5 And they came to the other side of the sea, to the
country of the Gaḏarenes.
2 And when He came out of the boat, immediately
there met Him out of the tombs a man with an unclean
spirit,
2267

MARK

who had his dwelling among the tombs. And no
one was able to bind him, not even with chains,
4 because he had often been bound with shackles
and chains but the chains had been pulled apart by
him, and the shackles broken in pieces, and no one
was able to tame him.
5 And continually, night and day, he was in the
mountains and in the tombs, crying out and cutting
himself with stones.
6 And seeing {vWHY from a distance, he ran and
bowed down to Him,
7 and having called out with a loud voice, said,
“What have I to do with You, {vWHY, Bĕn of the Most
High Ĕl? Swear to Elohim not to torture me.”
8 For He had said to him, “Come out of the man,
unclean spirit!”
9 And He was asking him, “What is your name?”
And he answered, saying, “My name is Legion,
because we are many.”
10 And he begged Him very much that He would not
send them out of the country.
11 Now a great herd of pigs was there, feeding near
the mountains.
12 And all the demons begged Him, saying, “Send us
to the pigs, so that we enter into them.”
13 And He gave them permission. And the unclean
spirits came out and entered into the pigs - they were
about two thousand - and the herd rushed down the
steep place into the sea, and drowned in the sea.
14 And those who fed the pigs fled, and reported it in
the city and in the country. And they went out to see
what had taken place.
15 So they came to {vWHY, and saw the demonpossessed one, him who had the legion, sitting, and
dressed, and in his right mind. And they were afraid.
3

2268

MARQOS

And those who saw it related to them what was
done to the demon-possessed one, and about the
pigs.
17 And they began to plead with Him to leave their
borders.
18 And as He was entering into the boat, he who had
been demon-possessed begged Him that he might be
with Him.
19 And {vWHY did not allow him, but said to him, “Go
home to your friends, and report to them what the
Aḏon has done for you, and how He had compassion
on you.”
20 And he left and began to proclaim in Dekapolis all
that {vWHY had done for him, and all marvelled.
21 And when {vWHY had passed over again by boat
to the other side, a large crowd assembled to Him,
and He was by the sea.
22 And see, one of the rulers of the congregation
came, Ya’ir by name. And when he saw Him, he fell
at His feet,
23 and begged Him strongly, saying, “My little
daughter lies at the point of death. Come, lay Your
hands on her to heal her, and she shall live.”
24 And He went with him. And a large crowd was
following Him, and they were thronging Him.
25 And a certain woman had a flow of blood for twelve
years,
26 and had suffered much from many physicians, and
spent all that she had and was no better, but rather
became worse.
27 Having heard about {vWHY, she came behind Him
in the crowd and touched His garment,
28 for she said, “If I only touch His garments, I shall
be made well.”
16

2269

MARK

And immediately the fountain of her blood was
dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed
of the affliction.
30 And immediately {vWHY, knowing in Himself that
power had gone out of Him, turned around in the
crowd and said, “Who touched My garments?”
31 And His talmidim said to Him, “You see the crowd
is thronging You, and You say, ‘Who touched Me?’ ”
32 And He was looking around to see her who did
this.
33 And the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing
what was done to her, came and fell down before Him
and spoke to Him all the truth.
34 And He said to her, “Daughter, your belief has
healed you. Go in peace, and be relieved from your
affliction.”
35 As He was speaking, they came from the ruler of
the congregation, saying, “Your daughter is dead.
Why trouble the Teacher any further?”
36 But having heard the word that was spoken,
{vWHY said to the ruler of the congregation, “Do not
be afraid - only believe.”
37 And He allowed no one to follow Him except
Kĕpha, and Ya’aqoḇ, and Yoḥanan the brother of
Ya’aqoḇ.
38 So they came to the house of the ruler of the
congregation, and saw a commotion, and much
weeping and lamenting.
39 And coming in He said to them, “Why make this
commotion and weep? The child has not died, but is
sleeping.”
40 And they were laughing at Him. And when He had
put them all out, He took the father and the mother of
the child, and those who were with Him, and went in
where the child was lying.
29

2270

MARQOS

And taking the child by the hand He said to her,
“Talitha, qumi,” which is translated, “Little girl, I say to
you, arise.”
42 And immediately the girl rose up and was walking,
for she was twelve years old. And they were
completely astonished.
43 But He ordered them many times that no one
should know it, and said that she should be given to
eat.
41

6 And He went away from there and came to His own
country, and His talmidim followed Him.
2 And Shabbath having come, He began to teach in
the congregation. And many who heard were
astonished, saying, “Where did He get all this? And
what wisdom is this which is given to Him, that such
miracles are done through His hands?
3 “Is this not the carpenter, the Bĕn of Miryam, and
brother of Ya’aqoḇ, and Yosĕph, and Yahuḏah, and
Shim’on? And are not His sisters here with us?” And
they stumbled in Him.
4 And {vWHY said to them, “A naḇi is not
unappreciated except in his own country, and among
his own relatives, and in his own house.”
5 And He was unable to do any miracle there,
except that He laid His hands on a few sick ones and
healed them.
6 And He marvelled because of their unbelief. And
He was going around among the villages, teaching.
7 And He called the twelve near, and began to send
them out two by two, and gave them authority over
unclean spirits.
8 And He instructed them to take naught for the
journey except a staff - no bag, no bread, no copper
in their money belts,
2271

MARK

but to wear sandals, and not to wear two
undergarments.
10 And He said to them, “Wherever you enter into a
house, stay there until you leave that place.
11 “And any place that does not receive you or listen
to you, when you leave there, shake off the dust
under your feet as a witness against them. Truly, I say
to you, it shall be more bearable for Seḏom and
Amorah in the day of judgment than for that city!”
12 And they went out and proclaimed the purpose to
repent.
13 And they were casting out many demons, and they
were anointing with oil many who were sick, and they
were healing them.
14 And Sovereign Hĕrodĕs heard, for His Name had
become well known. And he said, “Yoḥanan the
Immerser has been raised from the dead, and
because of this these powers are at work in him.”
15 Others said, “He is Ĕliyahu.” And others said, “He
is a naḇi - like one of the neḇi’im.”
16 But when Hĕrodĕs heard, he said, “This one is
Yoḥanan whom I beheaded, he has been raised from
the dead!”
17 For Hĕrodĕs himself had sent and seized
Yoḥanan, and bound him in prison because of
Hĕrodias, his brother Philippos’ wife, because he had
married her,
18 for Yoḥanan had said to Hĕrodĕs, “It is not right for
you to have your brother’s wife.”
19 So Hĕrodias held a grudge against him and
wanted to kill him, but was unable,
20 for Hĕrodĕs feared Yoḥanan, knowing that he was
a righteous and qodesh man, and he protected him.
And when he heard him, he was much perplexed, yet
heard him gladly.
9

2272

MARQOS

And a suitable day came when Hĕrodĕs on his
birthday gave a feast for his great men, and the high
officers, and the chief men of Galil.
22 And when the daughter of Hĕrodias herself came
in and danced, and pleased Hĕrodĕs and those who
sat with him, the sovereign said to the girl, “Ask me
whatever you want, and I shall give it to you.”
23 And he swore to her, “Whatever you ask me, I
shall give you, up to half of my reign.”
24 And she went out and said to her mother, “What
shall I ask?” And she said, “The head of Yoḥanan the
Immerser!”
25 And coming in immediately with haste to the
sovereign she asked, saying, “I want you to give me
at once the head of Yoḥanan the Immerser on a dish.”
26 And the sovereign, becoming deeply grieved,
because of the oaths, and because of those who sat
with him, did not want to refuse her.
27 And
the sovereign straightaway sent an
executioner and commanded his head to be brought.
And he went and beheaded him in prison,
28 and brought his head on a dish, and gave it to the
girl. And the girl gave it to her mother.
29 And when his talmidim heard of it, they came and
took away his dead body and laid it in a tomb.
30 And the emissaries gathered to {vWHY and
reported to Him all, both what they had done and what
they had taught.
31 And He said to them, “Come aside by yourselves
to a lonely place and rest a little” - for there were many
coming and going, and they did not even have time to
eat.
32 And they went away to a lonely place in the boat
by themselves.
21

2273

MARK

But they saw them going, and many recognised
Him and ran there on foot from all the cities, and came
before them and came together to Him.
34 And having gone out, {vWHY saw a large crowd
and was moved with compassion for them because
they were like sheep not having a shepherd. And He
began to teach them much.
35 And as the hour grew late, His talmidim came to
Him and said, “This is a lonely place, and now the
hour is late.
36 “Send them away, so that they go into the
surrounding country and villages and buy themselves
bread, since they have naught to eat.”
37 But He answering, said to them, “You give them to
eat.” And they said to Him, “Should we go and buy
two hundred silver pieces worth of bread and give
them to eat?”
38 Then He said to them, “How many loaves do you
have? Go and see.” And when they found out they
said, “Five, and two fish.”
39 And He ordered them to make them all sit down in
groups on the green grass.
40 And they sat down in groups, in hundreds and in
fifties.
41 And taking the five loaves and the two fish, looking
up to the shamayim, He baraḵ and broke the loaves,
and gave them to His talmidim to put before them.
And the two fish He divided among them all.
42 And all ate and were satisfied.
43 And they picked up twelve baskets, filled with
pieces, also from the fish.
44 Now those who ate the loaves were about five
thousand men.
33

2274

MARQOS

And immediately He made His talmidim enter into
the boat, and to go before Him to the other side, to
Bĕyth Tsaiḏa, while He was dismissing the crowd.
46 And having sent them away, He went away to the
mountain to pray.
47 And when evening came, the boat was in the
middle of the sea. And He was alone on the land.
48 And seeing them straining at rowing - for the wind
was against them - at about the fourth watch of the
night, He came to them walking on the sea, and
intended to pass them by.
49 And when they saw Him walking on the sea, they
thought it was a phantom, and cried out,
50 for they all saw Him and were troubled. And
immediately He spoke to them and said to them,
“Take courage, it is I. Do not be afraid.”
51 And He went up to them, into the boat, and the
wind ceased. And they were exceedingly amazed in
themselves, and marvelled.
52 For they did not understand about the loaves,
because their heart was hardened.
53 And having passed over, they came to the land of
Gennĕsar and drew to shore.
54 And when they came out of the boat, He was
immediately recognised,
55 and all that neighbourhood ran about, and began
to carry about on beds those who were sick to
wherever they heard He was.
56 And wherever He went, into villages, or cities, or
the country, they were laying the sick in the marketplaces, and begged Him to let them touch if only the
tsitsit of His garment. And as many as touched Him
were healed.
45

2275

MARK

7 And the Pharisees and some of the scribes
assembled to Him, having come from Yerushalayim.
2 And seeing some of His talmidim eat bread with
defiled, that is, with unwashed hands, they found
fault.
3 For the Pharisees, and all the Yahuḏim, do not eat
unless they wash their hands thoroughly, holding fast
the tradition of the elders,
4 and from the market-place, they do not eat unless
they wash. And there are many others which they
have received and hold fast - the washing of cups and
utensils and copper vessels and couches.
5 Then the Pharisees and scribes asked Him, “Why
do Your talmidim not walk according to the tradition
of the elders, but eat bread with unwashed hands?”
6 And He answering, said to them, “Well did
Yeshayahu naḇa concerning you hypocrites, as it has
been written, ‘This people respect Me with their lips,
but their heart is far from Me.
7 And in vain do they worship Me teaching as
teachings the commands of men.’
8 “Forsaking the Command of Elohim, you hold fast
the tradition of men: washing of pots and cups and
many other like matters.”
9 And He said to them, “Well do you put aside the
Command of Elohim, in order to guard your tradition.
10 “For Mosheh said, ‘Respect your father and your
mother,’ and, ‘He who curses father or mother, let him
be put to death.’
11 “But you say, ‘If a man says to his father or mother,
“Whatever profit you might have received from me, is
Qorban (that is, a gift),” ’
12 you let him do naught at all for his father or his
mother,
2276

MARQOS

nullifying the Word of Elohim through your tradition
which you have handed down. And many such-like
you do.”
14 And calling the crowd to Him, He said to them,
“Hear Me, everyone, and understand:
15 “There is no matter that enters a man from outside
which is able to defile him, but it is what comes out of
him that defiles the man.
16 “If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!”
17 And when He went from the crowd into a house,
His talmidim asked Him concerning the parable.
18 And He said to them, “Are you also without
understanding? Do you not perceive that whatever
enters a man from outside is unable to defile him,
19 because it does not enter his heart but his
stomach, and is cast out in the sewer, thus purging all
the foods?”
20 And He said, “What comes out of a man, that
defiles a man.
21 “For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed
evil reasonings, adulteries, whorings, murders,
22 thefts, greedy desires, wickednesses, deceit,
indecency, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride,
foolishness.
23 “All this wickedness comes from within and defile
a man.”
24 And rising up from there He went to the borders of
Tsor and Tsiḏon. And entering into a house He
wanted no one to know it, but it was impossible to be
hidden.
25 For a woman whose young daughter had an
unclean spirit heard about Him, and she came and fell
at His feet.
13

2277

MARK

Now the woman was a Yawanite, a SuroPhoinikĕan by birth, and she kept asking Him to cast
the demon out of her daughter.
27 And {vWHY said to her, “Let the children be
satisfied first, for it is not good to take the children’s
bread and throw it to the little dogs.”
28 But she answering, said to Him, “Yes, Aḏonai, for
even the little dogs under the table eat from the
children’s crumbs.”
29 And He said to her, “Because of this word go, the
demon has gone out of your daughter.”
30 And having come into her house, she found the
demon gone out, and her daughter lying on the bed.
31 And again, going out from the borders of Tsor and
Tsiḏon, He came to the Sea of Galil, through the
midst of the borders of Dekapolis.
32 And they brought to Him one who was deaf and
spoke with difficulty, and they begged Him to lay His
hand upon him.
33 And taking him away from the crowd, He put His
fingers in his ears, and having spit, He touched his
tongue.
34 And looking up to the shamayim, He sighed, and
said to him, “Ephphatha,” that is, “Be opened.”
35 And immediately his ears were opened, and the
binding of his tongue was loosed, and he was
speaking plainly.
36 And He ordered them, that they should say it to no
one, but the more He ordered them, the more they
published it.
37 And they were immeasurably astonished, saying,
“He has done all well. He makes even the deaf to hear
and the dumb to speak.”
26

2278

MARQOS

8 In those days, the crowd being very great and
having naught to eat, {vWHY called His talmidim near
and said to them,
2 “I have compassion on the crowd, for they have
now been with Me three days and have naught to eat.
3 “And if I dismiss them unfed to their home, they
shall faint on the way, for some of them have come
from afar.”
4 And His talmidim answered Him, “How shall
anyone be able to feed these people with bread here
in the desert?”
5 And He asked them, “How many loaves do you
have?” And they said, “Seven.”
6 And He commanded the crowd to sit down on the
ground. And taking the seven loaves, giving thanks,
He broke them and gave them to His talmidim to put
before them. And they put them before the crowd.
7 And they had a few small fish. And having baraḵ,
He said to put them also before them.
8 And they ate and were satisfied, and they picked
up seven large baskets of broken pieces.
9 And those eating were about four thousand, and
He dismissed them.
10 And immediately entering into the boat with His
talmidim, He came to the parts of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharisees came out and began to dispute
with Him, seeking from Him a sign from the
shamayim, trying Him.
12 And sighing deeply in His spirit He said, “Why
does this generation seek a sign? Truly, I say to you,
no sign shall be given to this generation.”
13 And leaving them, again entering into the boat, He
went away to the other side.
2279

MARK

And they had forgotten to take bread, and they did
not have more than one loaf with them in the boat.
15 And He was warning them, saying, “Mind! Beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the leaven of
Hĕrodĕs.”
16 And they were reasoning with one another,
saying, “Because we have no bread.”
17 And {vWHY, being aware of it, said to them, “Why
do you reason because you have no bread? Do you
not yet perceive nor understand? Is your heart still
hardened?
18 “Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears,
do you not hear? And do you not remember?
19 “When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand,
how many baskets filled with broken pieces did you
pick up?” They said to Him, “Twelve.”
20 “And when I broke the seven for the four thousand,
how many large baskets filled with broken pieces did
you pick up?” And they said, “Seven.”
21 And He said to them, “How do you not
understand?”
22 And He came to Bĕyth Tsaiḏa, and they brought a
blind man to Him, and begged Him to touch him.
23 And taking the blind man by the hand He led him
out of the village. And having spit on his eyes, laying
hands on him, He asked him, “Do you see at all?”
24 And he looked up and said, “I see men like trees,
walking.”
25 Then He placed His hands on his eyes again and
made him look up. And he was restored, and saw all
clearly.
26 And He sent him away to his home, saying, “Do
not go into the village.”
27 And {vWHY and His talmidim went out to the
villages of Kaisereia Philippos. And on the way He
14

2280

MARQOS

asked His talmidim, saying to them, “Who do men say
I am?”
28 And they said to Him, “Yoḥanan the Immerser, and
others, Ĕliyahu, but others, one of the neḇi’im.”
29 And He asked them, “And you, who do you say I
am?” And Kĕpha answering, said to Him, “You are
ha’Mashiaḥ.”
30 And He warned them that they should speak to no
one about Him.
31 And He began to teach them that the Bĕn of Aḏam
has to suffer much, and be rejected by the elders and
chief kohenim and scribes, and be killed, and after
three days to rise again.
32 And He was speaking about this openly. Then
Kĕpha, taking Him aside, began to rebuke Him.
33 And turning around and seeing His talmidim, He
rebuked Kĕpha, saying, “Get behind Me, Satan! For
your thoughts are not those of Elohim, but those of
men.”
34 And calling near the crowd with His talmidim, He
said to them, “Whoever desires to come after Me, let
him deny himself, and take up his stake, and follow
Me.
35 “For whoever desires to save his life shall lose it,
but whoever loses his life for the sake of Me and the
Good News, he shall save it.
36 “For what shall it profit a man if he gains all the
world, and loses his own ḥai?
37 “Or what shall a man give in exchange for his life?
38 “For whoever is ashamed of Me and My Words in
this adulterous and sinning generation, of him the Bĕn
of Aḏam also shall be ashamed when He comes in
the esteem of His Father with the qodesh
messengers.”
2281

MARK

9 And He said to them, “Truly, I say to you that there
are some standing here who shall not taste of death at
all until they see the reign of Elohim having come in
power.”
2 And after six days {vWHY took Kĕpha, and
Ya’aqoḇ, and Yoḥanan, and led them up on a high
mountain alone by themselves. And He was
transformed before them.
3 And His garments became glittering, exceedingly
white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth is able
to whiten.
4 And there appeared to them Ĕliyahu with Mosheh,
and they were talking with {vWHY.
5 And Kĕpha responding, said to {vWHY, “Rabbi, it
is good for us to be here. And let us make three
booths, one for You, and one for Mosheh, and one for
Ĕliyahu,”
6 because he did not know what to say, for they
were exceedingly afraid.
7 And there came a cloud overshadowing them, and
a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My
Bĕn, the Beloved. Hear Him!”
8 And suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw
anyone with them, but only {vWHY.
9 And as they were coming down from the mountain,
He ordered them not to relate to anyone what they
saw, till the Bĕn of Aḏam had risen from the dead.
10 And they kept this matter to themselves, debating
what the rising from the dead meant.
11 And they asked Him, saying, “Why do the scribes
say that Ĕliyahu has to come first?”
12 And He said to them, “Ĕliyahu indeed, having
come first, restores all. And how has it been written
2282

MARQOS

concerning the Bĕn of Aḏam, that He is to suffer much
and be despised?
13 “But I say to you that even Ĕliyahu has come, and
they did to him whatever they wanted, as it has been
written of him.”
14 And coming to the talmidim, He saw a large crowd
around them, scribes disputing with them.
15 And immediately, when all the crowd saw Him,
they were greatly alarmed, and running near, greeted
Him.
16 And He asked the scribes, “What are you disputing
with them?”
17 And one of the crowd answering, said, “Teacher, I
brought You my son, who has a dumb spirit.
18 “And wherever he seizes him, he throws him
down, and he froths, and gnashes his teeth, and he
wastes away. And I spoke to Your talmidim, that they
should cast him out, but they were not able.”
19 And He answered him and said, “O unbelieving
generation, how long shall I be with you? How long
shall I put up with you? Bring him to Me.”
20 So they brought him to Him. And when he saw
Him, immediately the spirit threw him into
convulsions. And falling on the ground, he rolled
about, frothing.
21 And He asked his father, “How long has he been
like this?” And he said, “From childhood,
22 and often he has thrown him both into the fire and
into the water to destroy him. But if it is at all possible
for You, have compassion on us and help us.”
23 And {vWHY said to him, “If you are able to believe,
all is possible to him who believes.”
24 And immediately the father of the child cried out
and said with tears, “I believe Aḏonai, help my
unbelief!”
2283

MARK

And when {vWHY saw that a crowd came running
together, He rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to
him, “You deaf and dumb spirit, I order you, come out
of him, and never again enter into him!”
26 And crying out, and convulsing him much, it came
out of him. And he became as one dead, so that many
said that he was dead.
27 But {vWHY, taking him by the hand, lifted him up,
and he arose.
28 And when He came into a house, His talmidim
asked Him separately, “Why were we unable to cast
him out?”
29 And He said to them, “It is impossible for this kind
to come out except through prayer and fasting.”
30 And going from there they passed through Galil.
And He did not want anyone to know,
31 for He was teaching His talmidim and said to them,
“The Bĕn of Aḏam is being delivered into the hands
of men, and they shall kill Him. And having been
killed, He shall rise the third day.”
32 But they did not understand the word, and they
were afraid to ask Him.
33 And they came to Kephar Naḥum, and having
come in the house He asked them, “What was it you
disputed among yourselves on the way?”
34 And they were silent, for on the way they had
disputed with one another who was the greatest.
35 And sitting down, He called the twelve and said to
them, “If anyone wants to be first, he shall be last of
all and servant of all.”
36 And He took a little child and put him in their midst,
and taking him in His arms, He said to them,
37 “Whoever receives one of such little children in My
Name receives Me. And whoever receives Me,
receives not Me, but the One who sent Me.”
25

2284

MARQOS

And Yoḥanan said to Him, “Teacher, we saw
someone, who does not follow us, casting out
demons in Your Name, and we forbade him because
he does not follow us.”
39 And {vWHY said, “Do not forbid him, for no one
who works a miracle in My Name is able to readily
speak evil of Me.
40 “For he who is not against us is for us.
41 “For whoever gives you a cup of water to drink in
My Name, because you are of Mashiaḥ, truly, I say to
you, he shall by no means lose his reward.
42 “And whoever causes one of these little ones who
believe in Me to stumble, it is better for him if a
millstone were hung around his neck, and he were
thrown into the sea.
43 “And if your hand makes you stumble, cut it off. It
is better for you to enter into life crippled, than having
two hands, to go into Gĕy-Hinnom, into the
unquenchable fire,
44 where ‘their worm does not die and the fire is not
quenched.’
45 “And if your foot makes you stumble, cut it off. It is
better for you to enter into life crippled, than having
two feet, to be thrown into Gĕy-Hinnom, into the
unquenchable fire,
46 where ‘their worm does not die and the fire is not
quenched.’
47 “And if your eye makes you stumble, pluck it out.
It is better for you to enter into the reign of Elohim with
one eye, than having two eyes, to be thrown into the
fire of Gĕy-Hinnom,
48 where ‘their worm does not die and the fire is not
quenched.’
49 “For everyone shall be seasoned with fire, and
every offering shall be seasoned with salt.
38

2285

MARK

“Salt is good, but if the salt becomes tasteless,
how shall you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and
be at peace among one another.”

50

10 And rising up from there He came into the
borders of Yahuḏah by the other side of the Yardĕn.
And crowds gathered to Him again, and as He usually
did, He was teaching them again.
2 And Pharisees came and asked Him, “Is it right for
a man to put away his wife?” - trying Him.
3 And He answering, said to them, “What did
Mosheh command you?”
4 And they said, “Mosheh allowed a man to write a
certificate of separation, and to divorce.”
5 And {vWHY said to them, “Because of the
hardness of your heart he wrote you this command.
6 “However, from the beginning of the creation,
Elohim ‘made them male and female.’
7 ‘For this cause a man shall leave his father and
mother and join unto his wife,
8 and the two shall become one flesh,’ so that they
are no longer two, but one flesh.
9 “Therefore what Elohim has joined together, let
man not separate.”
10 And in the house His talmidim asked Him about
this again.
11 And He said to them, “Whoever puts away his wife
and marries another commits adultery against her.
12 “And if a woman puts away her husband and
marries another, she commits adultery.”
13 And they were bringing little children for Him to
touch them, but the talmidim were rebuking those
who were bringing them.
14 And when {vWHY saw it, He was much displeased
and said to them, “Let the little children come to Me,
2286

MARQOS

and do not forbid them, for of such is the reign of
Elohim.
15 “Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the
reign of Elohim as a little child, shall certainly not
enter into it.”
16 And taking them up in His arms, laying His hands
on them, He baraḵ them.
17 And as He was proceeding on the way, one came
running, and knelt before Him, and asked Him, “Good
Teacher, what shall I do to inherit everlasting ḥai?”
18 And {vWHY said to him, “Why do you call Me
good? No one is good except One - Elohim.
19 “You know the Commands, ‘Do not commit
adultery,’ ‘Do not murder,’ ‘Do not steal,’ ‘Do not bear
false witness,’ ‘Do not defraud,’ ‘Respect your father
and your mother.’ ”
20 And he answering, said to Him, “Teacher, all these
I have watched over from my youth.”
21 And {vWHY, looking at him, loved him, and said to
him, “One you lack: Go, sell all you possess and give
to the poor, and you shall have treasure in the
shamayim. And come, follow Me, taking up the
stake.”
22 But he, being sad at this word, went away grieved,
for he had many possessions.
23 And {vWHY, looking around, said to His talmidim,
“How hard it is for those who have riches to enter into
the reign of Elohim!”
24 And the talmidim were astonished at His words.
And {vWHY responding, said to them again,
“Children, how hard it is for those who trust in riches
to enter into the reign of Elohim!
25 “It is easier for a camel to enter through the eye of
a needle than for a rich man to enter into the reign of
Elohim.”
2287

MARK

And they were immeasurably astonished, saying
among themselves, “Who then is able to be saved?”
27 And looking at them, {vWHY said, “With men it is
impossible, but not with Elohim, for with Elohim all is
possible.”
28 And Kĕpha began to say to Him, “See, we have
left all and we have followed You.”
29 {vWHY said, “Truly, I say to you, there is no one
who has left house or brothers or sisters or father or
mother or wife or children or lands, for the sake of Me
and the Good News,
30 who shall not receive a hundredfold now in this
time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers
and children and lands, with persecutions, and in the
age to come, everlasting ḥai.
31 “But many who are first shall be last, and the last
first.”
32 And they were on the way, going up to
Yerushalayim, and {vWHY was going before them.
And they were astonished, and those who followed
were afraid. And again He took the twelve aside and
began to say to them what was about to befall Him:
33 “See, we are going up to Yerushalayim, and the
Bĕn of Aḏam shall be delivered to the chief kohenim
and to the scribes, and they shall condemn Him to
death and shall deliver Him to the gentiles,
34 and they shall mock Him, and flog Him, and spit
on Him, and kill Him. And the third day He shall rise
again.”
35 And Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan, the sons of Zaḇdai,
came up to Him, saying, “Teacher, we want You to do
for us whatever we ask.”
36 And He said to them, “What do you want Me to do
for you?”
26

2288

MARQOS

And they said to Him, “Grant us to be seated in
Your esteem, one on Your right hand and the other
on Your left.”
38 But {vWHY said to them, “You do not know what
you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and
be immersed with the immersion that I am immersed
with?”
39 And they said to Him, “We are able.” And {vWHY
said to them, “You shall indeed drink the cup that I
drink, and with the immersion I am immersed with,
you shall be immersed,
40 but to sit on My right hand and on My left is not
Mine to give, but it is for those for whom it has been
prepared.”
41 And when the ten heard it, they began to be sorely
displeased with Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan.
42 And {vWHY, calling them near, said to them, “You
know that those who think to rule the gentiles are
masters over them, and their great ones exercise
authority over them.
43 “But it is not so among you, but whoever wants to
become great among you shall be your servant.
44 “And whoever wants to be first among you, shall
be servant of all.
45 “For even the Bĕn of Aḏam did not come to be
served, but to serve, and to give His ḥai a ransom for
many.”
46 And they came to Yeriḥo. And as He was leaving
Yeriḥo with His talmidim and a large crowd, blind
Bartimai, the son of Timai, was sitting by the way
begging.
47 And when he heard that it was {vWHY of
Natsareth, he began to cry out and to say, “{vWHY
Bĕn of Dawiḏ, have compassion on me!”
37

2289

MARK

And many were reprimanding him to be silent, but
he cried out all the more, “Bĕn of Dawiḏ, have
compassion on me!”
49 And {vWHY stopped and said, “Call him.” And they
called the blind man, saying to him, “Take courage,
arise, He is calling you.”
50 And he, throwing aside his garment, rose and
came to {vWHY.
51 And {vWHY responding, said to him, “What do you
desire I do for you?” And the blind man said to Him,
“Rabboni, that I receive my sight.”
52 And {vWHY said to him, “Go, your belief has
healed you.” And immediately he saw again and
followed {vWHY on the way.
48

11 And when they came near Yerushalayim, to
Bĕyth Phaḡi and Bĕyth Aniyah, at the Mount of Olives,
He sent out two of His talmidim,
2 and said to them, “Go into the village opposite you,
and immediately entering into it, you shall find a colt
tied, on which no one has sat. Loosen it and bring it.
3 “And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing
this?’ say, ‘The Aḏon needs it and shall send it back
straightaway.’ ”
4 So they went away, and found the colt tied by the
door outside on the street, and they loosened it.
5 And some of those standing there said to them,
“What are you doing, loosening the colt?”
6 And they said to them, as {vWHY had said. So they
let them go.
7 And they brought the colt to {vWHY and threw their
garments on it, and He sat on it.
8 And many spread their garments on the way, and
others were cutting down branches from the trees and
were spreading them on the way.
2290

MARQOS

And those going before and those following cried
out, saying, “Hoshia-na! ‘Baruḵ is He who is coming
in the Name of hWhY!’
10 Baruḵ is the coming reign of our father Dawiḏ - in
the Name of hWhY Hoshia-na in the highest!”
11 And {vWHY went into Yerushalayim and into the
Miqdash. And having looked around on all, He went
out to Bĕyth Anyah with the twelve, as the hour was
already late.
12 And on the next day, when they had come out from
Bĕyth Anyah, He was hungry.
13 And seeing at a distance a fig tree having leaves,
He went to see whether He would find anything on it.
And when He came to it, He found naught but leaves,
for it was not the season for figs.
14 And {vWHY, responding, said to it, “Let no one eat
fruit from you ever again.” And His talmidim heard it.
15 And they came to Yerushalayim. {vWHY, entering
into the Miqdash, began to drive out those who
bought and sold in the Miqdash, and overturned the
tables of the money changers and the seats of those
selling doves.
16 And He did not allow anyone to carry a vessel
through the Miqdash.
17 And He was teaching, saying to them, “Has it not
been written, ‘My House shall be called a house of
prayer for all nations’? But you have made it a ‘den of
robbers.’ ”
18 And the scribes and the chief kohenim heard it and
they were seeking how to destroy Him, for they feared
Him, because all the crowd was astonished at His
teaching.
19 And when evening came, He went out of the city.
20 And in the morning, passing by, they saw the fig
tree dried up from the roots.
9

2291

MARK

Then Kĕpha, remembering, said to Him, “Rabbi,
look! The fig tree which You cursed has withered.”
22 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Have belief
in Elohim.
23 “For truly, I say to you, whoever says to this
mountain, ‘Be removed and be thrown into the sea,’
and does not doubt in his heart, but believes that what
he says, shall be done, he shall have whatever he
says.
24 “Because of this I say to you, whatever you ask
when you pray, believe that you receive them, and
you shall have them.
25 “And whenever you stand praying, if you hold
whatever against anyone, forgive, so that your Father
in the shamayim shall also forgive you your
trespasses.
26 “But if you do not forgive, neither shall your Father
in the shamayim forgive your trespasses.”
27 And they came again to Yerushalayim. And as He
was walking in the Miqdash, the chief kohenim, and
the scribes, and the elders came to Him,
28 and they said to Him, “By what authority are You
doing these? And who gave You this authority to do
these?”
29 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “I shall ask
you one question, and answer Me, and I shall say to
you by what authority I do these:
30 “The immersion of Yoḥanan - was it from the
shamayim or from men? Answer Me.”
31 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, “If
we say, ‘From the shamayim,’ He shall say, ‘Then
why did you not believe him?’
32 “But if we say, ‘From men’ ” - they feared the
people, for all held that Yoḥanan was a naḇi indeed.
21

2292

MARQOS

And answering they said to {vWHY, “We do not
know.” And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Neither
do I say to you by what authority I do these.”

33

12 And He began to speak to them in parables, “A
man planted a vineyard and put a hedge around it, and
dug a vat for the winepress and built a watchtower, and
let it out to farmers and went away.
2 “And in due season he sent a servant to the
farmers, to receive some of the fruit of the vineyard
from the farmers.
3 “And they seized and beat him and sent away
empty-handed.
4 “And again he sent them another servant, and
throwing stones, they wounded him in the head, and
having insulted, sent him away.
5 “And again he sent another, and they killed him;
and many others, beating some and killing some.
6 “He had one more son, his beloved. He sent him
last of all, saying, ‘They shall respect my son.’
7 “But those farmers said among themselves, ‘This
is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance
shall be ours.’
8 “So they took and killed him and threw him out of
the vineyard.
9 “What then shall the owner of the vineyard do? He
shall come and destroy the farmers, and give the
vineyard to others.
10 “Have you not read this Scripture, ‘The Stone
which the builders rejected has become the chief
Corner-Stone.
11 ‘This was from hWhY, and it is marvellous in our
eyes’?”

2293

MARK

And they were seeking to seize Him, but feared
the crowd, for they knew He had spoken the parable
against them. And leaving Him, they went away.
13 And they sent to Him some of the Pharisees and
the Hĕrodians, to catch Him in a word.
14 And when they came, they said to Him, “Teacher,
we know that You are true, and it does not concern
You about anyone, for You are not partial to any, but
teach the Way of Elohim in truth. Is it right to pay taxes
to Kaisar, or not?
15 “Should we pay, or should we not pay?” And He,
knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, “Why do you
try Me? Bring Me a silver piece to look at.”
16 And they brought it, and He said to them, “Whose
likeness and inscription is this?” And they said to Him,
“Kaisar’s.”
17 So {vWHY said to them, “Give to Kaisar what is
Kaisar’s, and to Elohim what is Elohim’s.” And they
marvelled at Him.
18 And Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection,
came to Him. And they asked Him, saying,
19 “Teacher, Mosheh wrote to us that if a brother of
anyone dies, and leaves his wife behind, and leaves
no children, his brother should take his wife and raise
up offspring for his brother.
20 “There were seven brothers, and the first took a
wife, and died, leaving no offspring.
21 “And the second took her, and he died, leaving
behind no offspring. And the third likewise.
22 “And the seven left no offspring. Last of all the
woman died too.
23 “In the resurrection then, when they rise, whose
wife shall she be? For seven had her as wife.”
12

2294

MARQOS

And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Is this not
why you go astray, because you do not know the
Scriptures nor the power of Elohim?
25 “For when they rise from the dead, they neither
marry nor are given in marriage, but are as
messengers in the shamayim.
26 “And concerning the dead, that they rise - have
you not read in the Book of Mosheh, at the bush, how
Elohim spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the Elohim of
Aḇraham, and the Elohim of Yitsḥaq, and the Elohim
of Ya’aqoḇ’?
27 “He is not the Elohim of the dead, but Elohim of
the living. You, then, go greatly astray.”
28 And one of the scribes coming near, hearing them
reasoning together, knowing that He had answered
them well, asked Him, “Which is the first Command of
all?”
29 And {vWHY answered him, “The first of all the
Commands is, ‘Hear, O Yisra’ĕl, hWhY our Elohim,
hWhY is one.
30 ‘And you shall love hWhY your Elohim with all your
heart, and with all your being, and with all your mind,
and with all your strength.’ This is the first Command.
31 “And the second, like it, is this, ‘You shall love your
neighbour as yourself.’ There is no other command
greater than these.”
32 And the scribe said to Him, “Well said, Teacher.
You have spoken the truth, for there is one Elohim,
and there is no other besides Him.
33 “And to love Him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the being, and with all the
strength, and to love one’s neighbour as oneself, is
more than all the burnt offerings and slaughter
offerings.”
24

2295

MARK

And when {vWHY saw that he answered wisely,
He said to him, “You are not far from the reign of
Elohim.” And after that no one dared to question Him.
35 And {vWHY responding, said, while teaching in the
Miqdash, “How is it that the scribes say that
ha’Mashiaḥ is the Bĕn of Dawiḏ?
36 “Dawiḏ himself said by the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
‘hWhY said to Aḏoni, “Sit at My right hand, until I make
Your enemies a footstool for Your feet.” ’
37 “Dawiḏ himself calls Him ‘Aḏoni.’ In what way then
is He his Bĕn?” And the large crowd heard Him gladly.
38 And in His teaching He was saying to them,
“Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in
long robes, and greetings in the market-places,
39 and the best seats in the congregations, and the
best places at feasts,
40 who are devouring widows’ houses, and for a
show make long prayers. These shall receive greater
judgment.”
41 And sitting opposite the treasury He saw how the
people put copper into the treasury. And many rich
ones put in much.
42 And a poor widow came and threw in two small
coins, which amount to a quarter.
43 And calling near His talmidim He said to them,
“Truly, I say to you that this poor widow has put in
more than all those putting into the treasury,
44 for they all put in out of their excess, but she out of
her poverty put in all that she had, her entire
livelihood.”
34

13 And as He went out of the Miqdash, one of His
talmidim said to Him, “Teacher, see what stones! And
what buildings!”
2296

MARQOS

And {vWHY answering, said to him, “Do you see
these great buildings? Not one stone shall be left
upon another at all, which shall not be thrown down.”
3 And as He sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the
Miqdash, Kĕpha, and Ya’aqoḇ, and Yoḥanan, and
Andri asked Him separately,
4 “Say to us, when shall these be? And what shall
be the sign when all this is going to be
accomplished?”
5 And {vWHY began to say to them, “Take heed that
no one leads you astray,
6 for many shall come in My Name, saying, ‘I am
He,’ and they shall lead many astray.
7 “And when you hear of fightings and reports of
fightings, do not be troubled - it has to take place, but
the end is not yet.
8 “For nation shall rise against nation, and reign
against reign. And there shall be earthquakes in
various places, and there shall be scarcities of food,
and disturbances. These are the beginnings of birthpains.
9 “But take heed to yourselves, for they shall deliver
you up to councils and to congregations. You shall be
beaten, and you shall be brought before rulers and
sovereigns for My sake, for a witness to them.
10 “And the Good News has to be proclaimed first to
all the nations.
11 “And when they lead you away and deliver you up,
do not worry beforehand what you are to say. But
whatever is given you in that hour, speak that, for it is
not you who are speaking, but the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
12 “And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and
a father his child. And children shall rise up against
parents and shall put them to death.
2

2297

MARK

“And you shall be hated by all because of My
Name. But he who shall have endured to the end, he
shall be saved.
14 “And when you see the ‘abomination that lays
waste,’ spoken of by Dani’ĕl the naḇi, put up where it
should not be” - he who reads, let him understand “then let those who are in Yahuḏah flee to the
mountains.
15 “And he who is on the house-top, let him not go
down into the house, nor come in to take whatever
out of his house.
16 “And he who is in the field, let him not go back to
get his cloak.
17 “And woe to those who are pregnant and to those
nursing children in those days!
18 “And pray that your flight does not take place in
winter.
19 “For in those days there shall be distress, such as
has not been from the beginning of creation which
Elohim created until this time, nor ever shall be.
20 “And if the Aḏon had not shortened those days, no
flesh would have been saved; but because of the
chosen ones, whom He chose, He shortened the
days.
21 “And if anyone then says to you, ‘Look, here is
ha’Mashiaḥ!’ or, ‘Look, there!’ do not believe it.
22 “For false messiahs and false prophets shall rise
and show signs and wonders to lead astray, if
possible, even the chosen ones.
23 “And you, take heed. See, I have forewarned you
of it all.
24 “But in those days, after that distress, the sun shall
be darkened, and the moon shall not give its light,
25 and the stars of the shamayim shall fall, and the
powers in the shamayim shall be shaken.
13

2298

MARQOS

“And then they shall see the Bĕn of Aḏam coming
in the clouds with much power and esteem.
27 “And then He shall send His messengers, and
assemble His chosen ones from the four winds, from
the farthest part of earth to the farthest part of the
shamayim.
28 “And learn this parable from the fig tree: When its
branch has already become tender, and puts forth
leaves, you know that the summer is near.
29 “So you also, when you see these taking place,
know that it is near, at the door.
30 “Truly, I say to you, this generation shall by no
means pass away till all this takes place.
31 “The shamayim and the earth shall pass away, but
My Words shall by no means pass away.
32 “But concerning that day and the hour no one
knows, not even the messengers in the shamayim,
nor the Bĕn, but only the Father.
33 “Take heed, watch and pray, for you do not know
when the time is 34 as a man going abroad, having left his house and
given authority to his servants, and to each his work,
and commanded the doorkeeper to watch.
35 “Watch therefore, for you do not know when the
master of the house is coming - in the evening or at
midnight, or at the crowing of the cock, or in the
morning,
36 lest, coming suddenly, he should find you
sleeping.
37 “And what I say to you, I say to all: Watch!”
26

14 Now the Pesaḥ and Matstsoth was after two
days. And the chief kohenim and the scribes were
seeking how to take Him through treachery and put
Him to death.
2299

MARK

And they said, “Not at the Festival, lest there shall
be an uproar of the people.”
3 And while He was in Bĕyth Anyah in the house of
Shim’on the leper, and sitting at the table, a woman
came having an alabaster flask of perfume, genuine
nard, very costly. And breaking the flask she poured
it on His head.
4 But there were some who were much displeased
among themselves, and said, “Why was this perfume
wasted?
5 “For it could have been sold for more than three
hundred pieces of silver and given to the poor.” And
they were scolding her.
6 But {vWHY said, “Leave her alone. Why do you
trouble her? She has done a good work for Me.
7 “For you have the poor with you always, and
whenever you want, you are able to do good to them.
But you do not always have Me.
8 “What she had, she used. She took it beforehand
to anoint My body for the burial.
9 “Truly, I say to you, wherever this Good News is
proclaimed in all the world, what this woman did shall
also be spoken of, to her remembrance.”
10 And Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth, one of the twelve,
went to the chief kohenim to deliver Him up to them.
11 And when they heard it, they were glad, and
promised to give him silver. And he was seeking how
to deliver Him up, conveniently.
12 And on the first day of Matstsoth, when they were
slaughtering the Pesaḥ, His talmidim said to Him,
“Where do You want us to go and prepare, for You to
eat the Pesaḥ?”
13 And He sent out two of His talmidim and said to
them, “Go into the city, and there a man bearing a jar
of water shall meet you, follow him.
2

2300

MARQOS

“And wherever he enters, say to the master of the
house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is the guest room
in which I am to eat the Pesaḥ with My talmidim?” ’
15 “And he shall show you a large upper room,
furnished, ready. Prepare for us there.”
16 And His talmidim went out and came into the city,
and found it as He said to them, and they prepared
the Pesaḥ.
17 And evening having come, He came with the
twelve.
18 And as they sat and ate, {vWHY said, “Truly, I say
to you, one of you who is eating with Me shall deliver
Me up.”
19 And they began to be grieved, and to say to Him
one by one, “Is it I?” And another, “Is it I?”
20 And He answering, said to them, “It is one of the
twelve, he who is dipping with Me in the dish.
21 “The Bĕn of Aḏam is indeed going, as it has been
written of Him, but woe to that man by whom the Bĕn
of Aḏam is delivered up! It would have been good for
that man if he had not been born.”
22 And as they were eating, {vWHY took bread,
having baraḵ, broke it, gave it to them and said,
“Take, eat, this is My body.”
23 And taking the cup, giving thanks, He gave it to
them, and they all drank from it.
24 And He said to them, “This is My blood, that of the
Renewed Covenant, which is shed for many.
25 “Truly, I say to you, I shall certainly no more drink
of the fruit of the vine till that day when I drink it anew
in the reign of Elohim.”
26 And having sung a song, they went out to the
Mount of Olives.
14

2301

MARK

And {vWHY said to them, “All of you shall stumble
in Me this night, for it has been written, ‘I shall strike
the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.’
28 “But after I am raised, I shall go before you to
Galil.”
29 And Kĕpha said to Him, “Even if all shall stumble,
yet not I.”
30 And {vWHY said to him, “Truly, I say to you that
today, this night, before the cock shall crow twice, you
shall deny Me three times.”
31 But he spoke more strongly, “If I have to die with
You, I shall not deny You!” And they all said the same.
32 And they came to a place called Gath Shemen.
And He said to His talmidim, “Sit here while I pray.”
33 And He took with Him Kĕpha, and Ya’aqoḇ, and
Yoḥanan, and He began to be greatly alarmed, and
to be deeply distressed.
34 And He said to them, “My being is exceedingly
grieved, even to death. Stay here and watch.”
35 And He went on a little, and fell on the ground, and
was praying that if it were possible, the hour might
pass from Him.
36 And He said, “Abba, Father, all is possible for You.
Make this cup pass from Me. Yet not what I desire,
but what You.”
37 And He came and found them sleeping, and said
to Kĕpha, “Shim’on, are you sleeping? You were not
able to watch one hour!
38 “Watch and pray, lest you enter into trial. The spirit
indeed is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
39 And again He went away and prayed, and spoke
the same words.
40 And having returned, He found them asleep again,
for their eyes were heavy.
And they did not know what to answer Him.
27

2302

MARQOS

And He came the third time and said to them, “Are
you still sleeping and resting? It is enough! The hour
has come. See, the Bĕn of Aḏam is being delivered
up into the hands of the sinners.
42 “Rise up, let us go. See, he who is delivering Me
up has drawn near.”
43 And immediately, while He was still speaking,
Yahuḏah, one of the twelve, with a large crowd with
swords and clubs, came from the chief kohenim and
the scribes and the elders.
44 And the one who was delivering Him up had given
them a signal, saying, “Whomever I kiss, it is He seize Him and lead Him away safely.”
45 And coming, going straight up to Him, he said to
Him, “Rabbi, Rabbi!” and kissed Him.
46 And they laid their hands on Him and seized Him.
47 And one of those standing by drew his sword and
struck the servant of the kohĕn ha’gadol, and cut off
his ear.
48 And {vWHY answering, said to them, “Have you
come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs,
to take Me?
49 “Daily I was with you in the Miqdash teaching, and
you did not seize Me. But let the Scriptures be filled.”
50 And they all left Him and fled.
51 And a certain young man was following Him,
having a linen cloth over his nakedness. And when
they seized him,
52 he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.
53 And they led {vWHY away to the kohĕn ha’gadol.
And all the chief kohenim, and the elders, and the
scribes came together to Him.
54 And Kĕpha followed Him at a distance, even into
the courtyard of the kohĕn ha’gadol. And he was
41

2303

MARK

sitting with the officers and warming himself at the
fire.
55 And the chief kohenim and all the council were
seeking witness against {vWHY to put Him to death,
and they were finding none.
56 For many bore false witness against Him, but their
evidences did not agree.
57 And some rose up and bore false witness against
Him, saying,
58 “We heard Him saying, ‘I shall destroy this
Mishkan that is made with hands, and within three
days I shall build another made without hands.’ ”
59 And not even then did their witness agree.
60 Then the kohĕn ha’gadol stood up in the centre
and asked {vWHY, saying, “Have You no answer to
make? What do these witness against You?”
61 But He remained silent and gave no answer. Again
the kohĕn ha’gadol asked Him, saying to Him, “Are
You ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of the Baruḵ?”
62 And {vWHY said, “I am, and you shall see the Bĕn
of Aḏam sitting at the right hand of the Almighty, and
coming with the clouds of the shamayim.”
63 And tearing his garments, the kohĕn ha’gadol
said, “What further need do we have of witnesses?
64 “You have heard the blasphemy! What do you
think?” And they all condemned Him to be liable to
death.
65 And some began to spit on Him, and to blindfold
Him, and to beat Him, and to say to Him, “Naḇa!” And
the officers struck Him with the palms of their hands.
66 And as Kĕpha was below in the courtyard, one of
the servant girls of the kohĕn ha’gadol came,
67 and seeing Kĕpha warming himself, she looked at
him and said, “And you were with {vWHY of
Natsareth.”
2304

MARQOS

But he denied it, saying, “I do not know nor
understand what you are saying.” And he went out
onto the porch, and a cock crowed.
69 And the servant girl saw him again, and began to
say to those who stood by, “This is one of them.”
70 And again he was denying it. And after a little while
those who stood by again said to Kĕpha, “Truly you
are one of them, for you are a Galilean too, and your
speech is alike.”
71 And he began to curse and swear, “I do not know
this Man of whom you speak!”
72 And a second time the cock crowed. And Kĕpha
remembered the word that {vWHY had said to him,
“Before the cock crows twice, you shall deny Me three
times.” And thinking on it, he wept.
68

15 And immediately, in the morning, the chief
kohenim took counsel with the elders and scribes and
all the council. Having bound {vWHY, they led Him
away, and delivered Him to Pilatus.
2 And Pilatus asked Him, “You are the Sovereign of
the Yahuḏim?” And He answering, said to him, “You
say it.”
3 And the chief kohenim accused Him of much, but
He made no answer.
4 And Pilatus again asked Him, saying, “Have You
no answer? See how much they witness against
You!”
5 But {vWHY still gave no answer, so that Pilatus
marvelled.
6 And at a Festival he released to them one
prisoner, whomever they were asking.
7 And there was one called Barabba, chained with
his fellow rebels, who had committed murder in the
uprising.
2305

MARK

And the crowd, crying aloud, began to ask, as he
had always done for them.
9 But Pilatus answered them, saying, “Do you want
me to release for you the Sovereign of the Yahuḏim?”
10 For he knew that the chief kohenim had handed
Him over because of envy.
11 And the chief kohenim stirred up the crowd, that
he should rather release Barabba to them.
12 And Pilatus answered and again said to them,
“What then do you want me to do to whom you call
the Sovereign of the Yahuḏim?”
13 And again they cried out, “Impale Him!”
14 And Pilatus said to them, “Why, what evil has He
done?” And they vehemently cried out, “Impale Him!”
15 And Pilatus, wanting to satisfy the crowd, released
Barabba to them, and having whipped, he delivered
{vWHY over to be impaled.
16 And the soldiers led Him away into the court,
which is the palace, and they called together the
entire squad,
17 and decked Him with purple. And they plaited a
crown of thorns, put it on Him,
18 and they began to call out to Him, “Greetings,
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim!”
19 And they kept beating Him on the head with a reed
and were spitting on Him. And bending the knee, they
were bowing down to Him.
20 And when they had mocked Him, they took the
purple off Him, and put His own garments on Him,
and led Him out to impale Him.
21 And they compelled a passer-by, Shim’on, a
Kurĕnaion, coming from a field, the father of
Alexandras and Rufus, to bear His stake.
22 And they brought Him to the place Golgotha,
which is translated, Place of a Skull.
8

2306

MARQOS

And they were giving Him wine mixed with myrrh
to drink, but He did not take it.
24 And when they impaled Him, they divided His
garments, casting lots for them, what each one
should take.
25 And it was the third hour, and they impaled Him.
26 And the inscription of His accusation was written
above: THE SOVEREIGN OF THE YAHUḎIM.
27 And with Him they impaled two robbers, one on
His right and the other on His left.
28 And the Scripture was filled which says, “And He
was reckoned with the lawless.”
29 And those passing by were blaspheming Him,
shaking their heads and saying, “Ah! You who destroy
the Mishkan and build it in three days,
30 save Yourself, and come down from the stake!”
31 And likewise the chief kohenim and the scribes,
mocking to one another said, “He saved others, He is
unable to save Himself.
32 “Ha’Mashiaḥ? The Sovereign of Yisra’ĕl? Come
down now from the stake, so that we see and
believe.” And those who were impaled with Him were
reproaching Him.
33 And when the sixth hour came, darkness came
over all the land until the ninth hour.
34 And at the ninth hour {vWHY cried out with a loud
voice, saying, “Ĕli, Ĕli, lamah sheḇaqtani?” which is
translated, “My Ĕl, My Ĕl, why have You forsaken
Me?”
35 And some of those standing by, when they heard
it, said, “See, He is calling for Ĕliyahu!”
36 And someone ran and filled a sponge with vinegar,
and put it on a reed, and offered it to Him to drink,
saying, “Leave Him, let us see if Ĕliyahu comes to
take Him down.”
23

2307

MARK

And {vWHY cried out with a loud voice, and
breathed His last.
38 And the veil of the Mishkan was torn in two from
top to bottom.
39 And when the captain, who was standing opposite
Him, saw that He cried out like this and breathed His
last, he said, “Truly this Man was the Bĕn of Elohim!”
40 And there were also women watching from a
distance, among whom was also Miryam from
Maḡdala, and Miryam the mother of Ya’aqoḇ the Less
and of Yosĕph, and Shelomah,
41 who also followed Him and attended Him when He
was in Galil, and many other women who came up
with Him to Yerushalayim.
42 And when evening had come, because it was the
Preparation Day, that is, the day before the Shabbath,
43 Yosĕph of Ramathayim, a prominent council
member, who was himself waiting for the reign of
Elohim, came, boldly went in to Pilatus and asked for
the body of {vWHY.
44 But Pilatus wondered whether He was already
dead, so summoning the captain, he asked him if He
was already dead.
45 And when he learned from the captain, he gave
the body to Yosĕph.
46 And he, having bought fine linen, took Him down,
and wrapped Him in the linen. And he laid Him in a
tomb which had been hewn out of the rock, and rolled
a stone against the entrance of the tomb.
47 And Miryam from Maḡdala, and Miryam of
Yosĕph, saw where He was laid.
37

16 And when the Shabbath was past, Miryam from
Maḡdala, and Miryam of Ya’aqoḇ, and Shelomah
bought spices, to go and anoint Him.
2308

MARQOS

And very early morning, on one of the
shabbathoth, they came to the tomb when the sun
had risen.
3 And they said among themselves, “Who shall roll
away the stone from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
4 And looking up, they saw that the stone had been
rolled away, for it was extremely large.
5 And having entered into the tomb, they saw a
young man sitting on the right, wearing a white robe,
and they were greatly alarmed.
6 And he said to them, “Do not be much alarmed.
You seek {vWHY of Natsareth, who was impaled. He
is raised - He is not here! See the place where they
laid Him.
7 “And go, say to His talmidim, and Kĕpha, that He
is going before you into Galil. You shall see Him there
as He said to you.”
8 And they went out and fled from the tomb, and
were trembling and bewildered. And they spoke to no
one, for they were afraid.
9 And having risen in the morning on one of the
shabbathoth, He appeared first to Miryam from
Maḡdala, from whom He had cast out seven demons.
10 She went and reported to those who had been with
Him, mourning and weeping.
11 And when they heard that He was alive and had
been seen by her, they did not believe.
12 And after this He appeared in another form to two
of them as they walked and went into a field.
13 And they went and reported it to the rest, but they
did not believe them either.
14 Later He appeared to the eleven as they sat at the
table. And He reproached their unbelief and hardness
of heart, because they did not believe those who had
seen Him after He was raised.
2

2309

MARK

And He said to them, “Go into all the world and
proclaim the Good News to every creature.
16 “He who has believed and has been immersed,
shall be saved, but he who has not believed shall be
condemned.
17 “And these signs shall accompany the ones who
believe: In My Name they shall cast out demons, they
shall speak with renewed tongues,
18 they shall take up snakes, and if they drink
anything deadly it shall by no means hurt them, they
shall lay hands on the sick and they shall get well.”
19 Then indeed, after the Aḏon had spoken to them,
He was received up into the shamayim, and sat down
at the right hand of hWhY.
20 And they went out and proclaimed it everywhere,
while the Aḏon worked with them, and confirmed the
Word through the accompanying signs. Amĕn.
15

2310

LUKE

LUQAS
‫ לוקאס‬sAqWL

1 Since many have indeed taken in hand to put in
order an account of the matters completely confirmed
among us,
2 as
those who from the beginning were
eyewitnesses and servants of the Word delivered them
to us,
3 it seemed good to me as well, having followed up
all these matters exactly from the beginning, to write to
you an orderly account, most excellent Theophilos,
4 that you might know the certainty of the Words
which you were taught.
5 There was in the days of Hĕrodĕs, the sovereign of
Yahuḏah, a certain kohĕn named Zeḵaryah, of the
division of Aḇiyah. And his wife was of the daughters
of Aharon, and her name was Elisheḇa.
6 And they were both righteous before Elohim,
blamelessly walking in all the Commands and
Righteousnesses of HWHY.
7 And they had no child, because Elisheḇa was
barren, and both were advanced in years.
8 And it came to be, that while he was serving as
kohĕn before Elohim in the order of his division,
9 according to the institute of the kehunnah, he was
chosen by lot to burn incense when he went into the
Mishkan of HWHY.
10 And the entire crowd of people was praying outside
at the hour of incense.
11 And a messenger of HWHY appeared to him,
standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
12 And when Zeḵaryah saw, he was troubled, and fear
fell upon him.
13 But the messenger said to him, “Do not be afraid,
Zeḵaryah, for your prayer is heard. And your wife
2311

LUQAS

Elisheḇa shall bear you a son, and you shall call his
name Yoḥanan.
14 “And you shall have joy and gladness, and many
shall rejoice at his birth.
15 “For he shall be great before HWHY, and shall drink
no wine and strong drink at all. And he shall be filled
with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, even from his mother’s
womb.
16 “And he shall turn many of the children of Yisra’ĕl
to HWHY their Elohim.
17 “And he shall go before Him in the spirit and power
of Ĕliyahu, ‘to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children,’ and the disobedient to the insight of the
righteous, to make ready a people prepared for HWHY.”
18 And Zeḵaryah said to the messenger, “By what
shall I know this? For I am old, and my wife advanced
in years.”
19 And the messenger answering, said to him, “I am
Gaḇri’ĕl, who stands in the presence of Elohim, and
was sent to speak to you and announce to you this
good news.
20 “But see, you shall be silent and unable to speak
until the day this takes place, because you did not
believe my words which shall be filled in their
appointed time.”
21 And the people waited for Zeḵaryah, and marvelled
at his delay in the Mishkan.
22 And when he came out, he was unable to speak to
them. And they recognised that he had seen a vision
in the Mishkan, for he was beckoning to them and
remained dumb.
23 And it came to be, as soon as the days of his
service were completed, he went away to his house.
24 And after those days his wife Elisheḇa conceived.
And she hid herself five months, saying,
25 “HWHY has done this for me, in the days when He
looked upon me, to take away my reproach among
men.”
2312

LUKE

And in the sixth month the messenger Gaḇri’ĕl was
sent by Elohim to a city of Galil named Natsareth,
27 to a maiden engaged to a man whose name was
Yosĕph, of the house of Dawiḏ. And the maiden’s
name was Miryam.
28 And the messenger, coming to her, said,
“Greetings, favoured one, the Aḏon is with you. Baruḵ
are you among women!”
29 But she was greatly disturbed at his word, and
wondered what kind of greeting this was.
30 And the messenger said to her, “Do not be afraid,
Miryam, for you have found favour with Elohim.
31 “And see, you shall conceive in your womb, and
shall give birth to a Bĕn, and call His Name {fWHY.
32 “He shall be great, and shall be called the Bĕn of
the Most High. And HWHY Elohim shall give Him the
throne of His father Dawiḏ.
33 “And He shall reign over the house of Ya’aqoḇ
forever, and there shall be no end to His reign.”
34 And Miryam said to the messenger, “How shall this
be, since I do not know a man?”
35 And the messenger answering, said to her, “The
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh shall come upon you, and the power
of the Most High shall overshadow you. And for that
reason the Qadosh One born of you shall be called:
Bĕn of HWHY.
36 “And see, Elisheḇa your relative, she has also
conceived a son in her old age. And this is now the
sixth month to her who was called barren,
37 because
with Elohim no matter shall be
impossible.”
38 And Miryam said, “See the female servant of HWHY!
Let it be to me according to your word.” And the
messenger went away from her.
39 And Miryam arose in those days and went into the
hill country with haste, to a city of Yahuḏah,
40 and entered into the house of Zeḵaryah and
greeted Elisheḇa.
26

2313

LUQAS

And it came to be, when Elisheḇa heard the
greeting of Miryam, that the infant leaped in her womb.
And Elisheḇa was filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
42 and called out with a loud voice and said, “Baruḵ
are you among women, and baruḵ is the fruit of your
womb!
43 “And who am I, that the mother of Aḏonai should
come to me?
44 “For look, when the sound of your greeting came to
my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
45 “Baruḵ is she who believed, for that which HWHY
has said to her shall be accomplished!”
46 And Miryam said, “My being makes HWHY great,
47 and my spirit has rejoiced in Elohim my Saviour.
48 “Because He looked on the humiliation of His
female servant. For look, from now on all generations
shall call me baruḵ.
49 “For He who is mighty has done wonders for me,
and qodesh is His Name.
50 “And His compassion is from generation to
generation, to those who revere Him.
51 “He did mightily with His arm, He scattered the
proud in the thought of their hearts.
52 “He brought down rulers from their thrones, and
exalted the lowly.
53 “He has filled the hungry with good, and the rich He
has sent away empty.
54 “He
sustained Yisra’ĕl, His servant, in
remembrance of His compassion,
55 as He spoke to our fathers, to Aḇraham and to his
seed, forever.”
56 And Miryam stayed with her about three months,
and returned to her home.
57 And the time was filled for Elisheḇa to give birth,
and she bore a son.
58 And her neighbours and relatives heard how HWHY
had shown great compassion to her, and they rejoiced
with her.
41

2314

LUKE

And it came to be, on the eighth day, that they came
to circumcise the child. And they were calling him by
the name of his father, Zeḵaryah.
60 And his mother answering, said, “Not so, but he
shall be called Yoḥanan.”
61 And they said to her, “There is no one among your
relatives who is called by this name.”
62 Then they motioned to his father, what he would
like him to be called.
63 And having asked for a writing tablet, he wrote,
saying, “Yoḥanan is his name.” And they all marvelled.
64 And at once his mouth was opened and his tongue
loosed, and he was speaking, praising Elohim.
65 And fear came on all those dwelling around them,
and all these matters were spoken of in all the hill
country of Yahuḏah.
66 And all who heard them kept them in their hearts,
saying, “What then shall this child be?” And the hand
of HWHY was with him.
67 And Zeḵaryah, his father, was filled with the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh, and naḇu, saying,
68 “Baruḵ be HWHY Elohim of Yisra’ĕl, for He looked
upon and worked redemption for His people,
69 and has raised up a horn of deliverance for us in
the house of His servant Dawiḏ,
70 as He spoke by the mouth of His qodesh neḇi’im,
from of old 71 deliverance from our enemies and from the hand of
all those hating us,
72 to show compassion toward our fathers and to
remember His qodesh Covenant,
73 an oath which He swore to our father Aḇraham:
74 to give to us, being delivered from the hand of our
enemies, to serve Him without fear,
75 in qodeshah and righteousness before Him all the
days of our life.
76 “And you, child, shall be called naḇi of the Most
High, for you shall go before the face of HWHY to
59

2315

LUQAS

prepare His ways,
77 to give knowledge of deliverance to His people, by
the forgiveness of their sins,
78 through the tender compassion of our Elohim, with
which the daybreak from on high has looked upon us,
79 to give light to those who sit in darkness and the
shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of
peace.”
80 And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and
was in the deserts until the day of showing Himself
openly to Yisra’ĕl.

2 And it came to be in those days that a decree went
out from Kaisar Augustus for all the world to be
registered.
2 This took place as a first registration while Quirinius
was governing Suria.
3 And all were going to be registered, each one to his
own city.
4 And Yosĕph also went up from Galil, out of the city
of Natsareth to Yahuḏah, to the city of Dawiḏ, which is
called Bĕyth Leḥem, because he was of the house and
lineage of Dawiḏ,
5 to be registered with Miryam, who was engaged to
him - being pregnant.
6 And it came to be, that while they were there, the
days were filled for her to give birth.
7 And she gave birth to her first-born Bĕn, and
wrapped Him up, and laid Him down in a feeding
trough, because there was no room for them in a
lodging place.
8 And in the same country there were shepherds
living out in the fields, keeping watch over their flock
by night.
9 And look, a messenger of HWHY stood before them,
and the esteem of HWHY shone around them, and they
were greatly afraid.
10 And the messenger said to them, “Do not be afraid,
2316

LUKE

for look, I bring you good news of great joy which shall
be to all people.
11 “Because there was born to you today in the city of
Dawiḏ a Saviour, who is ha’Mashiaḥ, the Aḏon.
12 “And this is the sign to you: You shall find an infant
wrapped up, lying in a feeding trough.”
13 And suddenly there was with the messenger a
crowd of the host of the shamayim praising Elohim and
saying,
14 “Esteem to Elohim in the highest, and on earth
peace among men with whom He is pleased!”
15 And it came to be, when the messengers had gone
away from them into the shamayim, that the shepherds
said to each other, “Indeed, let us go to Bĕyth Leḥem
and see this matter that has taken place, which the
Aḏon has made known to us.”
16 And they came in haste and found Miryam and
Yosĕph, and the infant lying in a feeding trough.
17 And having seen, they made known the matter
which was spoken to them concerning the child.
18 And all those who heard marvelled at what the
shepherds said to them.
19 But Miryam kept all these matters, considering
them in her heart.
20 And the shepherds returned, boasting and praising
Elohim for all they had heard and seen, as it was
spoken to them.
21 And when eight days were completed for Him to be
circumcised, His Name was called {fWHY, the Name
given by the messenger before He was conceived in
the womb.
22 And when the days of her cleansing according to
the Torah of Mosheh were completed, they brought
Him to Yerushalayim to present Him to HWHY 23 as it has been written in the Torah of HWHY, “Every
male who opens the womb shall be called qodesh to
HWHY” 24 and to give an offering according to what is said in
2317

LUQAS

the Torah of HWHY, “A pair of turtledoves or two young
pigeons.”
25 And see, there was a man in Yerushalayim whose
name was Shim’on, and this man was righteous and
dedicated, looking for the comforting of Yisra’ĕl. And
the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh was upon him.
26 And it had been revealed to him by the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh that he would not see death before he sees
ha’Mashiaḥ of HWHY.
27 And he came in the Ruaḥ into the Miqdash. And as
the parents brought in the Child {fWHY, to do for Him
according to the usual practice of the Torah,
28 then he took Him up in his arms and baraḵ Elohim
and said,
29 “Now let Your servant go in peace, O Aḏonai,
according to Your word,
30 for my eyes have seen Your deliverance,
31 which You have prepared before the face of all the
peoples,
32 a light for the unveiling of the gentiles, and the
esteem of Your people Yisra’ĕl.”
33 And Yosĕph and His mother were marvelling at
what was said about Him.
34 And Shim’on baraḵ them, and said to Miryam His
mother, “See, this One is appointed for a fall and rising
of many in Yisra’ĕl, and for a sign spoken against 35 and a sword shall pierce through your own being
also - so as to reveal the thoughts of many hearts.”
36 And there was Ḥannah, a neḇiyah, a daughter of
Penu’ĕl, of the tribe of Ashĕr. She was advanced in
years, and had lived with a husband seven years from
her maidenhood,
37 and she was a widow of about eighty-four years,
who did not leave the Miqdash, but served Elohim with
fastings and prayers night and day.
38 And she, coming in at that moment, gave thanks to
HWHY, and spoke of Him to all who were waiting for
redemption in Yerushalayim.
2318

LUKE

And when they had accomplished all according to
the Torah of HWHY, they returned to Galil, to their city
Natsareth.
40 And the Child grew and became strong in spirit,
being filled with wisdom. And the favour of Elohim was
upon Him.
41 And His parents went to Yerushalayim every year
at the Festival of the Pesaḥ.
42 And when He was twelve years old, they went up
to Yerushalayim according to the practice of the
Festival.
43 When they had accomplished the days, as they
returned, the Child {fWHY stayed behind in
Yerushalayim. And His parents did not know it,
44 but thinking He was in the company, they went a
day’s journey, and were seeking Him among the
relatives and friends.
45 And not having found Him, they returned to
Yerushalayim, seeking Him.
46 And it came to be, after three days, that they found
Him in the Miqdash, sitting in the midst of the teachers,
both listening to them and asking them questions.
47 And all who heard Him were astonished at His
understanding and answers.
48 And having seen Him, they were amazed. And His
mother said to Him, “Bĕn, why have You done this to
us? See, Your father and I have been anxiously
seeking You.”
49 And He said to them, “Why were you seeking Me?
Did you not know that I had to be at that of My Father?”
50 But they did not understand the word which He
spoke to them.
51 And He went down with them and came to
Natsareth, and was subject to them, but His mother
kept all these matters in her heart.
52 And {fWHY increased in wisdom and stature, and
in favour with HWHY and men.
39

2319

LUQAS

3 And in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius
Kaisar, when Pontius Pilatus was governor of
Yahuḏah, and Hĕrodĕs district ruler of Galil, and his
brother Philippos district ruler of Yetur and the country
of Traḵonitis, and Lusanias district ruler of Aḇilĕnĕ,
2
Ḥanan and Qayapha being kohenim ha’gadolim,
the word of Elohim came to Yoḥanan the son of
Zeḵaryah in the wilderness.
3
And he went into all the neighbourhood of the
Yardĕn, proclaiming an immersion of repentance for
the forgiveness of sins,
4
as it has been written in the book of the words of
Yeshayahu the naḇi, saying, “A voice of one crying in
the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of HWHY, make His
paths straight.
5
‘Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and
hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall become
straight, and the rough become smooth ways,
6
and all flesh shall see the deliverance of Elohim.’
”
7
He said therefore to the crowds that came out to be
immersed by him, “Brood of adders, who warned you
to flee from the wrath to come?
8
“Therefore bear fruit worthy of repentance, and do
not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Aḇraham as
our father.’ For I say to you that Elohim is able to raise
up children to Aḇraham from these stones.
9
“And even now the axe is laid to the root of the
trees. Therefore every tree that does not bear good
fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.”
10 And the crowds asked him, saying, “What, then,
shall we do?”
11 And answering He said to them, “Let him who has
two undergarments share with him who has none, and
let him who has food do likewise.”
12 And tax collectors also came to be immersed, and
2320

LUKE

said to him, “Teacher, what shall we do?”
13 And he said to them, “Collect no more than what is
appointed for you.”
14 And soldiers also asked him, saying, “And what
shall we do?” And he said to them, “Do not intimidate
anyone or accuse falsely, and be satisfied with your
pay.”
15 But as the people were in expectation, and all were
reasoning in their hearts about Yoḥanan, whether he
was ha’Mashiaḥ or not,
16 Yoḥanan answered, saying to them all, “I indeed
immerse you in water, but One mightier than I is
coming, whose sandal straps I am not worthy to
loosen. He shall immerse you in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh
and fire.
17 “His winnowing fork is in His hand, and He shall
thoroughly cleanse His threshing-floor, and gather the
wheat into His storehouse, but the chaff He shall burn
with unquenchable fire.”
18 And urging with many other words, he brought the
Good News to the people.
19 And Hĕrodĕs the district ruler, being reproved by
him concerning Hĕrodias his brother Philippos’ wife,
and for all the wicked deeds which Hĕrodĕs did,
20 added this also to them all - he locked up Yoḥanan
in prison.
21 And it came to be, when all the people were
immersed, {fWHY also being immersed, and praying,
the shamayim was opened,
22 and the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh descended in bodily form
like a dove upon Him, and a voice came from the
shamayim saying, “You are My Bĕn, the Beloved, I
delight in You.”
23 And when {fWHY Himself began, He was about
thirty years of age, being, as reckoned by law, son of
Yosĕph, of Ĕli,
24 of Mattithyahu, of Lĕwi, of Meleḵi, of Yanah, of
Yosĕph,
2321

LUQAS

of Mattithyahu, of Amots, of Naḥum, of Ḥesli, of
Noḡah,
26 of Ma’ath, of Mattithyahu, of Shim’i, of Yosĕph, of
Yahuḏah,
27 of Yoḥanan, of Rephayah, of Zerubbaḇel, of
She’alti’ĕl, of Nĕri,
28 of Meleḵi, of Addi, of Qesem, of Elmoḏam, of Ĕr,
29 of Yosĕph, of Eli’ezer, of Yorim, of Mattithyahu, of
Lĕwi,
30 of Shim’on, of Yahuḏah, of Yosĕph, of Yonam, of
Elyaqim,
31 of Melea, of Menna, of Mattattah, of Nathan, of
Dawiḏ,
32 of Yishai, of Oḇĕḏ, of Bo’az, of Salmon, of
Naḥshon,
33 of Amminaḏaḇ, of Ram, of Ḥetsron, of Perets, of
Yahuḏah,
34 of Ya’aqoḇ, of Yitsḥaq, of Aḇraham, of Teraḥ, of
Naḥor,
35 of Seruḡ, of Re’u, of Peleḡ, of Ĕḇer, of Shĕlaḥ,
36 of Qĕynan, of Arpaḵshaḏ, of Shĕm, of Noaḥ, of
Lemeḵ,
37 of Methushelaḥ, of Ḥanoḵ, of Yereḏ, of Mahalal’ĕl,
of Qĕynan,
38 of Enosh, of Shĕth, of Aḏam, of HWHY.
25

4 And {fWHY, being filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
returned from the Yardĕn and was led by the Ruaḥ into
the wilderness,
2 being tried for forty days by the devil. And in those
days He did not eat at all, and afterward, when they
had ended, He was hungry.
3 And the devil said to Him, “If You are the Bĕn of
HWHY, command this stone to become bread.”
4 But {fWHY answered him, saying, “It has been
written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every
Word of HWHY.’ ”
5 And the devil, taking Him up on a high mountain,
2322

LUKE

showed Him all the reigns of the world in a moment of
time.
6 And the devil said to Him, “All this authority I shall
give You, and their esteem, for it has been delivered
to me, and I give it to whomever I want.
7 “If, then, You worship before me, all shall be Yours.”
8 And {fWHY answering him, said, “Get behind Me,
Satan! For it has been written, ‘You shall worship HWHY
your Elohim, and Him only you shall serve.’ ”
9 And he brought Him to Yerushalayim, put Him on
the edge of the Miqdash, and said to Him, “If You are
the Bĕn of HWHY, throw Yourself down from here,
10 for it has been written, ‘He shall command His
messengers concerning You, to guard over You,’
11 and, ‘In their hands they shall bear You up, lest You
dash Your foot against a stone.’ ”
12 And {fWHY answering, said to him, “It has been
said, ‘You shall not try HWHY your Elohim.’ ”
13 And when the devil had ended every trial, he went
away from Him till another time.
14 And {fWHY returned in the power of the Ruaḥ to
Galil, and news of Him went out through all the
surrounding country.
15 And He was teaching in their congregations, being
praised by all.
16 And He came to Natsareth, where He had been
brought up. And according to His practice, He went into
the congregation on the Shabbath day, and stood up
to read.
17 And the scroll of the naḇi Yeshayahu was handed
to Him. And having unrolled the scroll, He found the
place where it was written:
18 “The Ruaḥ of HWHY is upon Me, because He has
anointed Me to bring the Good News to the poor. He
has sent Me to heal the broken-hearted, to proclaim
release to the captives and recovery of sight to the
blind, to send away crushed ones with a release,
19 to proclaim the acceptable year of HWHY.”
2323

LUQAS

And having rolled up the scroll, He gave it back to
the attendant and sat down. And the eyes of all in the
congregation were fixed upon Him.
21 And He began to say to them, “Today this Scripture
has been filled in your hearing.”
22 And all were bearing witness to Him, and marvelled
at the pleasant words that came out of His mouth. And
they said, “Is this not the son of Yosĕph?”
23 And He said to them, “No doubt, you shall say this
proverb to Me, ‘Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we
have heard being done in Kephar Naḥum, do also here
in Your country.’ ”
24 And He said, “Truly, I say to you, no naḇi is
accepted in his own country.
25 “But truly I say to you, many widows were in Yisra’ĕl
in the days of Ĕliyahu, when the shamayim was shut
up for three years and six months, and there was a
great scarcity of food in all the land,
26 and Ĕliyahu was sent to none of them, but to
Tsarephath of Tsiḏon, to a woman, a widow.
27 “And many lepers were in Yisra’ĕl in the time of
Elisha the naḇi, and none of them was cleansed
except Na’aman the Aramean.”
28 And all those in the congregation, when they heard
this, were filled with wrath.
29 And rising up they drove Him out of the city, and
brought Him to the brow of the hill on which their city
was built, in order to throw Him down.
30 But He, passing through the midst of them, went
away.
31 And He came down to Kephar Naḥum, a city of
Galil, and was teaching them on the Shabbathoth.
32 And they were astonished at His teaching, for His
Word was with authority.
33 And in the congregation was a man having a spirit
of an unclean demon. And he cried out with a loud
voice,
34 saying, “Ha! What have we to do with You, {fWHY
20

2324

LUKE

of Natsareth? Did You come to destroy us? I know
You, who You are, the Qadosh One of Elohim!”
35 And {fWHY rebuked him, saying, “Be silenced, and
come out of him!” And when the demon had thrown
him in their midst, it came out of him without hurting
him.
36 And astonishment came on all, and they spoke to
each other, saying, “What is this word, that with
authority and power He commands the unclean spirits,
and they come out?”
37 And the report about Him went out into every place
of the neighbourhood.
38 And rising up from the congregation He went into
the house of Shim’on. But the mother-in-law of
Shim’on was sick with a severe inflammation, and they
asked Him concerning her.
39 And
standing over her He rebuked the
inflammation, and it left her, and instantly rising up she
served them.
40 And when the sun was going down, all who had any
who were sick with various diseases brought them to
Him. And He laid His hands on each one of them and
healed them.
41 And also demons were coming out of many, crying
out and saying, “You are ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of
Elohim!” And rebuking them, He did not allow them to
speak, for they knew that He was ha’Mashiaḥ.
42 And when day came, He went out and proceeded
to a lonely place, but the crowds were seeking Him and
came to Him, and tried to keep Him from leaving them.
43 And He said to them, “To the other cities I also have
to bring the Good News: the reign of Elohim, because
for this I have been sent.”
44 And He was proclaiming in the congregations of
Galil.

2325

LUQAS

5 And it came to be, while the crowd was pressing
upon Him to hear the Word of HWHY, that He stood by
the Lake of Gennĕsar,
2 and He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the
fishermen had gone from them and were washing their
nets.
3 And entering into one of the boats, which belonged
to Shim’on, He asked him to pull away a little from the
land. And He sat down and was teaching the crowds
from the boat.
4 And when He ceased speaking, He said to
Shim’on, “Pull out into the deep and let down your nets
for a catch.”
5 And Shim’on answering, said to Him, “Aḏonai, we
have toiled all night and caught none, but at Your word
I shall let down the net.”
6 And when they did so, they caught a great number
of fish, and their net was breaking,
7 and they motioned to their partners in the other boat
to come and help them. And they came and filled both
the boats, so that they were sinking.
8 And when Shim’on Kĕpha saw it, he fell down at
the knees of {fWHY, saying, “Depart from me, for I am
a man, a sinner, O Aḏonai!”
9 For astonishment had seized him and all those with
him, at the catch of fish which they took,
10 so too were Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan, the sons of
Zaḇdai, who were partners with Shim’on. Then {fWHY
said to Shim’on, “Do not fear, from now on you shall
catch men.”
11 And having brought the boats to land, they left all
and followed Him.
12 And it came to be when He was at a certain city,
that see, a man covered with leprosy saw {fWHY. And
he fell on his face and begged Him, saying, “Aḏonai, if
You desire, You are able to cleanse me.”
13 And He stretched out His hand and touched him,
2326

LUKE

saying, “I desire it. Be cleansed.” And immediately the
leprosy left him.
14 And He ordered him to say it to no one, “But go and
show yourself to the kohĕn, and make an offering for
your cleansing, as a witness to them, as Mosheh
commanded.”
15 And the news about Him was spreading even more.
And large crowds were coming together to hear, and
to be healed by Him of their sicknesses.
16 But He was withdrawing Himself to lonely places
and praying.
17 And on a certain day it came to be, as He was
teaching, that there were Pharisees and teachers of
the Torah sitting by, who had come out of every village
of Galil, Yahuḏah, and Yerushalayim. And the power
of HWHY was present to heal them.
18 And see, men brought on a bed a man who was
paralysed. And they were seeking to bring him in and
lay him before Him.
19 But having found no way to bring him in because of
the crowd, they went up on the house-top and let him
down with his bed through the tiles into the midst
before {fWHY.
20 And having seen their belief, He said to him, “Man,
your sins are forgiven you.”
21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to
reason, saying, “Who is this who speaks blasphemies?
Who is able to forgive sins except Elohim alone?”
22 And {fWHY, knowing their thoughts, answering,
said to them, “Why are you reasoning in your hearts?
23 “Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven
you,’ or to say, ‘Rise up and walk’?
24 “But in order for you to know that the Bĕn of Aḏam
possesses authority on earth to forgive sins...” He said
to the man who was paralysed, “I say to you, rise, take
up your bed, and go to your house.”
25 And at once, having risen up before them, he took
up what he had been lying on, and went away to his
2327

LUQAS

house, praising Elohim.
26 And astonishment seized them all, and they
praised Elohim and were filled with fear, saying, “We
have seen extraordinary matters today!”
27 And after this He went out and saw a tax collector
named Lĕwi, sitting at the tax office, and said to him,
“Follow Me.”
28 And he, having left all, rose up and followed Him.
29 And Lĕwi made a great feast for Him in his house.
And there were a great number of tax collectors and
others who sat down with them.
30 And the Pharisees and their scribes grumbled
against His talmidim, saying, “Why do You eat and
drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
31 And {fWHY answering, said to them, “Those who
are well do not need a physician, but those who are
sick.
32 “I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners,
to repentance.”
33 And they said to Him, “Why do the talmidim of
Yoḥanan fast often and make prayers, and likewise
those of the Pharisees, but Yours eat and drink?”
34 And He said to them, “Are you able to make the
friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is
with them?
35 “But days shall come when the bridegroom is taken
away from them, then they shall fast in those days.”
36 And He also spoke a parable to them, “No one puts
a piece from a fresh garment on an old one, otherwise
the fresh one makes a tear, and also the piece that
was taken out of the fresh one does not match the old.”
37 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins,
otherwise the new wine shall burst the wineskins and
run out, and the wineskins shall be ruined.
38 “But new wine is put into fresh wineskins, and both
are preserved.
39 “And no one, having drunk old wine, immediately
desires new, for he says, ‘The old is better.’ ”
2328

LUKE

6 And it came to be on a Shabbath that He went
through grainfields, and His talmidim were plucking the
heads of grain and were eating, rubbing them in the
hands.
2 And some of the Pharisees said to them, “Why are
you doing what is not right to do on the Shabbath?”
3 And {fWHY answering them, said, “Have you not
read what Dawiḏ did when he was hungry, he and
those who were with him,
4 how he went into the House of HWHY, took and ate
the showbread, and also gave some to those with him,
which is not right for any but the kohenim to eat?”
5 And He said to them, “The Bĕn of Aḏam is Aḏon of
the Shabbath.”
6 And it also came to be on another Shabbath, that
He entered into the congregation and taught, and there
was a man whose right hand was withered.
7 And the scribes and Pharisees were watching Him
closely, whether He would heal on the Shabbath, for
them to find an accusation against Him.
8 And He knew their thoughts, and said to the man
who had the withered hand, “Rise and stand in the
midst.” And he rose up and stood.
9 Then {fWHY said to them, “I ask you, is it right to
do good on the Shabbath, or to do evil, to save life or
to destroy it?”
10 And looking around at them all, He said to the man,
“Stretch out your hand.” And he did so, and his hand
was restored sound as the other.
11 But they were filled with folly, and were speaking
with one another what they should do to {fWHY.
12 And in those days it came to be that He went out to
the mountain to pray, and was spending the night in
prayer to HWHY.
13 And when it became day, He called near His
talmidim and chose from them twelve, whom He also
named emissaries:
2329

LUQAS

Shim’on whom He also named Kĕpha, and his
brother Andri, Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan, Philippos, and
Bartholomi,
15 Mattithyahu and T’oma, Ya’aqoḇ of Ḥĕleph and
Shim’on, the one called the Enthusiast,
16 Yahuḏah of Ya’aqoḇ and Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth
who also became the betrayer.
17 And coming down with them He stood on a level
place with a crowd of His talmidim and a great number
of people from all Yahuḏah and Yerushalayim, and
from the coast country of Tsor and Tsiḏon, who came
to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases,
18 and those who were troubled with unclean spirits and they were healed.
19 And all the crowd were seeking to touch Him, for
power went out from Him, and healing them all.
20 And He, lifting up His eyes toward His talmidim,
said, “Baruḵ are the poor, because yours is the reign
of Elohim.
21 “Baruḵ are you who hunger now, because you shall
be satisfied. Baruḵ are you who weep now, because
you shall laugh.
22 “Baruḵ are you when men shall hate you, and when
they shall cut you off, and shall reproach you, and cast
out your name as wicked, for the sake of the Bĕn of
Aḏam.
23 “Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for look, your
reward is great in the shamayim, for that is how their
fathers treated the neḇi’im.
24 “But woe to you who are rich, because you are
receiving your comfort.
25 “Woe to you who have been filled, because you
shall hunger. Woe to you who are laughing now,
because you shall mourn and weep.
26 “Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for
thus their fathers did to the false prophets.
27 “But I say to you who are hearing: Love your
enemies, do good to those hating you.
14

2330

LUKE

“Baraḵ those cursing you, and pray for those
insulting you.
29 “And to him who hits you on the one cheek, offer
the other also. And from him who takes away your
outer garment, do not withhold the inner garment
either.
30 “And give to everyone who asks of you. And from
him who takes away what is yours do not ask it back.
31 “And as you desire men should do to you, you also
do to them in the same way.
32 “And if you love those loving you, what favour have
you? For sinners, too, love those loving them.
33 “And if you do good to those doing good to you,
what favour have you? For even sinners do the same.
34 “And if you lend to whom you expect to receive
back, what favour have you? For even sinners lend to
sinners to receive as much back.
35 “Rather, love your enemies, and do good, and lend,
expecting naught in return. And your reward shall be
great, and you shall be sons of the Most High. Because
He is kind to the thankless and wicked ones.
36 “Therefore be compassionate, as your Father also
is compassionate.
37 “And do not judge, and you shall not be judged at
all. Condemn not, and you shall not be condemned at
all. Forgive, and you shall be forgiven.
38 “Give, and it shall be given to you. A good measure,
pressed down and shaken together and running over
shall be put into your lap. For with the same measure
with which you measure, it shall be measured back to
you.”
39 And He spoke a parable to them, “Is a blind able to
lead a blind? Shall they not both fall into a pit?
40 “A talmid is not above his teacher, but everyone
perfected shall be like his teacher.
41 “And why do you see the splinter in your brother’s
eye, but are not aware of the plank in your own eye?
42 “Or how are you able to say to your brother,
28

2331

LUQAS

‘Brother, let me take out the splinter that is in your eye,’
not seeing the plank in your own eye? Hypocrite, first
take the plank out of your own eye, and then you shall
see clearly to take out the splinter that is in your
brother’s eye.
43 “For a good tree does not yield rotten fruit, nor does
a rotten tree yield good fruit.
44 “For each tree is known by its own fruit. For they do
not gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes
from a bramble bush.
45 “The good man brings forth what is good out of the
good treasure of his heart, and the wicked man brings
forth what is wicked out of the wicked treasure of his
heart. For out of the overflow of the heart his mouth
speaks.
46 “But why do you call Me ‘Aḏonai, Aḏonai,’ and do
not do what I say?
47 “Everyone who is coming to Me, and is hearing My
Words and is doing them, I shall show you whom he is
like:
48 “He is like a man building a house, who dug deep
and laid a foundation on the rock. And when a flood
came, the stream burst against that house, but was
unable to shake it, for it was founded on the rock.
49 “But the one hearing and not doing, is like a man
who built a house on the earth without a foundation,
against which the stream burst, and immediately it fell.
And the ruin of that house was great.”

7 And when He completed all His words in the hearing
of the people, He went into Kephar Naḥum.
2 And a certain captain’s servant, who was valuable
to him, was sick and about to die.
3 And hearing about {fWHY, he sent elders of the
Yahuḏim to Him, asking Him to come and heal his
servant.
4 And when they came to {fWHY, they begged Him
earnestly, saying, “He is worthy for You to grant this to
2332

LUKE

him,
5 for he loves our nation, and has built the house of
assembly for us.”
6 So {fWHY went with them. However, He was not
far from the house when the captain sent friends to
Him, saying to Him, “Aḏonai, do not trouble Yourself,
for I am not worthy that You should come under my
roof.
7 “For this reason I did not even think myself worthy
to come to You. But say a word, and my servant shall
be healed.
8 “For I too am a man appointed under authority,
having soldiers under me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and
he goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and
to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
9 And when {fWHY heard this, He marvelled at him,
and turned around and said to the crowd that followed
Him, “I say to you, not even in Yisra’ĕl have I found
such great belief!”
10 And those who were sent, returning to the house,
found the servant who had been sick in good health.
11 And it came to be the next day, that He went into a
city called Na’im. And many of His talmidim went with
Him, and a large crowd.
12 And see, as He came near the gate of the city a
dead man was being carried out, the only son of his
mother, and she was a widow. And a large crowd from
the city was with her.
13 And when the Aḏon saw her, He had compassion
on her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
14 And coming near He touched the coffin, and those
bearing it stood still. And He said, “Young man, I say
to you, arise.”
15 And he who was dead sat up and began to speak,
and He gave him to his mother.
16 And fear seized all, and they praised Elohim,
saying, “A great naḇi has been raised up among us,”
and, “Elohim has visited His people.”
2333

LUQAS

And this news about Him went out in all Yahuḏah
and all the neighbourhood.
18 And the talmidim of Yoḥanan reported to him about
all this.
19 And Yoḥanan, calling two of his talmidim near, sent
to {fWHY, saying, “Are You the Coming One, or should
we look for another?”
20 And coming to Him, the men said, “Yoḥanan the
Immerser has sent us to You, saying, ‘Are You the
Coming One, or should we look for another?’ ”
21 And in the same hour He healed many of diseases,
and afflictions, and wicked spirits. And He gave sight
to many blind ones.
22 And {fWHY answering, said to them, “Go, report to
Yoḥanan what you have seen and heard: blind receive
sight, lame walk, lepers are cleansed, deaf hear, dead
are raised, the Good News is brought to the poor.
23 “And Baruḵ is he who shall not stumble in Me.”
24 And when the messengers of Yoḥanan had left, He
began to speak to the crowds concerning Yoḥanan,
“What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken by the wind?
25 “But what did you go out to see? A man dressed in
soft garments? Look, those who are splendidly
dressed and living in luxury are in the houses of
sovereigns.
26 “But what did you go out to see? A naḇi? Yes, I say
to you, and more than a naḇi.
27 “This is he concerning whom it has been written,
‘See, I send My messenger before Your face, who
shall prepare Your way before You.’
28 “For I say to you, among those born of women there
is not a greater naḇi than Yoḥanan the Immerser, but
he who is least in the reign of Elohim is greater than
he.”
29 And all the people, even the tax collectors, when
they heard, declared Elohim righteous, having been
immersed with the immersion of Yoḥanan.
17

2334

LUKE

But the Pharisees and those learned in the Torah
rejected the counsel of Elohim for themselves, not
having been immersed by him.
31 And the Aḏon said, “To what then shall I compare
the men of this generation, and what are they like?
32 “They are like children sitting in the market-place
and calling to each other, saying, ‘We played the flute
for you and you did not dance, we lamented for you
and you did not weep.’
33 “For Yoḥanan the Immerser came neither eating
bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a
demon.’
34 “The Bĕn of Aḏam has come eating and drinking,
and you say, ‘Look, a man, a glutton and a winedrinker,
a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
35 “And wisdom is declared right by all her children.”
36 And one of the Pharisees asked Him to eat with
him. And He went into the Pharisee’s house, and sat
down to eat.
37 And see, a woman in the city who was a sinner,
when she knew that {fWHY sat at the table in the
Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster flask of
perfume.
38 And standing behind, at His feet, weeping, she
began to wet His feet with her tears, and wiping them
with the hair of her head, and was kissing His feet and
anointing them with the perfume.
39 And when the Pharisee who had invited Him saw
this, he spoke to himself, saying, “This One, if He were
a naḇi, would know who and what kind of woman this
is who is touching Him, for she is a sinner.”
40 And {fWHY answering, said to him, “Shim’on, I
have somewhat to say to you.” And he said, “Teacher,
say it.”
41 “A certain creditor had two debtors. The one owed
five hundred pieces of silver, and the other fifty.
42 “And when they were unable to repay, he forgave
them both. Which of them, then, shall love him more?”
30

2335

LUQAS

And Shim’on answering, said, “I suppose the one
whom he forgave more.” And He said to him, “You
have rightly judged.”
44 And turning to the woman He said to Shim’on, “Do
you see this woman? I came into your house - you
gave Me no water for My feet, but she has wetted My
feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of her
head.
45 “You gave Me no kiss, but she has not ceased to
kiss My feet since the time I came in.
46 “You did not anoint My head with oil, but she
anointed My feet with perfume.
47 “Therefore I say to you, her many sins have been
forgiven, because she loved much. But to whom little
is forgiven, he loves little.”
48 And He said to her, “Your sins have been forgiven.”
49 And those who were sitting at the table with Him
began to say among themselves, “Who is this who
even forgives sins?”
50 And He said to the woman, “Your belief has saved
you.
Go
in
peace.”
43

8 And it came to be, afterward, that He went through
every city and village, proclaiming and bringing the
Good News of the reign of Elohim, and the twelve were
with Him,
2 and certain women who were healed of wicked
spirits and sicknesses: Miryam, called ‘from Maḡdala,’
out of whom had come seven demons,
3 and Yoḥanah the wife of Ḵuzas, manager of
Hĕrodĕs, and Shoshannah, and many others who
provided for Him from their resources.
4 And when a large crowd had gathered, and those
who were coming to Him from every city, He spoke by
a parable:
5 “A sower went out to sow his seed. And as he
sowed, some indeed fell by the wayside. And it was
trodden down, and the birds of the shamayim
2336

LUKE

devoured it.
6 “And other fell on rock, and when it grew up, it
withered because it had no moisture.
7 “And other fell among thorns, and the thorns grew
up with it and choked it.
8 “And other fell on the good soil, and grew up, and
yielded a crop a hundredfold.” Having said this He
cried, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear!”
9 And His talmidim were asking Him, saying, “What
does this parable mean?”
10 And He said, “To you it has been given to know the
secrets of the reign of Elohim, but to the rest in
parables, that ‘Seeing they do not see, and hearing
they do not understand.’
11 “And this is the parable: The seed is the Word of
HWHY.
12 “And those by the wayside are the ones who hear,
then the devil comes and takes away the Word from
their hearts, lest having believed, they should be
saved.
13 “And those on the rock are those who, when they
hear, receive the Word with joy. And these have no
root, who believe for a while and in time of trial fall
away.
14 “And that which fell among thorns are those who,
when they have heard, go out and are choked with
worries, and riches, and pleasures of life, and bring no
fruit to perfection.
15 “And that on the good soil are those who, having
heard the Word with a noble and good heart, retain it,
and bear fruit with endurance.
16 “And no one having lit a lamp, covers it with a
vessel or puts it under a bed, but he puts it on a
lampstand, so that those coming in see the light.
17 “For whatever is hidden shall be revealed, and
whatever is secret shall be known and come to light.
18 “Therefore take heed how you hear. For whoever
possesses, to him shall be given; and whoever does
2337

LUQAS

not possess, even what he thinks he possesses shall
be taken from him.”
19 And His mother and brothers came to Him, and
were unable to get to Him because of the crowd.
20 And it was reported to Him, saying, “Your mother
and Your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see
You.”
21 And He answering, said to them, “My mother and
My brothers are those who are hearing the Word of
HWHY and doing it.”
22 And on a certain day it came to be, that He entered
into a boat with His talmidim, and He said to them, “Let
us go over to the other side of the lake.” And they
departed.
23 And as they were sailing He fell asleep. And a
windstorm came down on the lake, and they were
filling up, and were in danger.
24 And they came to Him and woke Him up, saying,
“Aḏonai, Aḏonai, we are perishing!” And He awoke and
rebuked the wind and the raging of the water. And they
ceased, and there came a calm.
25 And He said to them, “Where is your belief?” And
they were afraid, and marvelled, saying to one
another, “Who then is this, that He even commands
the winds and water, and they obey Him?”
26 And they sailed to the country or the Gaḏarenes,
which is opposite Galil.
27 And as He went out onto the land, He was met by
a certain man, from the city, who had demons for a
long time. And he wore no garments, and he was not
living in a house but in the tombs.
28 And when he saw {fWHY, he cried out, fell down
before Him, and with a loud voice said, “What have I
to do with You, {fWHY, Bĕn of the Most High Elohim?
I beg You, do not torture me!”
29 For He had commanded the unclean spirit to come
out of the man. For it had seized him many times, and
he was bound with chains and shackles, being
2338

LUKE

guarded. And breaking the bonds, he was driven by
the demon into the lonely places.
30 And {fWHY asked him, saying, “What is your
name?” And he said, “Legion,” because many demons
had entered into him.
31 And they were begging Him that He would not
command them to go out into the bottomless pit.
32 And a herd of many pigs was feeding there on the
mountain. And they begged Him to allow them to go
into them. And He allowed them.
33 And the demons, having gone out of the man
entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the
steep place into the lake and drowned.
34 And when those feeding them saw what had taken
place, they fled and reported it in the city and in the
country.
35 So they came out to see what had taken place, and
came to {fWHY, and found the man from whom the
demons had gone out, sitting at the feet of {fWHY,
dressed, and in his right mind. And they were afraid.
36 And those who had seen it reported to them how
he who had been possessed by demons was healed.
37 And all the crowd of the neighbourhood of the
Gaḏarenes asked Him to leave them, for they were
seized with great fear. And He entered into the boat
and returned.
38 And the man from whom the demons had gone out
was begging Him to be with Him. But {fWHY sent him
away, saying,
39 “Go back to your house, and relate what Elohim has
done for you.” And he went away proclaiming through
all the city what {fWHY did for him.
40 And it came to be, when {fWHY returned, that the
crowd gladly received Him for they were all looking for
Him.
41 And see, there came a man whose name was Ya’ir,
and he was a ruler of the congregation. And falling
down at the feet of {fWHY he was calling upon Him to
2339

LUQAS

come to his house,
42 because he had an only daughter about twelve
years of age, and she was dying. And as He went, the
crowds thronged upon Him.
43 And a woman, having a flow of blood for twelve
years, who, having spent all her livelihood on
physicians, was unable to be healed by any,
44 came from behind and touched the tsitsit of His
garment. And immediately her flow of blood stopped.
45 And {fWHY said, “Who touched Me?” And when all
denied it, Kĕpha and those with him said, “Aḏonai, the
crowds throng You and press upon You, and You say,
‘Who touched Me?’ ”
46 But {fWHY said, “Somebody touched Me, for I knew
power went out from Me.”
47 And the woman, seeing that she was not hidden,
came trembling, and falling down before Him she
declared to Him in the presence of all the people why
she had touched Him and how she was healed
immediately.
48 And He said to her, “Take courage, daughter, your
belief has healed you. Go in peace.”
49 While He was still speaking, someone came from
the ruler of the congregation, saying to him, “Your
daughter is dead. Do not trouble the Teacher any
further.”
50 And {fWHY having heard, answered him, saying,
“Do not be afraid, only believe, and she shall be
healed.”
51 And coming into the house, He allowed no one to
go in except Kĕpha, and Ya’aqoḇ, and Yoḥanan, and
the girl’s father and mother.
52 And they were all weeping and mourning for her,
and He said, “Do not weep, she is not dead, but
sleeps.”
53 And they were laughing at Him, knowing that she
was dead.
54 But taking her by the hand He called, saying, “Child,
2340

LUKE

arise.”
55 And her spirit returned, and she rose up
immediately. And He directed that she be given to eat.
56 And her parents were astonished, but He ordered
them to say to no one what had taken place.

9 And having called His twelve talmidim together, He
gave them power and authority over all demons, and
to heal diseases.
2 And He sent them to proclaim the reign of Elohim
and to heal the sick.
3 And He said to them, “Take naught for the journey,
neither staffs nor bag nor bread nor silver - neither
have two undergarments.
4 “And whatever house you enter, stay there, and go
out from there.
5 “And as for those who do not receive you, when you
go out of that city, shake off the dust from your feet as
a witness against them.”
6 And going out they went through the villages,
bringing the Good News and healing everywhere.
7 And Hĕrodĕs the district ruler heard of all that was
done by Him, and was perplexed, because it was said
by some that Yoḥanan had been raised from the dead,
8 and by some that Ĕliyahu had appeared, and by
others that one of the old neḇi’im has risen up.
9 And Hĕrodĕs said, “Yoḥanan I have beheaded, but
who is this of whom I hear such?” And he was seeking
to see Him.
10 And the emissaries, when they had returned,
related to Him all that they had done. And He took
them and they withdrew by themselves to a city called
Bĕyth Tsaiḏa.
11 And when the crowds knew it, they followed Him.
And having received them, He was speaking to them
about the reign of Elohim, and healed those who had
need of healing.
12 And as the day began to decline, the twelve came
2341

LUQAS

and said to Him, “Send the crowd away, that going into
the surrounding villages and country, they might lodge
and get food, because here we are in a lonely place.”
13 But He said to them, “You give them to eat.” And
they said, “We have no more than five loaves and two
fish, unless we go and buy food for all these people.”
14 For there were about five thousand men. And He
said to His talmidim, “Make them sit down in groups of
fifty.”
15 And they did so, and made them all sit down.
16 And taking the five loaves and the two fish, having
looked up to the shamayim, He baraḵ and broke them,
and gave them to the talmidim to put before the crowd.
17 So they all ate and were satisfied, and twelve
baskets of the broken pieces were picked up by them.
18 And it came to be, as He was alone praying, the
talmidim were with Him, and He asked them, saying,
“Who do the crowds say that I am?”
19 And they answering, said, “Yoḥanan the Immerser,
but others Ĕliyahu, and others say that one of the old
neḇi’im has risen up.”
20 And He said to them, “And you, who do you say I
am?” And Kĕpha answering, said, “Ha’Mashiaḥ of
HWHY.”
21 And strictly warning them, He commanded them to
say this to no one,
22 saying, “The Bĕn of Aḏam has to suffer much, and
to be rejected by the elders and chief kohenim and
scribes, and to be killed, and to be raised the third day.”
23 And He said to them all, “If anyone wants to come
after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his stake
daily, and follow Me.
24 “For whoever wants to save his life shall lose it, but
whoever loses his life for My sake shall save it.
25 “For what is a man profited if he gains all the world,
and is himself destroyed or lost?
26 “For whoever is ashamed of Me and My Words, of
him the Bĕn of Aḏam shall be ashamed when He
2342

LUKE

comes in His esteem, and in His Father’s, and of the
qodesh messengers.
27 “But truly I say to you, there are some standing here
who shall not taste death at all till they see the reign of
Elohim:”
28 And it came to be, about eight days after these
words, taking with Him Kĕpha and Yoḥanan and
Ya’aqoḇ, He went up to the mountain to pray.
29 And it came to be, as He prayed, the appearance
of His face changed, and His garment radiant white.
30 And see, two men were talking with Him, who were
Mosheh and Ĕliyahu,
31 who having appeared in esteem, spoke of His
death which He was about to complete at
Yerushalayim.
32 But Kĕpha and those with him were heavy with
sleep. And having awakened, they saw His esteem
and the two men standing with Him.
33 And it came to be, as they were parting from Him,
Kĕpha said to {fWHY, “Aḏonai, it is good for us to be
here. And let us make three booths: one for You, and
one for Mosheh, and one for Ĕliyahu,” not knowing
what he said.
34 And as he was saying this, a cloud came and
overshadowed them. And they were afraid as they
entered the cloud.
35 And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is
My Bĕn, the Beloved. Hear Him!”
36 And when the voice had spoken, {fWHY was found
alone. And they were silent, and reported to no one in
those days any of what they had seen.
37 And it came to be on the next day, when they came
down from the mountain, that a large crowd met Him.
38 And see, a man from the crowd cried out, saying,
“Teacher, I beg You, look at my son, for he is my only
child.
39 “And see, a spirit seizes him, and he suddenly cries
out, and it convulses him, with foaming, and scarcely
2343

LUQAS

leaves him, bruising him.
40 “And I begged Your talmidim to cast it out, but they
were unable.”
41 And {fWHY answering, said, “O generation,
unbelieving and corrupted, how long shall I be with you
and put up with you? Bring your son here.”
42 And as he was still coming, the demon threw him
down in convulsions. And {fWHY rebuked the unclean
spirit, and healed the child, and gave him back to his
father.
43 And they were all amazed at the greatness of
Elohim. And while all were marvelling at all that {fWHY
did, He said to His talmidim,
44 “Lay up in your ears these words, for the Bĕn of
Aḏam is about to be delivered into the hands of men.”
45 But they did not understand this saying, and it was
veiled from them so that they did not perceive it. And
they were afraid to ask Him about this saying.
46 And a reasoning arose among them, who might be
the greater of them.
47 And {fWHY, having seen the reasoning of their
heart, took a little child and placed him by His side,
48 and said to them, “Whoever receives this little child
in My Name receives Me. And whoever receives Me
receives Him who sent Me. For he who is least among
you all, he shall be great.”
49 And Yoḥanan answering, said, “Aḏonai, we saw
someone casting out demons in Your Name, and we
forbade him because he does not follow with us.”
50 But {fWHY said to him, “Do not forbid him, for he
who is not against us is for us.”
51 And it came to be, when the days of His taking up
were being completed, even He turned His face to go
to Yerushalayim,
52 and He sent messengers ahead of Him. And they
went and entered into a village of the Shomeronites, to
prepare for Him.
53 And they did not receive Him, because His face
2344

LUKE

was turned for the journey to Yerushalayim.
54 And His talmidim, Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan, seeing it
said, “Aḏonai, do You want us to command fire to
come down from the shamayim and destroy them, as
also Ĕliyahu did?”
55 But having turned, He rebuked them and said, “You
do not know of what spirit you are,
56 for the Bĕn of Aḏam did not come to destroy men’s
lives but to save them.” And they went on to another
village.
57 And it came to be, as they journeyed on the way,
that someone said to Him, “Aḏonai, I shall follow You
wherever You go.”
58 And {fWHY said to him, “The foxes have holes and
the birds of the shamayim nests, but the Bĕn of Aḏam
has nowhere to lay His head.”
59 And He said to another, “Follow Me,” but he said,
“Aḏonai, let me first go and bury my father.”
60 And {fWHY said to him, “Let the dead bury their
own dead, but you go and announce the reign of
Elohim.”
61 And another also said, “Aḏonai, I shall follow You,
but let me first say good-bye to those in my house.”
62 But {fWHY said to him, “No one, having put his
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the reign
of Elohim.”

10 And after this the Aḏon appointed seventy others,
and sent them two by two ahead of Him into every city
and place where He Himself was about to go.
2 Then He said to them, “The harvest indeed is great,
but the workers are few, therefore pray to the Aḏon of
the harvest to send out workers into His harvest.
3 “Go! See, I send you out as lambs into the midst of
wolves.
4 “Do not take a purse, nor a bag, nor sandals. And
greet no one along the way.
5 “And whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace to
2345

LUQAS

this house.’
6 “And if indeed a son of peace is there, your peace
shall rest on it; and if not, it shall return to you.
7 “And stay in the same house, eating and drinking
whatever with them, for the labourer is worthy of his
wages. Do not move from house to house.
8 “And into whatever city you enter, and they receive
you, eat whatever is placed before you,
9 and heal the sick there, and say to them, ‘The reign
of Elohim has come near to you.’
10 “And into whatever city you enter, and they do not
receive you, go out into its streets and say,
11 ‘Even the dust of your city which clings to us, we
wipe off against you, but know this, that the reign of
Elohim has come near to you.’
12 “And I say to you that it shall be more bearable for
Seḏom in that Day, than for that city.
13 “Woe to you, Ḵorazin! Woe to you, Bĕyth Tsaiḏa!
For if the miracles which were done in you had been
done in Tsor and Tsiḏon, they would have repented
long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14 “But it shall be more bearable for Tsor and Tsiḏon
at the judgment than for you.
15 “And you, Kephar Naḥum, who are exalted to the
shamayim, shall be brought down to the grave.
16 “He who hears you hears Me, he who rejects you
rejects Me, and he who rejects Me rejects Him who
sent Me.”
17 And the seventy returned with joy, saying, “Aḏonai,
even the demons are subject to us in Your Name.”
18 And He said to them, “I saw Satan falling out of the
shamayim as lightning.
19 “See, I give you the authority to trample on serpents
and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy,
and none at all shall hurt you.
20 “But do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject
to you, but rather rejoice because your names have
been written in the shamayim.”
2346

LUKE

In that hour {fWHY exulted in the Ruaḥ and said, “I
praise You, Father, Aḏon of the shamayim and of the
earth, that You have hidden these from clever and
learned ones, and revealed them to children. Yes,
Father, because thus it was well-pleasing in Your
sight.
22 “All has been delivered to Me by My Father, and no
one knows who the Bĕn is, except the Father, and who
the Father is, except the Bĕn, and he to whom the Bĕn
wants to reveal.”
23 And turning to His talmidim He said, separately,
“Baruḵ are the eyes that see what you see,
24 for I say to you that many neḇi’im and sovereigns
have wanted to see what you see, and have not seen
it, and to hear what you hear, and have not heard it.”
25 And see, a certain one learned in the Torah stood
up, trying Him, and saying, “Teacher, what shall I do to
inherit everlasting ḥai?”
26 And He said to him, “What has been written in the
Torah? How do you read it?”
27 And he answering, said, “‘You shall love HWHY your
Elohim with all your heart, and with all your being, and
with all your strength, and with all your mind,’ and ‘your
neighbour as yourself.’ ”
28 And He said to him, “You have answered rightly. Do
this and you shall live.”
29 But he, wanting to declare himself righteous, said
to {fWHY, “And who is my neighbour?”
30 And replying, {fWHY said, “A certain man was
going down from Yerushalayim to Yeriḥo, and fell
among robbers, who, both stripping and beating him,
went away, leaving him half dead.
31 “And by a coincidence a certain kohĕn was going
down that way. And when he saw him, he passed by
on the other side.
32 “And likewise a Lĕwite also, when he came to the
place, and seeing, passed by on the other side.
33 “But a certain Shomeronite, journeying, came upon
21

2347

LUQAS

him. And when he saw him, he had compassion on
him,
34 and he went to him and bandaged his wounds,
pouring on oil and wine. And having placed him on his
own beast, he brought him to an inn, and looked after
him.
35 “And going out on the next day, he took out two
pieces of silver, gave them to the innkeeper, and said
to him, ‘Look after him, and whatever more you spend
I shall repay you when I return.’
36 “Who, then, of these three, do you think, was
neighbour to him who fell among the robbers?”
37 And he said, “He who showed compassion on him.”
Then {fWHY said to him, “Go and do likewise.”
38 And it came to be as they went that He entered into
a certain village. And a certain woman named Martha
received Him into her house.
39 And she had a sister called Miryam, who also sat at
the feet of {fWHY and heard His Word.
40 But Martha was distracted with much serving, and
coming up she said, “Aḏonai, are You not concerned
that my sister has left me to serve alone? Speak to her
then, to help me.”
41 And {fWHY answering, said to her, “Martha,
Martha, you are worried and troubled about much,
42 but one only is necessary, and Miryam has chosen
the good portion, which shall not be taken away from
her.”

11 And it came to be while He was praying in a
certain place, as He ceased, one of His talmidim said
to Him, “Aḏonai, teach us to pray, as Yoḥanan also
taught his talmidim.”
2 And He said to them, “When you pray, say: Our
Father in the shamayim, let Your Name be qodesh, let
Your reign come, let Your desire be done on earth as
it is in shamayim.
3 “Give us day by day our daily bread.
2348

LUKE

“And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive
everyone who is indebted to us. And do not lead us
into trial, but rescue us from the wicked one.”
5 And He said to them, “Which of you shall have a
friend, and go to him at midnight and say to him,
‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
6 since a friend of mine has come to me on his
journey, and I have naught to put before him,’
7 then the one inside answering, says, ‘Do not
trouble me, the door is already locked, and my children
with me are in bed. I am unable to get up and give to
you’?
8 “I say to you, if he does not get up and give to him
because he is his friend, he shall get up and give him
as many as he needs because of his persistence.
9 “And I say to you: ask and it shall be given to you,
seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened
to you.
10 “For everyone asking receives, and he who is
seeking finds, and to him who is knocking it shall be
opened.
11 “And what father among you whose son asks for
bread shall give him a stone, or if he asks for a fish
shall give him a snake instead of a fish,
12 or if he asks for an egg shall give him a scorpion?
13 “If you then, being wicked, know how to give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father
from shamayim give the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh to those
asking Him!”
14 And He was casting out a demon, and it was dumb.
And it came to be, when the demon had gone out, that
the dumb spoke. And the crowds marvelled.
15 But some of them said, “He casts out demons by
Be’elzebul, the ruler of the demons,”
16 and others, trying, were seeking from Him a sign
from the shamayim.
17 And He, knowing their thoughts, said to them,
“Every reign divided against itself is laid waste, and a
4

2349

LUQAS

house against a house falls.
18 “So if Satan also is divided against himself, how
shall his reign stand? Because you say I cast out
demons by Be’elzebul.
19 “Now if I cast out demons by Be’elzebul, by whom
do your sons cast them out? Because of this they shall
be your judges.
20 “But if I cast out demons by the finger of Elohim,
then the reign of Elohim has come upon you.
21 “When a strong man, having been well armed,
watches over his own court, his possessions are in
peace.
22 “But when a stronger than he comes upon him and
overcomes him, he takes from him all his armour in
which he trusted, and divides his booty.
23 “He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who
does not gather with Me scatters.
24 “When the unclean spirit goes out of a man, he
goes through dry places, seeking rest. And finding
none, he says, ‘I shall return to my house from which I
came.’
25 “And when he comes, he finds it swept and
decorated,
26 then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits
more wicked than himself, and they enter and dwell
there. And the last of that man becomes worse than
the first.”
27 And it came to be, as He was saying this, a certain
woman from the crowd raised her voice and said to
Him, “Baruḵ is the womb that bore You, and the
breasts which You nursed on!”
28 But He said, “Baruḵ rather are those hearing the
Word of HWHY and keeping it!”
29 And while the crowds were thronging, He began to
say, “This generation is wicked. It seeks a sign, and no
sign shall be given to it except the sign of Yonah the
naḇi.
30 “For as Yonah became a sign to the Ninewites, so
2350

LUKE

also the Bĕn of Aḏam shall be to this generation.
31 “The sovereigness of the South shall rise up in the
judgment with the men of this generation and shall
condemn them, for she came from the ends of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Shelomoh, and look, a
greater than Shelomoh is here.
32 “The men of Ninewĕh shall rise up in the judgment
with this generation and condemn it, for they repented
at the preaching of Yonah, and look, a greater than
Yonah is here.
33 “And no one, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a
hidden place or under a basket, but on a lampstand,
that those who come in shall see the light.
34 “The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore, when
your eye is good, all your body also is enlightened. But
when your eye is evil, your body also is darkened.
35 “See to it therefore that the light which is in you is
not darkness.
36 “If then all your body is enlightened, having no part
dark, all shall be enlightened, as when the bright
shining of a lamp gives you light.”
37 And as He spoke, a certain Pharisee asked Him to
dine with him, so He went in and sat down to eat.
38 And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that
He did not first wash before dinner.
39 And the Aḏon said to him, “Now you Pharisees
make the outside of the cup and dish clean, but your
inward part is filled with greed and wickedness.
40 “Mindless ones! Did not He who made the outside
make the inside also?
41 “But give in kindness of that which is within, and
see, all are clean to you.
42 “But woe to you Pharisees, because you tithe the
mint and the rue and every plant, and pass by the rightruling and the love of Elohim. These you should have
done, without leaving the others undone.
43 “Woe to you Pharisees, because you love the best
seats in the congregations and the greetings in the
2351

LUQAS

market-places.
44 “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
because you are like the unseen tombs, and the men
walking over them do not know.”
45 And one of those learned in the Torah, answering,
said to Him, “Teacher, when You say this You insult us
too.”
46 And He said, “Woe to you also, you learned in the
Torah, because you load men with burdens hard to
bear, and you yourselves do not touch the burdens
with one of your fingers.
47 “Woe to you, because you build the tombs of the
neḇi’im, and your fathers killed them.
48 “So you bear witness that you approve of the works
of your fathers, because they indeed killed them, and
you build their tombs.
49 “And because of this the wisdom of Elohim said, ‘I
shall send them neḇi’im and emissaries, and some of
them they shall kill and persecute,’
50 so that the blood of all the neḇi’im which was shed
from the foundation of the world shall be required of
this generation,
51 from the blood of Heḇel to the blood of Zeḵaryah
who perished between the altar and the Mishkan. Yes,
I say to you, it shall be required of this generation.
52 “Woe to you learned in the Torah, because you took
away the key of knowledge. You did not enter in
yourselves, and those who were entering in you
hindered.”
53 And as He was saying this to them, the scribes and
the Pharisees began to oppose Him fiercely, and to
draw Him out on many subjects,
54 watching Him, and seeking to catch somewhat from
His mouth, so as to accuse Him.

12 Meanwhile, when an innumerable crowd of
people had gathered together, so that they trampled
one another, He began to say to His talmidim, first,
2352

LUKE

“Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.
2 “And whatever is concealed shall be revealed, and
whatever is hidden shall be known.
3 “So, whatever you have said in the dark shall be
heard in the light, and what you have spoken in the ear
in inner rooms shall be proclaimed on the house-tops.
4 “But I say to you, My friends, do not be afraid of
those who kill the body, and after that are unable to do
any more.
5 “But I shall show you whom you should fear: Fear
the One who, after killing, possesses authority to cast
into Gĕy-Hinnom. Yes, I say to you, fear Him!
6 “Are not five sparrows sold for two copper coins?
And not one of them is forgotten before Elohim.
7 “But even the hairs of your head have all been
numbered. Do not fear, you are worth more than many
sparrows.
8 “And I say to you, everyone who confesses Me
before men, the Bĕn of Aḏam shall also confess him
before the messengers of Elohim.
9 “But he that has denied Me before men shall be
denied before the messengers of Elohim.
10 “And everyone who shall speak a word against the
Bĕn of Aḏam, it shall be forgiven him, but to him who
has blasphemed against the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, it shall
not be forgiven.
11 “And when they bring you to the congregations and
rulers and authorities, do not worry about how or what
you should answer, or what you should say,
12 for the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh shall teach you in that very
hour what you should say.”
13 And someone from the crowd said to Him,
“Teacher, speak to my brother, to divide the
inheritance with me.”
14 But He said to him, “Man, who made Me a judge or
divider over you?”
15 And He said to them, “Mind, and beware of greed,
2353

LUQAS

because one’s life does not consist in the excess of his
possessions.”
16 He then spoke a parable to them, saying, “The land
of a certain rich man yielded well.
17 “And he was reasoning within himself, saying,
‘What shall I do, because I have no room to store my
crops?’
18 “And he said, ‘I am going to do this: pull down my
storehouses and build greater, and store all my crops
and my goods there,
19 then say to myself, “Life, you have many goods laid
up for many years, take your ease, eat, drink, rejoice.”
’
20 “But Elohim said to him, ‘You mindless one! This
night your life shall be demanded from you. And who
shall own what you have prepared?’
21 “So is he who is storing up treasure for himself, and
is not rich toward Elohim.”
22 And He said to His talmidim, “For this reason I say
to you, do not worry about your life, what you shall eat;
nor about the body, what you shall put on.
23 “The life is more than the food, and the body is
more than the clothing.
24 “Look at the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap,
which have neither storehouse nor granary, and
Elohim feeds them. How much more valuable are you
than the birds?
25 “And which of you by worrying is able to add one
pĕḵus to his life’s span?
26 “If then you are unable to do the least, why do you
worry about the rest?
27 “Look at the lilies, how they grow. They neither toil
nor spin, and I say to you, even Shelomoh in all his
esteem was not dressed like one of these.
28 “And if Elohim so clothes the grass, which today
exists in the field and tomorrow is thrown into the
furnace, how much more you, O you of little belief?
29 “And do not seek what you shall eat or what you
2354

LUKE

shall drink, and do not keep worrying.
30 “For the gentiles of the world seek all these, and
your Father knows that you need these.
31 “But seek the reign of Elohim, and all these shall be
added to you.
32 “Do not fear, little flock, because your Father
delights to give you the reign.
33 “Sell your possessions and give in kindness. Make
yourselves purses which do not grow old, a treasure in
the shamayim that does not fail, where no thief comes
near nor moth destroys.
34 “For where your treasure is, there your heart shall
be also.
35 “Let your loins be girded and your lamps burning,
36 and be like men waiting for their master, when he
shall return from the wedding, that when he comes and
knocks they open to him immediately.
37 “Baruḵ are those servants whom the master, when
he comes, shall find watching. Truly, I say to you that
he shall gird himself and make them sit down to eat,
and shall come and serve them.
38 “And if he comes in the second watch, or in the third
watch, and finds them so, baruḵ are those servants.
39 “And know this, that if the master of the house had
known what hour the thief comes, he would have
watched and not allowed his house to be broken into.
40 “And you, then, be ready, for the Bĕn of Aḏam is
coming at an hour you do not expect.”
41 And Kĕpha said to Him, “Aḏonai, do You speak this
parable to us, or also to all?”
42 And the Aḏon said, “Who then is the trustworthy
and wise manager, whom his master shall appoint
over his household, to give the portion of food in due
season?
43 “Baruḵ is that servant whom his master shall find so
doing when he comes.
44 “Truly, I say to you that he shall appoint him over all
his possessions.
2355

LUQAS

“But if that servant says in his heart, ‘My master is
delaying his coming,’ and begins to beat the male
servants and female servants, and to eat and drink and
be drunk,
46 the master of that servant shall come on a day
when he does not expect him, and at an hour that he
does not know, and shall cut him in two and appoint
his portion with the unbelievers.
47 “And that servant who knew his master’s desire,
and did not prepare, nor did according to his desire,
shall be beaten much.
48 “But he who did not know, yet did what deserved
flogging, shall be beaten with few. And everyone to
whom much is given, from him much shall be
demanded. And to whom much has been entrusted,
from him much more shall be asked.
49 “I came to send fire on the earth, and how I prefer
it were already kindled!
50 “But I have an immersion to be immersed with, and
how distressed I am until it is accomplished!
51 “Do you think that I came to give peace on earth? I
say to you, no, but rather division.
52 “For from now on five in one house shall be divided,
three against two, and two against three 53 father shall be divided against son, and son against
father, mother against daughter, and daughter against
mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law,
and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”
54 And He also said to the crowds, “When you see a
cloud rising out of the west, immediately you say, ‘A
storm is coming,’ and so it is.
55 “And when you see the south wind blow, you say,
‘There shall be hot weather,’ and it is.
56 “Hypocrites! You know to discern the face of the
shamayim and of the earth, but how is it you do not
discern this time?
57 “And why, also, do you not judge for yourselves
what is right?
45

2356

LUKE

“For, as you go with your opponent to a ruler, try
hard along the way to settle with him, lest he drag you
to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer,
and the officer throw you into prison.
59 “I say to you, you shall certainly not leave there until
you have paid even the last coin.”
58

13 And some were present at that time, reporting to
Him about the Galileans whose blood Pilatus had
mixed with their offerings.
2 And {fWHY answering, said to them, “Do you think
that these Galileans were worse sinners than all
Galileans, because they have suffered like this?
3 “I say to you, no! But unless you repent you shall all
perish in the same way.
4 “Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Shiloaḥ
fell and killed them, do you think that they were greater
offenders than all other men who dwelt in
Yerushalayim?
5 “I say to you, no! But unless you repent you shall all
perish in the same way.”
6 And He spoke this parable, “A certain man had a
fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking
fruit on it and found none.
7 “And he said to the gardener, ‘Look, for three years
I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none.
Cut it down, why does it even make the ground
useless?’
8 “And he answering, said to him, ‘Master, leave it
this year too, until I dig around it and throw manure.
9 ‘And if indeed it bears fruit. But if not so, you shall
cut it down.’ ”
10 And He was teaching in one of the congregations
on the Shabbath,
11 and see, there was a woman having a weakening
spirit for eighteen years, and was bent over and was
unable to straighten up at all.
12 And {fWHY, seeing her, called her near and said to
2357

LUQAS

her, “Woman, you are loosened from your weakness.”
13 And He laid His hands on her, and immediately she
was straightened up, and praised Elohim.
14 But the ruler of the congregation, responding, much
displeased that {fWHY had healed on the Shabbath,
said to the crowd, “There are six days on which men
should work, so come and be healed on them, and not
on the Shabbath day.”
15 Then the Aḏon answered him and said, “Hypocrite!
Does not each one of you on the Shabbath loosen his
ox or his donkey from the stall and lead it away to water
it?
16 “And this one, being a daughter of Aḇraham, whom
Satan has bound, look, for eighteen years, should she
not be loosened from this bond on the Shabbath?”
17 And when He said this, all His opponents were put
to shame. And all the crowd rejoiced for all the
splendour being done by Him.
18 Therefore He said, “What is the reign of Elohim
like? And to what shall I compare it?
19 “It is like a mustard seed, which a man took and
threw into his garden. And it grew and became a large
tree, and the birds of the shamayim nested in its
branches.”
20 And again He said, “To what shall I compare the
reign of Elohim?
21 “It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in
three measures of flour until it was all leavened.”
22 And He was going through the cities and villages,
teaching, and journeying toward Yerushalayim,
23 and someone said to Him, “Aḏonai, are there few
who are being saved?” And He said to them,
24 “Strive to enter through the narrow gate, because
many, I say to you, shall seek to enter in and shall not
be able.
25 “When once the Aḏon of the house has risen up
and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and
knock at the door, saying, ‘Aḏonai, Aḏonai, open for
2358

LUKE

us,’ and He shall answer and say to you, ‘I do not know
you, where you are from,’
26 then you shall begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in
Your presence, and You taught in our streets.’
27 “But He shall say, ‘I say to you I do not know you,
where you are from. Depart from Me, all you workers
of unrighteousness.’
28 “There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
when you see Aḇraham and Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ and
all the neḇi’im in the reign of Elohim, and yourselves
thrown outside.
29 “And they shall come from the east and the west,
and from the north and the south, and sit down in the
reign of Elohim.
30 “And see, there are last who shall be first, and there
are first who shall be last.”
31 On the same day there came certain Pharisees,
saying to Him, “Get out and go from here, for Hĕrodĕs
wants to kill You.”
32 And He said to them, “Go, say to that fox, ‘See, I
cast out demons and perform healings today and
tomorrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.’
33 “But I have to journey today, and tomorrow, and the
day following, because it is not fitting for a naḇi to
perish outside of Yerushalayim.
34 “Yerushalayim, Yerushalayim, killing the neḇi’im
and stoning those who are sent to her! How often I
wanted to gather your children together, the way a hen
her chickens under her wings, but you would not!
35 “See, your House is left to you laid waste. And truly
I say to you, you shall by no means see Me until it
comes when you say, ‘Baruḵ is He who is coming in
the Name of HWHY!’ ”

14 And it came to be, as He went into the house of
one of the rulers of the Pharisees to eat bread on the
Shabbath, that they were watching Him closely.
2 And see, there was a certain man before Him
2359

LUQAS

suffering from dropsy.
3 And {fWHY responding, spoke to those learned in
the Torah and the Pharisees, saying, “Is it right to heal
on the Shabbath?”
4 But they were silent. So taking hold of him He
healed him, and let him go.
5 And to them He said, “Which of you, having a
donkey or an ox that has fallen into a pit, shall not
immediately pull him out on the Shabbath day?”
6 And they were unable to answer Him regarding
these.
7 And He spoke a parable to those who were invited,
when He noted how they chose the best places, saying
to them:
8 “When you are invited by anyone to a wedding
feast, do not sit down in the best place, lest one more
distinguished than you be invited by him,
9 and he who invited you and him come and say to
you, ‘Give this one place,’ and then you begin with
shame to take the last place.
10 “Rather, when you are invited, go and sit down in
the last place, so that when he who invited you comes
he shall say to you, ‘Friend, come up higher.’ Then you
shall have esteem in the presence of those who sit at
the table with you.
11 “For everyone who is exalting himself shall be
humbled, and he who is humbling himself shall be
exalted.”
12 And He also said to him who invited Him, “When
you give a dinner or a supper, do not ask your friends,
nor your brothers, nor your relatives, nor your rich
neighbours, lest they also invite you back, and you be
repaid.
13 “But when you give a feast, invite poor ones,
crippled ones, lame ones, blind ones,
14 and you shall be baruḵ because they do not have
to repay you. For you shall be repaid at the
resurrection of the righteous.”
2360

LUKE

And when one of those who sat at the table with
Him heard this, he said to Him, “Baruḵ is he who eats
bread in the reign of Elohim!”
16 But He said to him, “A certain man gave a great
supper and invited many,
17 and he sent his servant at supper time to say to
those who were invited, ‘Come, for all is now ready.’
18 “But one by one they all began making excuses.
The first said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I need
to go and see it. I ask you to have me excused.’
19 “And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen,
and I am going to try them out. I ask you to have me
excused.’
20 “And another said, ‘I have married a wife, and
because of this I am unable to come.’
21 “And that servant came and reported this to his
master. Then the master of the house, being wroth,
said to his servant, ‘Hurry out into the streets and lanes
of the city, and bring in here the poor, and crippled, and
lame, and blind.’
22 “And the servant said, ‘Master, it is done as you
commanded, and still there is room.’
23 “And the master said to the servant, ‘Go out into the
street corners and hedges, and compel them to come
in, so that my house is filled.
24 ‘For I say to you that none of those men who were
invited shall taste my supper.’ ”
25 And large crowds were going with Him, and turning,
He said to them,
26 “If anyone comes to Me and does not hate his
father and mother, and wife, and children, and
brothers, and sisters, and his own life too, he is unable
to be My talmid.
27 “And whoever does not bear his stake and come
after Me is unable to be My talmid.
28 “For who of you, wanting to build a tower, does not
sit down first and count the cost, whether his
possessions will finish it?
15

2361

LUQAS

“Otherwise, when he has laid the foundation, and is
unable to finish it, all who see it begin to mock him,
30 saying, ‘This man began to build and was unable to
finish.’
31 “Or what sovereign, going to fight against another
sovereign, does not sit down first and take counsel
whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who
comes against him with twenty thousand?
32 “And if not, while the other is still far away, he sends
a delegation and asks conditions of peace.
33 “So, then, everyone of you who does not give up all
that he has, is unable to be My talmid.
34 “The salt is good, but if the salt becomes tasteless,
with what shall it be seasoned?
35 “It is not fit for land, nor for manure, they throw it
out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear!”
29

15 Now all the tax collectors and the sinners were
coming to Him to hear Him.
2 And the Pharisees and scribes grumbled, saying,
“This One receives sinners and eats with them.”
3 And He spoke this parable to them, saying,
4 “What man among you, having a hundred sheep,
and having lost one of them, does not leave the ninetynine in the wilderness and go after the one which is
lost until he finds it?
5 “And having found it, he lays it on his shoulders,
rejoicing.
6 “And having come home, he calls together his
friends and neighbours, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with
me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!’
7 “I say to you that in the same way there shall be
more joy in the shamayim over one sinner repenting,
than over ninety-nine righteous ones who need no
repentance.
8 “Or what woman, having ten silver coins, if she
loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the
house, and seek diligently till she finds it?
2362

LUKE

“And having found it, she calls friends and
neighbours together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I
have found the coin which I lost!’
10 “I say to you, in the same way there is joy in the
presence of the messengers of Elohim over one sinner
repenting.”
11 And He said, “A certain man had two sons,
12 and the younger of them said to his father, ‘Father,
give me the portion of goods put forth.’ And he divided
his livelihood between them.
13 “And not many days after, the younger son, having
gathered all together, went away to a distant country,
and there wasted his goods with loose living.
14 “And when he had spent all, there arose a severe
scarcity of food throughout that land, and he began to
be in need.
15 “And he went and joined himself to one of the
citizens of that country, and he sent him to his fields to
feed pigs.
16 “And he was longing to fill his stomach with the
pods which the pigs were eating, and no one gave to
him.
17 “But having come to himself, he said, ‘How many of
my father’s hired servants have bread enough and to
spare, and I am perishing with hunger!
18 ‘Having risen, I shall go to my father and say to him,
“Father, I have sinned against the shamayim, and
before you,
19 and I am no longer worthy to be called your son.
Make me like one of your hired servants.” ’
20 “And having risen, he went to his father. And while
he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was
moved with compassion, and ran and fell on his neck
and kissed him.
21 “And the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned
against the shamayim, and before you, and I am no
longer worthy to be called your son.’
22 “But the father said to his servants, ‘Bring out the
9

2363

LUQAS

best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand
and sandals on his feet.
23 ‘And bring the fattened calf here and slaughter it,
and let us eat and rejoice,
24 because this son of mine was dead and is alive
again, and he was lost and is found.’ And they began
to rejoice.
25 “And his older son was in the field, and when he
came and approached the house, he heard music and
dancing.
26 “And having called one of the servants he asked
what this meant.
27 “And he said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and
your father has slaughtered the fattened calf because
he received him back in health.’
28 “And he was wroth and would not go in. So his
father came out and pleaded with him.
29 “And answering, he said to his father, ‘See, these
many years I have been serving you, and I have never
transgressed a command of yours, but to me you have
never given a young goat, so I could rejoice with my
friends.
30 ‘But when this son of yours came, who has
devoured your livelihood with whores, you slaughtered
the fattened calf for him.’
31 “Then he said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me
and all I have is yours.
32 ‘And we had to rejoice and be glad, for your brother
was dead and is alive, and was lost and is found.’ ”

16 And He also said to His talmidim, “There was a
certain rich man who had a manager and he was
accused to him as wasting his possessions.
2 “So having called him he said to him, ‘What is this I
hear about you? Give an account of your
management, for you are no longer able to be
manager.’
3 “And the manager said within himself, ‘What shall I
2364

LUKE

do? For my master is taking the managership away
from me. I am unable to dig, I am ashamed to beg.
4 ‘I know what I shall do, that, when I am removed
from the managership, they might receive me into their
houses.’
5 “And calling every one of his master’s debtors to
him, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my
master?’
6 “And he said, ‘A hundred measures of oil.’ And he
said to him, ‘Take your account, and sit down quickly
and write fifty.’
7 “Then to another he said, ‘And how much do you
owe?’ And he said, ‘A hundred measures of wheat.’
And he said to him, ‘Take your account, and write
eighty.’
8 “And the master praised the unrighteous manager
because he had acted shrewdly, because the sons of
this age are more shrewd in their generation than the
sons of light.
9 “And would I say to you, make friends for
yourselves by unrighteous wealth, that when you fail,
they shall receive you into everlasting dwellings?
10 “He who is trustworthy in what is least, is
trustworthy also in much. And he who is unrighteous in
what is least is unrighteous also in much.
11 “If, therefore, you have not been trustworthy in the
unrighteous wealth, who shall entrust to you the true?
12 “And if you have not been trust worthy in what is
another man’s, who shall give you what is your own?
13 “No servant is able to serve two masters, for either
he shall hate the one and love the other, or else he
shall cling to the one and despise the other. You are
not able to serve Elohim and wealth.”
14 And the Pharisees, who loved silver, also heard all
this, and were sneering at Him,
15 so He said to them, “You are those who declare
yourselves righteous before men, but Elohim knows
your hearts, because what is highly thought of among
2365

LUQAS

men is an abomination in the sight of Elohim.
16 “The Torah and the Neḇi’im are until Yoḥanan.
Since then the reign of Elohim is being announced,
and everyone is doing violence upon it.
17 “And it is easier for the shamayim and the earth to
pass away than for one tittle of the Torah to fall.
18 “Everyone divorcing his wife and marrying another
commits adultery. And everyone marrying her who is
divorced from her husband commits adultery.
19 “But there was a certain rich man who used to dress
in purple and fine linen and lived luxuriously every day.
20 “And there was a certain beggar named El’azar,
being covered with sores, who was placed at his gate,
21 and longing to be fed with the crumbs which fell
from the rich man’s table. Indeed, even the dogs came
and licked his sores.
22 “And it came to be that the beggar died, and was
carried by the messengers to the bosom of Aḇraham.
And the rich man also died and was buried.
23 “And while suffering tortures in the grave, having
lifted up his eyes, he saw Aḇraham far away, and
El’azar in his bosom.
24 “And crying out he said, ‘Father Aḇraham, have
compassion on me, and send El’azar to dip the tip of
his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am
suffering in this flame.’
25 “But Aḇraham said, ‘Son, remember that in your life
you received your good, and likewise El’azar the evil,
but now he is comforted and you are suffering.
26 ‘And besides all this, between us and you a great
chasm has been put, so that those who want to pass
from here to you are unable, nor do those from there
pass to us.’
27 “And he said, ‘Then I beg you, father, that you
would send him to my father’s house,
28 for I have five brothers, let him warn them, lest they
also come to this place of torture.’
29 “Aḇraham said to him, ‘They have Mosheh and the
2366

LUKE

Neḇi’im, let them hear them.’
30 “And he said, ‘No, father Aḇraham, but if someone
from the dead goes to them, they shall repent.’
31 “But he said to him, ‘If they do not hear Mosheh and
the Neḇi’im, neither would they be persuaded even if
one should rise from the dead.’ ”

17 And He said to the talmidim, “It is inevitable that
stumbling-blocks should come, but woe to him through
whom they come!
2 “It would be better for him if a millstone is put
around his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, than
that he should cause one of these little ones to
stumble.
3 “Take heed to yourselves. If your brother sins
against you, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
4 “And if he sins against you seven times in a day,
and seven times in a day comes back to you, saying,
‘I repent,’ you shall forgive him.”
5 And the emissaries said to the Aḏon, “Give us more
belief.”
6 And the Aḏon said, “If you have belief as a mustard
seed, you would say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be pulled
up by the roots and be planted in the sea,’ and it would
obey you.
7 “But who of you, having a servant ploughing or
shepherding, would say to him when he has come in
from the field, ‘Come immediately and sit down to eat’?
8 “But would he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare
somewhat for my supper, and gird yourself and serve
me while I eat and drink, and afterward you shall eat
and drink’?
9 “Would he thank that servant because he did what
he was commanded? I think not.
10 “So also you, when you have done all that you were
commanded, say, ‘We are unworthy servants, we have
done what was our duty to do.’ ”
11 And it came to be, as He went to Yerushalayim, that
2367

LUQAS

He passed through the midst of Shomeron and Galil.
12 And as He was entering into a certain village, He
was met by ten leprous men, who stood at a distance.
13 And they lifted up their voices, saying, “{fWHY,
Aḏonai, have compassion on us!”
14 And having seen, He said to them, “Go, show
yourselves to the kohenim.” And it came to be, that as
they were going, they were cleansed.
15 And one of them, when he saw that he was healed,
returned, praising Elohim with a loud voice,
16 and he fell down upon his face at His feet, giving
thanks to Him. And he was a Shomeronite.
17 And {fWHY answering, said, “Were there not ten
cleansed? But where are the nine?
18 “Was no one found to return to give praise to
Elohim, except this foreigner?”
19 And He said to him, “Rise, go your way. Your belief
has made you well.”
20 And having been asked by the Pharisees when the
reign of Elohim would come, He answered them and
said, “The reign of Elohim does not come with intent
watching,
21 nor shall they say, ‘Look here!’ or ‘Look there!’ For
look, the reign of Elohim is in your midst!”
22 And He said to the talmidim, “Days shall come
when you shall long to see one of the days of the Bĕn
of Aḏam, but you shall not see it.
23 And they shall say to you, ‘Look here!’ or ‘Look
there!’ Do not go after them, nor follow.
24 “For as the lightning that flashes out of one part
under the shamayim shines to the other part under the
shamayim, so also the Bĕn of Aḏam shall be in His
day.
25 “But first He has to suffer much and be rejected by
this generation.
26 “And as it came to be in the days of Noaḥ, so also
shall it be in the days of the Bĕn of Aḏam:
27 “They were eating, they were drinking, they were
2368

LUKE

marrying, they were given in marriage, until the day
that Noaḥ went into the ark, and the flood came and
destroyed them all.
28 “And likewise, as it came to be in the days of Lot:
They were eating, they were drinking, they were
buying, they were selling, they were planting, they
were building,
29 but on the day Lot went out of Seḏom it rained fire
and sulphur from the shamayim and destroyed all.
30 “It shall be the same in the day the Bĕn of Aḏam is
revealed.
31 “In that day, he who shall be on the house-top, and
his goods in the house, let him not come down to take
them away. And likewise the one who is in the field, let
him not turn back.
32 “Remember the wife of Lot.
33 “Whoever seeks to save his life shall lose it, and
whoever loses his life shall preserve it.
34 “I say to you, in that night there shall be two in one
bed, the one shall be taken and the other shall be left.
35 “Two shall be grinding together, the one shall be
taken and the other shall be left.
36 “Two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken and
the other shall be left.”
37 And they answering, said to Him, “Where, Aḏonai?”
And He said to them, “Where the body is, there also
the vultures shall be gathered together.”

18 And He spoke a parable to them, that they should
always pray and not lose heart,
2 saying, “In a certain city there was a certain judge,
not revering Elohim nor regarding man.
3 “And a widow was in that city, and she came to him,
saying, ‘Do right to me on my adversary.’
4 “And he would not for a while, but afterward he said
within himself, ‘Even if I do not revere Elohim nor
regard man,
5 yet because this widow troubles me I shall do right
2369

LUQAS

to her, lest by her continual coming she wears me out.’
”
6 And the Aḏon said, “Hear what the unrighteous
judge said.
7 “And shall Elohim not do right by all means to His
own chosen ones who are crying out day and night to
Him, and being patient over them?
8 “I say to you that He shall do right to them speedily.
But when the Bĕn of Aḏam comes, shall He find the
belief on the earth?”
9 And He also spoke this parable to some who relied
on themselves that they were righteous, and looking
down on others:
10 “Two men went up to the Miqdash to pray - the one
a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11 “The Pharisee stood and began to pray with himself
this way, ‘Elohim, I thank You that I am not like the rest
of men, swindlers, unrighteous, adulterers, or even as
this tax collector.
12 ‘I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all that I
possess.’
13 “But the tax collector standing at a distance would
not even raise his eyes to the shamayim, but was
beating his breast, saying, ‘Elohim, show favour unto
me, a sinner!’
14 “I say to you, this man went down to his house
declared right, rather than the other. For everyone who
is exalting himself shall be humbled, and he who is
humbling himself shall be exalted.”
15 And they also brought infants to Him to touch them,
but His talmidim seeing it, rebuked them.
16 But {fWHY called them to Him and said, “Let the
little children come to Me, and do not forbid them, for
of such is the reign of Elohim.
17 “Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the
reign of Elohim as a little child, shall certainly not enter
into it.”
18 And a certain ruler asked Him, saying, “Good
2370

LUKE

Teacher, what shall I do to inherit everlasting ḥai?”
19 So {fWHY said to him, “Why do you call Me good?
No one is good except One - Elohim.
20 “You know the Commands, ‘Do not commit
adultery,’ ‘Do not murder,’ ‘Do not steal,’ ‘Do not bear
false witness,’ ‘Respect your father and your mother.’
”
21 And he said, “All these I have watched over from
my youth.”
22 And hearing this, {fWHY said to him, “Yet one you
lack: Sell all that you have and distribute to the poor,
and you shall have treasure in the shamayim. And
come, follow Me.”
23 But when he heard this, he became intensely sad,
for he was extremely rich.
24 And when {fWHY saw that he became intensely
sad, He said, “How hard it is for those who have riches
to enter into the reign of Elohim!
25 “For it is easier for a camel to enter through a
needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into the reign
of Elohim.”
26 And those who heard it said, “And who is able to be
saved?”
27 And He said, “What is impossible with men is
possible with Elohim.”
28 And Kĕpha said, “See, we have left all and followed
You.”
29 And He said to them, “Truly, I say to you, there is
no one who has left house or parents or brothers or
wife or children, for the sake of the reign of Elohim,
30 who shall not receive many times more in this
present time, and in the age to come everlasting ḥai.”
31 And taking the twelve aside, He said to them, “See,
we are going up to Yerushalayim, and all that have
been written by the neḇi’im about the Bĕn of Aḏam
shall be accomplished.
32 “For He shall be delivered up to the gentiles and
shall be mocked and insulted and spat upon,
2371

LUQAS

and having flogged Him they shall kill Him. And on
the third day He shall rise again.”
34 But they understood none of this, and this word was
hidden from them, and they did not know what was
being said.
35 And it came to be, that as He was coming near
Yeriḥo, that a certain blind man was sitting by the way
begging.
36 And hearing a crowd passing by, he asked what it
meant.
37 And they reported to him that {fWHY of Natsareth
was passing by.
38 And he cried out, saying, “{fWHY, Bĕn of Dawiḏ,
have compassion on me!”
39 And those going before were rebuking him that he
should be silent, but he was crying out much more,
“Bĕn of Dawiḏ, have compassion on me!”
40 And {fWHY stopped and commanded him to be
brought to Him. And when he had come near, He
asked him,
41 saying, “What do you want Me to do for you?” And
he said, “Aḏonai, to receive my sight.”
42 And [vHWY said to him, “Receive your sight! Your
belief has saved you.”
43 And immediately he received his sight, and was
following Him, praising Elohim. And all the people,
seeing it, gave praise to Elohim.
33

19 And having entered, He was passing through
Yeriḥo.
2 And see, a man called Zakkai! And he was a chief
tax collector, and he was rich,
3 and he was seeking to see who [vHWY was, but
was unable because of the crowd, for he was small in
stature.
4 And having run ahead, he climbed up into a
sycamore tree to see Him, because He was about to
pass by.
2372

LUKE

And as [vHWY came to the place, He looked up and
saw him, and said to him, “Zakkai, hurry and come
down, for I have to stay at your house today.”
6 And he hurried and came down, and received Him,
rejoicing.
7 And seeing it, they all grumbled, saying, “He has
gone in to stay with a man who is a sinner.”
8 But Zakkai stood up and said to the Aḏon, “Look,
Aḏonai, I give half of my possessions to the poor. And
if I have taken whatever from anyone by false
accusation, I repay fourfold.”
9 And [vHWY said to him, “Today deliverance has
come to this house - since he also is a son of Aḇraham.
10 “For the Bĕn of Aḏam has come to seek and to save
what was lost.”
11 And as they were hearing this, He spoke another
parable, because He was near Yerushalayim and they
thought the reign of Elohim was about to be
manifested straightaway.
12 He therefore said, “A certain nobleman went to a
distant country to receive for himself a reign and to
return.
13 “And calling ten of his servants, He gave them ten
minas, and said to them, ‘Trade until I come.’
14 “But his subjects were hating him, and sent a
delegation after him, to say, ‘We do not want this one
to reign over us.’
15 “And it came to be, when he came back, having
received the reign, that he sent for these servants to
whom he had given the silver, in order to know what
each had gained by trading.
16 “And the first came, saying, ‘Master, your mina has
earned ten minas.’
17 “And he said to him, ‘Well done, good servant.
Because you were trustworthy in very little, have
authority over ten cities.’
18 “And the second came, saying, ‘Master, your mina
has earned five minas.’
5

2373

LUQAS

“And he said to him also, ‘And you - be over five
cities.’
20 “And another came, saying, ‘Master, here is your
mina, which I kept laid up in a handkerchief.
21 ‘For I was afraid of you, because you are a hard
man. You take up what you did not lay down, and reap
what you did not sow.’
22 “And he said to him, ‘Out of your own mouth I shall
judge you, you wicked servant. You knew that I was a
hard man, taking up what I did not lay down and
reaping what I did not sow.
23 ‘Why did you not put the silver in the bank, that
when I come I could have collected it with interest?’
24 “Then he said to those who stood by, ‘Take the
mina from him, and give it to him who possesses ten
minas.’
25 “But they said to him, ‘Master, he possesses ten
minas.’
26 ‘For I say to you, that to everyone who possesses
shall be given; and from him who does not possess,
even what he possesses shall be taken away from him.
27 ‘But those enemies of mine who did not want me to
reign over them, bring them here and slay them before
me.’ ”
28 And having said this, He went on ahead, going up
to Yerushalayim.
29 And it came to be, when He came near to Bĕyth
Phaḡi and Bĕyth Anyah, at the mountain of Olives, that
He sent two of His talmidim,
30 saying, “Go into the village opposite you, in which,
as you enter, you shall find a colt tied, on which no one
has ever sat. Loosen it and bring it here.
31 “And if anyone asks you, ‘Why do you loosen it?’
thus you shall say to him, ‘Because the Aḏon has need
of it.’ ”
32 And those who were sent went away and found it
as He had said to them.
33 And as they were loosing the colt, the owners of it
19

2374

LUKE

said to them, “Why do you loosen the colt?”
34 And they said, “The Aḏon needs it.”
35 So they brought it to [vHWY. And throwing their
garments on the colt, they put [vHWY on it.
36 And as He went, they were spreading their
garments on the way.
37 And as He was coming near, already at the descent
of the Mount of Olives, the entire crowd of the talmidim
began, to praise Elohim, rejoicing with a loud voice for
all the miracles they had seen,
38 saying, “ ‘Baruḵ is the Sovereign who is coming in
the Name of HWHY!’ Peace in the shamayim and
esteem in the highest!”
39 And some of the Pharisees from the crowd, said to
Him, “Teacher, rebuke Your talmidim.”
40 But He answering, said to them, “I say to you that if
these shall be silent, the stones would cry out.”
41 And as He came near, He saw the city and wept
over it,
42 saying, “If you only knew even today, these for your
peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes.
43 “Because days shall come upon you when your
enemies shall build a rampart around you, and
surround you and press you on all sides,
44 and dash you to the ground, and your children
within you. And they shall not leave in you one stone
upon another, because you did not know the time of
your visitation.”
45 And having entered into the Miqdash, He began to
drive out those selling and buying in it,
46 saying to them, “It has been written, ‘My House is a
house of prayer,’ but you have made it a ‘den of
robbers.’ ”
47 And He was teaching daily in the Miqdash. But the
chief kohenim, and the scribes, and the leaders of the
people were seeking to destroy Him,
48 but they did not find what they might do, for all the
people were hanging upon Him, listening.
2375

LUQAS

20 And it came to be, on one of those days, as He
was teaching the people in the Miqdash and bringing
the Good News, that the chief kohenim and the
scribes, together with the elders, came up
2 and spoke to Him, saying, “Say to us, by what
authority are You doing these? Or who is he who gave
You this authority?”
3 And He answering, said to them, “I shall ask you
one question too, and answer Me:
4 “The immersion of Yoḥanan - was it from the
shamayim or from men?”
5 And they debated among themselves, saying, “If
we say, ‘From the shamayim,’ He shall say, ‘Then why
did you not believe him?’
6 “But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people shall
stone us, for they are persuaded that Yoḥanan was a
naḇi.”
7 And they answered that they did not know from
where it was.
8 And [vHWY said to them, “Neither do I say to you
by what authority I do these.”
9 And He began to speak this parable to the people,
“A certain man planted a vineyard, and leased it to
farmers, and went away for a long time.
10 “And in due time he sent a servant to the farmers,
to give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the
farmers beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
11 “And again he sent another servant. And they beat
him too and maltreated him, and sent him away
empty-handed.
12 “And again he sent a third. And they wounded him
too and cast him out.
13 “And the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I
do? I shall send my son, the beloved. They might
respect him when they see him.’
14 “But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned
among themselves, saying, ‘This is the heir. Come, let
2376

LUKE

us kill him, so that the inheritance becomes ours.’
15 “And they cast him out of the vineyard and killed
him. What, then, shall the owner of the vineyard do to
them?
16 “He shall come and destroy those farmers and give
the vineyard to others.” And having heard, they said,
“Let it not be!”
17 But He looked at them and said, “What then is this
that has been written, ‘The stone which the builders
rejected has become the chief corner-stone’?
18 “Everyone who falls on that stone shall be broken,
but on whomever it falls, he shall be pulverised.”
19 And the chief kohenim and the scribes sought to lay
hands on Him in the same hour, but they feared the
people, for they knew that He had spoken this parable
against them.
20 And keeping a close watch, they sent spies who
pretended to be righteous, to catch Him in a word, in
order to deliver Him to the rule and to the authority of
the governor.
21 So they asked Him, saying, “Teacher, we know that
You say and teach rightly, and You are not partial to
any, but teach the Way of Elohim truly.
22 “Is it right for us to pay taxes to Kaisar or not?”
23 But perceiving their craftiness, He said to them,
“Why do you try Me?
24 “Show Me a silver piece. Whose likeness and
inscription does it have?” And they answering, said,
“Kaisar’s.”
25 And He said to them, “Then give to Kaisar what is
Kaisar’s, and to Elohim what is Elohim’s.”
26 And they were unable to catch Him in a saying in
the presence of the people, and marvelling at His
answer, they were silent.
27 And some of the Sadducees, who deny that there
is a resurrection, came to Him and asked Him,
28 saying, “Teacher, Mosheh wrote to us that if a
man’s brother dies, having a wife, and he dies
2377

LUQAS

childless, his brother should take his wife and raise up
offspring for his brother.
29 “Now, there were seven brothers, and the first took
a wife, and died childless.
30 “And the second took her as wife, and he died
childless.
31 “And the third took her, and in the same way the
seven also. And they left no children, and died.
32 “And last of all the woman died too.
33 “At the resurrection, then, whose wife does she
become? For the seven had her as wife.”
34 And [vHWY answering, said to them, “The sons of
this age marry and are given in marriage,
35 but those who are counted worthy of attaining that
age, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are they given in marriage,
36 for neither is it possible for them to die any more,
because they are like messengers and are sons of
Elohim, being sons of the resurrection.
37 “But that the dead are raised, even Mosheh
showed at the bush when he called HWHY ‘the Elohim
of Aḇraham, and the Elohim of Yitsḥaq, and the Elohim
of Ya’aqoḇ.’
38 “Now He is not the Elohim of the dead, but of the
living, for all live to Him.”
39 And some of the scribes answering, said, “Teacher,
You have spoken well.”
40 And they dared not question Him anymore.
41 And He said to them, “How do they say that
ha’Mashiaḥ is the Bĕn of Dawiḏ?
42 “For Dawiḏ himself said in the Book of Tehillim,
‘HWHY said to Aḏoni, “sit at My right hand,
43 until I make Your enemies a footstool of Your feet.”
’
44 “Dawiḏ then calls Him ‘Aḏoni,’ how is He then his
Bĕn?”
45 And in the hearing of all the people, He said to His
talmidim,
2378

LUKE

“Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long
robes, and love greetings in the market-places, and
the best seats in the congregations, and the best
places at feasts,
47 who devour widows’ houses, and for a show make
long prayers. They shall receive greater judgment.”
46

21 And looking up He saw the rich putting their gifts
into the treasury,
2 and He saw a certain poor widow putting in two
small coins.
3 And He said, “Truly I say to you that this poor widow
has put in more than all.
4 “For all these out of their excess have put in
offerings for Elohim, but she out of her poverty has put
in all that she had to live on.”
5 And as some were speaking about the Miqdash,
that it was adorned with pleasant stones and gifts, He
said,
6 “These that you see - the days are coming in which
not one stone shall be left upon another that shall not
be thrown down.”
7 And they asked Him, saying, “Teacher, but when
shall this be? And what is the sign when this is about
to take place?”
8 And He said, “See that you are not led astray, for
many shall come in My Name, saying, ‘I am,’ and, ‘The
time is near.’ Then do not go after them.
9 “But when you hear of fightings and unrests, do not
be alarmed, for these have to take place first, but the
end is not immediately.”
10 Then He said to them, “Nation shall rise against
nation, and reign against reign.
11 “And there shall be great earthquakes in various
places, and scarcities of food and deadly diseases.
And there shall be terrors, and great signs from the
shamayim and there shall be great tempests.
12 “But before all this, they shall lay their hands on you
2379

LUQAS

and persecute you, delivering you up to the
congregations and prisons, and be brought before
sovereigns and rulers for My Name’s sake.
13 “And it shall turn out to you for a witness.
14 “Therefore, resolve in your hearts not to
premeditate on what to answer.
15 “For I shall give you a mouth and wisdom which all
your adversaries shall not be able to refute or resist.
16 “And you shall also be betrayed by parents and
brothers and relatives and friends. And some of you
shall be put to death.
17 “And you shall be hated by all because of My
Name.
18 “But not a hair of your head shall be lost at all.
19 “Possess your lives by your endurance!
20 “And when you see Yerushalayim surrounded by
armies, then know that its laying waste is near.
21 “Then let those in Yahuḏah flee to the mountains,
and let those who are in the midst of her go out, and
let not those who are in the fields enter her.
22 “Because these are days of vengeance, to fill all
that have been written.
23 “And woe to those who are pregnant and to those
who are nursing children in those days! For there shall
be great distress in the earth and wrath upon this
people.
24 “And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and
be led away captive into all nations. And Yerushalayim
shall be trampled underfoot by the gentiles until the
times of the gentiles are filled.
25 “And there shall be signs in the sun, and moon, and
stars, and on the earth anxiety of nations, in
bewilderment at the roaring of the sea, and agitation,
26 men fainting from fear and the expectation of what
is coming on the earth, for the powers of the shamayim
shall be shaken.
27 “And then they shall see the Bĕn of Aḏam coming
in a cloud with power and much esteem.
2380

LUKE

“And when these begin to take place, look up and
lift up your heads, because your redemption draws
near.”
29 And He spoke a parable to them, “Look at the fig
tree, and all the trees.
30 “When they have already budded, observing it, you
shall know for yourselves that summer is now near.
31 “So you also, when you see these take place, know
that the reign of Elohim is near.
32 “Truly, I say to you, this generation shall by no
means pass away till all shall have taken place.
33 “The shamayim and the earth shall pass away, but
My Words shall by no means pass away.
34 “And take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts be
weighed down by gluttony, and drunkenness, and
worries of this life, and that day come on you suddenly.
35 “For it shall come as a snare on all those dwelling
on the face of all the earth.
36 “Watch then at all times, and pray that you be
counted worthy to escape all this about to take place,
and to stand before the Bĕn of Aḏam.”
37 And He was teaching in the Miqdash by day, but at
night He went out and stayed on the mountain of
Olives,
38 and early in the morning all the people came to Him
in the Miqdash to hear Him.
28

22 And the Festival of Matstsoth drew near, which is
called Pesaḥ.
2 And the chief kohenim and the scribes were
seeking how to kill Him, for they feared the people.
3 And Satan entered into Yahuḏah, who was called
of Qeriyoth, who was numbered among the twelve.
4 And he went and spoke with the chief kohenim and
captains, how he might deliver Him up to them.
5 And they were glad, and agreed to give him silver.
6 And he promised, and was seeking an occasion to
deliver Him up to them, away from the crowd.
2381

LUQAS

And the Day of Matstsoth came when the Pesaḥ
had to be slaughtered.
8 And He sent Kĕpha and Yoḥanan, saying, “Go and
prepare the Pesaḥ for us to eat.”
9 And they said to Him, “Where do You want us to
prepare?”
10 And He said to them, “See, as you enter into the
city, a man shall meet you carrying a jar of water.
Follow him into the house he enters.
11 “And you shall say to the master of the house, ‘The
Teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where
I might eat the Pesaḥ with My talmidim?” ’
12 “And he shall show you a large, furnished upper
room. Prepare it there.”
13 And going they found it as He had said to them, and
they prepared the Pesaḥ.
14 And when the hour had come, He sat down, and
the twelve emissaries with Him.
15 And He said to them, “With desire I have desired to
eat this Pesaḥ with you before My suffering,
16 for I say to you, I shall certainly not eat of it again
until it is filled in the reign of Elohim.”
17 And taking the cup, giving thanks, He said, “Take
this and divide it among yourselves,
18 for I say to you, I shall certainly not drink of the fruit
of the vine until the reign of Elohim comes.”
19 And taking bread, giving thanks, He broke it and
gave it to them, saying, “This is My body which is given
for you, do this in remembrance of Me.”
20 Likewise the cup also, after supper, saying, “This
cup is the Renewed Covenant in My blood which is
shed for you.
21 “But see, the hand of him delivering Me up is with
Me on the table.
22 “For indeed the Bĕn of Aḏam goes as it has been
decreed, but woe to that man by whom He is delivered
up!”
23 And they began to ask among themselves, which
7

2382

LUKE

of them it could be who was about to do this.
24 And there also took place a dispute among them,
as to which of them seemed to be greater.
25 And He said to them, “The sovereigns of the
gentiles rule over them, and those who control them
are called ‘workers of good.’
26 “But not so with you, but let him who is greatest
among you be as the youngest, and the leader as one
who serves.
27 “For who is greater, the one who sits at the table,
or the one who serves? Is it not the one who sits at the
table? But I am in your midst as the One who serves.
28 “But you are those who have remained with Me in
My trials.
29 “And I covenant for you, as My Father covenanted
for Me, a reign,
30 to eat and drink at My table, in My reign, and to sit
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Yisra’ĕl.”
31 And the Aḏon said, “Shim’on, Shim’on! See, Satan
has asked for you to sift as wheat.
32 “But I have prayed for you, that your belief should
not fail. And when you have turned, strengthen your
brothers.”
33 And he said to Him, “Aḏonai, I am prepared to go
with You, both to prison and to death.”
34 And He said, “I say to you, Kĕpha, the cock shall
not crow at all today until you have denied three times
that you know Me.”
35 And He said to them, “When I sent you without
purse and bag and sandals, did you lack any?” And
they said, “None at all.”
36 And He said to them, “But now, let him who has a
purse take it, likewise also a bag. And let him who has
no sword sell his garment and buy one.
37 “For I say to you that what has been written has yet
to be accomplished in Me, ‘And He was reckoned with
lawless ones.’ For that which refers to Me has an end
too.”
2383

LUQAS

And they said, “Aḏonai, look, here are two swords.”
But He said to them, “That is enough.”
39 And coming out, He went to the Mount of Olives,
according to usage, and His talmidim also followed
Him.
40 And coming to the place, He said to them, “Pray
that you do not enter into trial.”
41 And He withdrew from them about a stone’s throw,
and falling on His knees He was praying,
42 saying, “Father, if it be Your counsel, remove this
cup from Me. Yet not My desire, but let Yours be done.”
43 And there appeared a messenger from shamayim
to Him, strengthening Him.
44 And being in agony, He was praying more
earnestly. And His sweat became like great drops of
blood falling down to the ground.
45 And rising up from prayer, and coming to His
talmidim, He found them sleeping from grief.
46 And He said to them, “Why do you sleep? Rise and
pray, lest you enter into trial.”
47 And while He was still speaking, see: a crowd! And
he who was called Yahuḏah, one of the twelve, was
going before them and came near to [vHWY to kiss
Him.
48 And [vHWY said to him, “Yahuḏah, do you deliver
up the Bĕn of Aḏam with a kiss?”
49 And those around Him, seeing what was about to
take place, said to Him, “Aḏonai, shall we strike with
the sword?”
50 And one of them struck the servant of the kohĕn
ha’gadol and cut off his right ear.
51 But [vHWY answering, said, “Allow it this far.” And
touching his ear He healed him.
52 And [vHWY said to those who had come against
Him, the chief kohenim and captains of the Miqdash
and the elders, “Have you come out as against a
robber, with swords and clubs?
53 “While I was with you daily in the Miqdash, you did
38

2384

LUKE

not lay hands on Me. But this is your hour and the
authority of darkness.”
54 And having seized Him, they led Him and brought
Him to the house of the kohĕn ha’gadol. And Kĕpha
was following at a distance.
55 And when they had lit a fire in the midst of the
courtyard, and sat down together, Kĕpha sat among
them.
56 And a certain servant girl, seeing him as he sat by
the fire, looked intently at him and said, “And this one
was with Him.”
57 But he denied Him, saying, “Woman, I do not know
Him.”
58 And after a little while another saw him and said,
“You are one of them too.” But Kĕpha said, “Man, I am
not!”
59 And about an hour later, another insisted, saying,
“Truly, this one was with Him too, for he is a Galilean
too.”
60 But Kĕpha said, “Man, I do not know what you are
saying!” And immediately, while he was still speaking,
a cock crowed.
61 And the Aḏon turned and looked at Kĕpha, and
Kĕpha remembered the word of the Aḏon, how He had
said to him, “Before a cock crows, you shall deny Me
three times.”
62 And Kĕpha went out and wept bitterly.
63 And the men who were holding [vHWY were
mocking Him, beating Him.
64 And having blindfolded Him, they were striking Him
on the face and were asking Him, saying, “Naḇa! Who
is it that struck You?”
65 And they said to Him much more, blaspheming.
66 And when it became day, the elders of the people,
both chief kohenim and scribes, came together and
they led Him into their council, saying,
67 “If You are ha’Mashiaḥ, say it to us.” And He said
to them, “If I say to you, you would not believe it at all,
2385

LUQAS

and if I asked you, you would not answer Me at all.
69 “From now on the Bĕn of Aḏam shall sit on the right
hand of the Almighty HWHY.”
70 And they all said, “You then, are the Bĕn of HWHY?”
And He said to them, “You say that I am.”
71 And they said, “Why do we need further witness?
For we heard it ourselves from His mouth.”
68

23 And the entire assembly of them, having risen up,
led Him to Pilatus,
2 and began to accuse Him, saying, “We found this
one corrupting the nation, and forbidding to pay taxes
to Kaisar, saying that He Himself is Mashiaḥ, a
Sovereign.”
3 And Pilatus asked Him, saying, “You are the
Sovereign of the Yahuḏim?” And answering him He
said, “You say it.”
4 And Pilatus said to the chief kohenim and the
crowd, “I find no guilt in this Man.”
5 But they were insisting, saying, “He stirs up the
people, teaching through all Yahuḏah, beginning from
Galil unto this place.”
6 And when Pilatus heard of Galil, he asked if the
Man was a Galilean.
7 And when he learned that He was under the
authority of Hĕrodĕs, he sent Him to Hĕrodĕs, who
was also in Yerushalayim in those days.
8 And seeing [vHWY, Hĕrodĕs rejoiced greatly, for a
long time he had wanted to see Him, because he had
heard much about Him, and was anticipating to see
some miracle done by Him,
9 and was questioning Him with many words, but He
gave him no answer.
10 And the chief kohenim and the scribes stood,
accusing Him intensely.
11 And Hĕrodĕs, with his soldiers, made light of Him
and mocked Him, dressing Him in a bright robe, and
sent Him back to Pilatus.
2386

LUKE

And on that day Pilatus and Hĕrodĕs became
friends with each other, for before that they had been
at enmity with each other.
13 And Pilatus, having called together the chief
kohenim and the rulers and the people,
14 said to them, “You brought this Man to me, as one
who turns away the people. And look, I have examined
Him in your presence and have found no guilt in this
Man regarding the charges which you make against
Him,
15 and neither did Hĕrodĕs, for I sent you back to him.
And look, He has done naught deserving death.
16 “Having disciplined Him, then, I shall release” 17 for he had to release one to them at the Festival.
18 And they cried out, all together, saying, “Away with
this One, and release to us Barabba” 19 who had been thrown into prison for a certain
uprising made in the city, and for murder.
20 Wishing to release [vHWY, then, Pilatus appealed
to them again.
21 But they were calling out, saying, “Impale! Impale
Him!”
22 And he said to them the third time, “Why, what evil
has He done? I have found no reason for death in Him.
Having disciplined Him then, I shall release.”
23 But with loud voices they insisted, asking for Him to
be impaled. And the voices of these men and of the
chief kohenim were prevailing.
24 And Pilatus pronounced sentence that what they
asked should be done.
25 And he released the one they asked for, who for
uprising and murder had been thrown into prison, but
he handed [vHWY over to their wants.
26 And as they led Him away, they laid hold of a
certain man, Shim’on a Kurĕnaion, who was coming
from the field, and they put the stake on him, to bear it
behind [vHWY.
27 And a great number of the people were following
12

2387

LUQAS

Him, and women who also were mourning and
lamenting Him.
28 But [vHWY, turning to them, said, “Daughters of
Yerushalayim, do not weep for Me, but weep for
yourselves and for your children.
29 “For look, days are coming in which they shall say,
‘Baruḵ are the barren, and wombs that never bore, and
the breasts which never nursed!’
30 “Then they shall begin to say to the mountains, “Fall
on us!” and to the hills, “Cover us!” ’
31 “Because if they do this to the green tree, what is
going to be done to the dry?”
32 And two others also, evil-doers, were led with Him
to be put to death.
33 And when they had come to the place called
Golgotha, they impaled Him there, and the evil-doers,
one on the right and the other on the left.
34 And [vHWY said, “Father, forgive them, for they do
not know what they do.” And they divided His garments
and cast lots.
35 And the people were standing, looking on, and the
rulers also were sneering with them, saying, “He saved
others, let Him save Himself if He is ha’Mashiaḥ, the
chosen of Elohim.”
36 And the soldiers were mocking Him too, coming
and offering Him vinegar,
37 and saying, “If You are the Sovereign of the
Yahuḏim, save Yourself.”
38 And there was also an inscription written over Him
in letters of Yawanite, and Roman, and lḇri: THIS IS
THE SOVEREIGN OF THE YAHUḎIM.
39 And one of the evil-doers who were hanged, was
speaking evil of Him, saying, “If You are ha’Mashiaḥ,
save Yourself and us.”
40 But the other, responding, rebuked him, saying,
“Do you not even fear Elohim, since you are under the
same judgment?
41 “And we, indeed, rightly so, for we receive the due
2388

LUKE

reward of our deeds, but this One has done no wrong.”
42 And he said to [vHWY, “Aḏonai, remember me
when You come into Your reign.”
43 And [vHWY said to him, “Truly, I say to you today,
you shall be with Me in Paradise.”
44 And it was now about the sixth hour, and darkness
came over all the land, until the ninth hour.
45 And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the
Mishkan was torn in two.
46 And crying out with a loud voice, [vHWY said,
“Father, into Your hands I commit My spirit.” And
having said this, He breathed His last.
47 And the captain, seeing what took place, praised
Elohim, saying, “Truly, this Man was righteous!”
48 And when all the crowds who had gathered to that
sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and
went away.
49 And all those who knew Him, and the women who
followed Him from Galil, stood at a distance, watching
this.
50 And see, a man named Yosĕph, a council member,
a good and righteous man 51 he was not agreeing with their counsel and deed from Ramathayim, a city of the Yahuḏim, who himself
was also wailing for the reign of Elohim,
52 he, going to Pilatus, asked for the body of [vHWY.
53 And taking it down, he wrapped it in linen, and laid
it in a tomb hewn out of the rock, where no one was
yet laid.
54 And it was Preparation day, and the Sabbath was
approaching.
55 And the women who had come with Him from Galil
followed after, and saw the tomb and how His body
was laid.
56 And having returned, they prepared spices and
perfumes. And they rested on the Shabbath according
to the Command.
2389

LUQAS

24 And on one of the shabbathoth, at early dawn,
they came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they
had prepared,
2 and they found the stone rolled away from the
tomb.
3 And having entered, they did not find the body of
the Aḏon [vHWY.
4 And it came to be, as they were perplexed about
this, that see, two men stood by them in glittering
garments.
5 And becoming frightened and bowing their faces to
the earth, these said to them, “Why do you seek the
living among the dead?
6 “He is not here, but has been raised up! Remember
how He spoke to you when He was still in Galil,
7 saying, ‘The Bĕn of Aḏam has to be delivered into
the hands of sinners, and be impaled, and the third day
rise again.’ ”
8 And they remembered His words.
9 And having returned from the tomb they reported
all this to the eleven and to all the rest.
10 And it was Miryam from Maḡdala, and Yoḥanah,
and Miryam of Ya’aqoḇ, and the rest with them, who
told this to the emissaries.
11 And their words appeared to them to be nonsense,
and they did not believe them.
12 But Kĕpha arose and ran to the tomb. And stooping
down, he saw the linen wrappings lying by themselves.
And he went away home, marvelling at what took
place.
13 And see, two of them were going that same day to
a village called Amma’us, which was sixty stadios from
Yerushalayim.
14 And they were talking to each other of all this which
had taken place.
15 And it came to be, as they were talking and
reasoning, that [vHWY Himself drew near and went
2390

LUKE

with them.
16 But their eyes were restrained, so that they did not
know Him.
17 And He said to them, “What are these words you
are exchanging with each other as you are walking and you are sad?”
18 And the one whose name was Qleophas
answering, said to Him, “Are You the lone visitor in
Yerushalayim who does not know what took place in it
these days?”
19 And He said to them, “What?” And they said to Him,
“Concerning [vHWY of Natsareth, who was a naḇi
mighty in deed and word before Elohim and all the
people,
20 and how the chief kohenim and our rulers delivered
Him to be condemned to death, and impaled Him.
21 “We, however, were expecting that it was He who
was going to redeem Yisra’ĕl. But besides all this,
today is the third day since these took place.
22 “But certain women of ours, who arrived at the tomb
early, also astonished us,
23 when they did not find His body, they came saying
that they had also seen a vision of messengers who
said He was alive.
24 “And some of those with us went to the tomb and
found it, as also the women had said, but they did not
see Him.”
25 And He said to them, “O thoughtless ones, and
slow of heart to believe in all that the neḇi’im have
spoken!
26 “Was it not necessary for ha’Mashiaḥ to suffer
these and to enter into His esteem?”
27 And beginning at Mosheh and all the Neḇi’im, He
was explaining to them in all the Scriptures that
concerning Himself.
28 And they approached the village where they were
going, and He seemed to be going on.
29 But they urged Him strongly, saying, “Stay with us,
2391

LUQAS

for it is toward evening, and the day has declined.” And
He went in to stay with them.
30 And it came to be, when He sat at the table with
them, having taken the bread, He baraḵ, and having
broken, He was giving it to them.
31 And their eyes were opened and they recognised
Him. And He disappeared from their sight.
32 And they said to each other, “Was not our heart
burning within us as He was speaking to us on the way,
and as He was opening the Scriptures to us?”
33 And rising up that same hour they returned to
Yerushalayim, and found the eleven and those who
were with them gathered together,
34 saying, “The Aḏon was truly raised, and has
appeared to Shim’on!”
35 And they related this on the way, and how He was
recognised by them in the breaking of the bread.
36 And as they were saying this, [vHWY Himself stood
in the midst of them, and said to them, “Peace to you.”
37 And being startled and frightened, they thought
they had seen a spirit.
38 And He said to them, “Why are you troubled? And
why do doubts arise in your hearts?
39 “See My hands and My feet, that it is I Myself.
Handle Me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and
bones as you see I have.”
40 And saying this, He showed them His hands and
His feet.
41 And while they were still not believing for joy, and
marvelling, He said to them, “Have you any food
here?”
42 And they gave Him a piece of a broiled fish and
some honeycomb.
43 And taking it He ate in their presence.
44 And He said to them, “These are the words which I
spoke to you while I was still with you, that all have to
be filled that were written in the Torah of Mosheh and
the Neḇi’im and the Tehillim concerning Me.”
2392

LUKE

Then He opened their minds to understand the
Scriptures,
46 and said to them, “Thus it has been written, and so
it was necessary for ha’Mashiaḥ to suffer and to rise
again from the dead the third day,
47 and that repentance and forgiveness of sins should
be proclaimed in His Name to all nations, beginning at
Yerushalayim.
48 “And you are witnesses of these.
49 “And see, I am sending the Promise of My Father
upon you, but you are to remain in the city of
Yerushalayim until you are clothed with power from on
high.”
50 And He led them out as far as Bĕyth Anyah, and
lifting up His hands He baraḵ them.
51 And it came to be, while He baraḵ them, that He
was parted from them and was taken up into the
shamayim.
52 And they, having bowed down to Him, returned to
Yerushalayim with great joy,
53 and were continually in the Miqdash praising and
beraḵah Elohim. Amĕn.
45

2393

JOHN

YOḤANAN
‫!! יהוחנן‬XWhY

1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with Elohim, and the Word was Elohim.
2 He was in the beginning with Elohim.
3 All came to be through Him, and without Him not
even one came to be that came to be.
4 In Him was Ḥai, and the Ḥai was the Light of men.
5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the
darkness has not overcome it.
6 There was a man sent from Elohim, whose name
was Yoḥanan.
7 This one came for a witness, to bear witness of the
Light, that all might believe through him.
8 He was not that Light, but that he might bear
witness of that Light.
9 He was the true Light, which enlightens every man,
coming into the world.
10 He was in the world, and the world came to be
through Him, and the world did not know Him.
11 He came to His own, and His own did not receive
Him.
12 But as many as received Him, to them He gave the
authority to become children of Elohim, to those
believing in His Name,
13 who were born, not of blood nor of the desire of
flesh nor of the desire of man, but of Elohim.
14 And the Word became flesh and pitched His tent
among us, and we saw His esteem, esteem as of an
only brought-forth of a father, complete in favour and
truth.
15 Yoḥanan bore witness of Him and cried out, saying,
“This was He of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me
2394

YOḤANAN

has become before me, because He was before me.’
”
16 And out of His completeness we all received, and
favour upon favour,
17 for the Torah was given through Mosheh - the
favour and the truth came through [vWHY Mashiaḥ.
18 No one has ever seen HWHY. The only brought-forth
Bĕn, who is in the bosom of the Father, He declared.
19 Now this was the witness of Yoḥanan when the
Yahuḏim sent from Yerushalayim kohenim and
Lĕwites to ask him, “Who are you?”
20 And he confessed, and did not deny, but
confessed, “I am not ha’Mashiaḥ.”
21 And they asked him, “Who then, are you Ĕliyahu?”
So he said, “I am not.” “Are you the Naḇi?” And he
answered, “No.”
22 Therefore they said to him, “Who are you, so that
we give an answer to those who sent us? What do you
say about yourself?”
23 He said, “I am a voice of one crying in the
wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of HWHY,’ as the
naḇi Yeshayahu said.”
24 And those sent were of the Pharisees,
25 and they asked him, saying, “Why then do you
immerse if you are not ha’Mashiaḥ, nor Ĕliyahu, nor
the Naḇi?”
26 Yoḥanan answered them, saying, “I immerse in
water, but in your midst stands One whom you do not
know,
27 the One coming after me, who has become before
me, whose sandal strap l am not worthy to loosen.”
28 This took place in Bĕyth Aḇarah beyond the
Yardĕn, where Yoḥanan was immersing.

2395

JOHN

On the next day Yoḥanan saw [vWHY coming
toward him, and said, “See, the Lamb of HWHY who
takes away the sin of the world!
30 “This is He of whom I said, ‘After me comes a Man
who has become before me, for He was before me.’
31 “And l did not know Him, but that He might be
revealed to Yisra’ĕl, therefore I came immersing in
water.”
32 And Yoḥanan bore witness, saying, “I have seen
the Ruaḥ coming down from the shamayim like a dove
and remain on Him.
33 “And I did not know Him, but He who sent me to
immerse in water said to me, ‘Upon whom you see the
Ruaḥ coming down and remaining on Him, this is He
who immerses in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.’
34 “And I have seen and have witnessed that this is
the Bĕn of HWHY.”
35 Again the following day, Yoḥanan was standing
with two of his talmidim,
36 and looking at [vWHY walking, he said, “See the
Lamb of HWHY!”
37 And the two talmidim heard him speaking, and
they followed [vWHY.
38 And [vWHY turning, and seeing them following,
said to them, “What do you seek?” And they said to
Him, “Rabbi,” which translated means, Teacher,
“where are You staying?”
39 He said to them, “Come and see.” They went and
saw where He was staying, and remained with Him
that day. Now it was about the tenth hour.
40 Andri, the brother of Shim’on Kĕpha, was one of the
two who heard from Yoḥanan, and followed Him.
41 First he found his own brother Shim’on, and said to
him, “We have found ha’Mashiaḥ,” which interpreted
is, the Anointed.
29

2396

YOḤANAN

And he brought him to [vWHY. And looking at him,
[vWHY said, “You are Shim’on the son of Yonah, you
shall be called Kĕpha,” which translated is, a stone.
43 On the following day [vWHY wanted to go to Galil,
and He found Philippos and said to him, “Follow Me.”
44 And Philippos was from Bĕyth Tsaiḏa, the city of
Andri and Kĕpha.
45 Philippos found Nethan’ĕl and said to him, “We
have found Him whom Mosheh wrote of in the Torah,
and the Neḇi’im: [vWHY of Natsareth - the son of
Yosĕph.”
46 And Nethan’ĕl said to him, “Is it possible for any
good to come out of Natsareth?” Philippos said to him,
“Come and see.”
47 [vWHY saw Nethan’ĕl coming toward Him, and said
of him, “See, truly a Yisra’ĕlite, in whom is no deceit!”
48 Nethan’ĕl said to Him, “From where do You know
me?” [vWHY answered and said to him, “Before
Philippos called you, when you were under the fig tree,
I saw you.”
49 Nethan’ĕl answered and said to Him, “Rabbi, You
are the Bĕn of Elohim! You are the Sovereign of
Yisra’ĕl!”
50 [vWHY answered and said to him, “Because I said
to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree,’ do you believe?
Greater than that you shall see.”
51 And He said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, from
now on you shall see the shamayim opened, and the
messengers of Elohim ascending and descending
upon the Bĕn of Aḏam.”
42

2 And on the third day there was a wedding in Qanah

of Galil, and the mother of [vWHY was there.
2 And both [vWHY and His talmidim were invited to
the wedding.
2397

JOHN

And when they were short of wine, the mother of
[vWHY said to Him, “They have no wine.”
4 [vWHY said to her, “Woman, what is that to Me and
to you? My hour has not yet come.”
5 His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever He
says to you.”
6 And there were six stone water-jugs standing there,
according to the mode of cleansing of the Yahuḏim,
each holding two or three metrĕtĕs.
7 [vWHY said to them, “Fill the water-jugs with water.”
And they filled them up to the brim.
8 And He said to them, “Now draw out and take it to
the master of the feast.” So they took it.
9 But when the master of the feast had tasted the
water that had become wine, and did not know where
it came from - though the servants who had drawn the
water knew - the master of the feast called the
bridegroom,
10 and said to him, “Every man at the beginning puts
out the good wine, and when they have drunk, then
that which is poorer. You have kept the good wine until
now.”
11 This, the beginning of the signs, [vWHY did in
Qanah of Galil, and manifested His esteem. And His
talmidim believed in Him.
12 After this He went down to Kephar Naḥum, He and
His mother, and His brothers, and His talmidim. And
there they stayed not many days.
13 And the Pesaḥ of the Yahuḏim was near, and
[vWHY went up to Yerushalayim.
14 And He found in the Miqdash those selling oxen
and sheep and doves, and the moneychangers sitting.
15 And having made a whip of cords, He drove them
all out of the Miqdash, with the sheep and the oxen,
3

2398

YOḤANAN

and poured out the moneychangers’ coins and
overturned the tables.
16 And He said to those selling doves, “Take these
away! Do not make the house of My Father a house of
merchandise!”
17 And His talmidim remembered that it was written,
“The ardour for Your house has eaten Me up.”
18 And the Yahuḏim answered and said to Him, “What
sign do You show to us, since You are doing these?”
19 [vWHY answered and said to them, “Destroy this
Mishkan, and in three days I shall raise it.”
20 Then the Yahuḏim said, “It took forty-six years to
build this Mishkan, and You are going to raise it in
three days?”
21 But He spoke about the Mishkan of His body.
22 So, when He was raised from the dead, His
talmidim remembered that He said this to them. And
they believed the Scripture and the word which [vWHY
had said.
23 And when He was in Yerushalayim at the Pesaḥ, at
the Festival, many believed in His Name when they
saw the signs which He was doing.
24 But [vWHY was not entrusting Himself to them,
because He knew all men,
25 and had no need that anyone should witness of
man, for He knew what was in man.

3 And there was a man of the Pharisees, Naḵdimon
was his name, a ruler of the Yahuḏim.
2 This one came to [vWHY by night and said to Him,
“Rabbi, we know that You are a teacher come from
Elohim, for no one is able to do these signs You do if
Elohim is not with him.”

2399

JOHN

[vWHY answered and said to him, “Truly, truly, I say
to you, unless one is born from above, he is unable to
see the reign of Elohim.”
4 Naḵdimon said to Him, “How is a man able to be
born when he is old? Is he able to enter into his
mother’s womb a second time and be born?”
5 [vWHY answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless
one is born of water and the Ruaḥ, he is unable to
enter into the reign of Elohim.
6 “That which has been born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which has been born of the Ruaḥ is spirit.
7 “Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You have to be
born from above.’
8 “The Ruaḥ breathes where it wants, and you hear
the sound of it, but do not know where it comes from
and where it goes. So is everyone who has been born
of the Ruaḥ.”
9 Naḵdimon answered and said to Him, “How is it
possible for this to take place?”
10 [vWHY answered and said to him, “Are you the
teacher of Yisra’ĕl, and do not know this?
11 “Truly, truly, I say to you, We speak what We know
and witness what We have seen, and you do not
receive Our witness.
12 “If you do not believe when I spoke to you about
earthly, how are you going to believe when I speak to
you about that of the shamayim?
13 “And no one has gone up into the shamayim except
He who came down from the shamayim - the Bĕn of
Aḏam.
14 “And as Mosheh lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so the Bĕn of Aḏam has to be lifted
up,
15 so that whoever is believing in Him should not
perish but possess everlasting ḥai.
3

2400

YOḤANAN

“For Elohim so loved the world that He gave His
only brought-forth Bĕn, so that everyone who believes
in Him should not perish but possess everlasting ḥai.
17 “For Elohim did not send His Bĕn into the world to
judge the world, but that the world through Him might
be saved.
18 “He who believes in Him is not judged, but he who
does not believe is judged already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only brought-forth Bĕn of
Elohim.
19 “And this is the judgment, that the Light has come
into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than
the Light, for their works were wicked.
20 “For everyone who is practising evil hates the Light
and does not come to the Light, lest his works should
be exposed.
21 “But the one doing the truth comes to the Light, so
that his works are clearly seen, that they have been
wrought in Elohim.”
22 After this, [vWHY and His talmidim came into the
land of Yahuḏah, and He remained there with them,
and was immersing.
23 And Yoḥanan was also immersing in Ayin near
Salem, because there was plenty of water there. And
they were coming and were being immersed,
24 for Yoḥanan had not yet been put into prison.
25 Then a dispute arose between some of Yoḥanan’s
talmidim and the Yahuḏim about cleansing,
26 and they came to Yoḥanan and said to him, “Rabbi,
He who was with you beyond the Yardĕn, to whom you
have witnessed, see, He is immersing, and all are
coming to Him!”
27 Yoḥanan answered and said, “A man is able to
receive naught unless it is given to him from the
shamayim.
16

2401

JOHN

“You yourselves are witnesses for me that I said, ‘I
am not ha’Mashiaḥ but I am sent ahead of Him.’
29 “He that has the bride is the bridegroom, but the
friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly because of the voice of the
bridegroom. So this joy of mine is complete.
30 “It is right for Him to increase, but me to decrease.
31 “He who comes from above is over all, he who is
from the earth is of the earth and speaks of the earth.
He who comes from the shamayim is over all.
32 “And what He has seen and heard, that He
witnesses. And no one receives His witness.
33 “He who receives His witness has put his seal that
Elohim is true.
34 “For He whom Elohim has sent speaks the Words
of Elohim, for Elohim goes not give the Ruaḥ by
measure.
35 “The Father loves the Bĕn, and has given all into
His hand.
36 “He who believes in the Bĕn possesses everlasting
ḥai, but he who does not obey the Bĕn shall not see
ḥai, but the wrath of Elohim remains on him.”
28

4 So when the Aḏon knew that the Pharisees had
heard that [vWHY made and immersed more talmidim
than Yoḥanan 2 although [vWHY Himself did not immerse, but His
talmidim 3 He left Yahuḏah and went away again to Galil.
4 And He had to pass through Shomeron.
5 So He came to a city of Shomeron, called Sheḵem,
near the piece of land Ya’aqoḇ gave to his son Yosĕph.
6 And Ya’aqoḇ’s fountain was there. So [vWHY,
being wearied from the journey, was sitting there at the
fountain. It was about the sixth hour.
2402

YOḤANAN

A woman of Shomeron came to draw water. [vWHY
said to her, “Give Me to drink.”
8 For His talmidim had gone off into the city to buy
food.
9 The woman of Shomeron therefore said to Him,
“How is it that You, being a Yahuḏi, ask a drink from
me, a woman of Shomeron?” For Yahuḏim do not
associate with Shomeronites.
10 [vWHY answered and said to her, “If you knew the
gift of Elohim, and who it is who says to you, ‘Give Me
to drink,’ you would have asked Him, and He would
have given you living water.”
11 The woman said to Him, “Aḏonai, You have no
vessel, and the well is deep. From where, then, do You
have living water?
12 “Are You greater than our father Ya’aqoḇ, who
gave us the well, and drank from it himself, and his
sons, and his stock?”
13 [vWHY answered and said to her, “Everyone
drinking of this water shall thirst again,
14 but whoever drinks of the water I give him shall
certainly never thirst. And the water that I give him shall
become in him a fountain of water springing up into
everlasting ḥai.”
15 The woman said to Him, “Aḏonai, give me this
water, so that I do not thirst, nor come here to draw.”
16 [vWHY said to her, “Go, call your husband, and
come here.”
17 The woman answered and said, “I have no
husband.” [vWHY said to her, “You have well said, ‘I
have no husband,’
18 for you have had five husbands, and the one whom
you now have is not your husband. What you have said
is true.”
7

2403

JOHN

The woman said to Him, “Aḏonai, I see that You are
a naḇi.
20 “Our fathers worshipped on this mountain, but you
say that in Yerushalayim is the place where one needs
to worship.”
21 [vWHY said to her, “Woman, believe Me, the hour
is coming when you shall neither on this mountain, nor
in Yerushalayim, worship the Father.
22 “You worship what you do not know. We worship
what we know, because the deliverance is of the
Yahuḏim.
23 “But the hour is coming, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth,
for the Father also seeks such to worship Him.
24 “Elohim is Ruaḥ, and those who worship Him need
to worship in spirit and truth.”
25 The woman said to Him, “I know that Mashiaḥ is
coming, the One who is called Anointed. When that
One comes, He shall announce to us all.”
26 [vWHY said to her, “I who am speaking to you am
He.”
27 And upon this His talmidim came, and they were
marvelling that He was speaking with a woman,
however, no one said, “What do You seek?” or, “Why
do You speak with her?”
28 The woman then left her water-jug, and went away
to the city, and said to the men,
29 “Come, see a Man who told me all that I have done.
Is this not ha’Mashiaḥ?”
30 They went out of the city and were coming to Him.
31 But in the meantime His talmidim were asking Him,
saying, “Rabbi, eat.”
32 And He said to them, “I have food to eat of which
you do not know.”
19

2404

YOḤANAN

Then the talmidim said to each other, “Did anyone
bring Him to eat?”
34 [vWHY said to them, “My food is to do the desire of
Him who sent Me, and to accomplish His work.
35 “Do you not say, ‘There are still four months, and
the harvest comes’? See, I say to you, lift up your eyes
and see the fields, for they are white for harvest already!
36 “He who is reaping receives a reward, and gathers
fruit for everlasting ḥai, so that both he who is sowing
and he who is reaping rejoice together.
37 “For in this the word is true, ‘One sows and another
reaps.’
38 “I sent you to reap that for which you have not
laboured. Others have laboured, and you have entered
into their labours.”
39 And many of the Shomeronites of that city believed
in Him because of the word of the woman who
witnessed, “He told me all that I have done.”
40 Therefore when the Shomeronites came to Him,
they were asking Him to stay with them, and He stayed
there two days.
41 And many more believed because of His word.
42 And they said to the woman, “We no longer believe
because of what you said, for we ourselves have
heard, and we know that this is truly ha’Mashiaḥ, the
Saviour of the world.”
43 And after the two days He left there and went to
Galil.
44 For [vWHY Himself witnessed that a naḇi is without
appreciation in his own country.
45 Therefore when He came to Galil, the Galileans
received Him, having seen all that He had done in
Yerushalayim at the Festival, for they also went to the
Festival.
33

2405

JOHN

Then [vWHY came again to Qanah of Galil where
He had made the water wine. And there was a certain
nobleman whose son was sick at Kephar Naḥum.
47 When he heard that [vWHY had come from
Yahuḏah into Galil, he went to Him and was asking
Him to come down and heal his son, for he was about
to die.
48 [vWHY then said to him, “If you do not see signs
and wonders, you do not believe at all.”
49 The nobleman said to Him, “Aḏonai, come down
before my child dies!”
50 [vWHY said to him, “Go, your son lives.” And the
man believed the word that [vWHY spoke to him, and
went.
51 And while he was going down, his servants met him
and reported, saying, “Your son lives!”
52 He then asked from them the hour in which he
became better, and they said to him, “Yesterday at the
seventh hour the inflammation left him.”
53 Then the father knew that it was at the same hour
in which [vWHY said to him, “Your son lives.” And he
himself believed, and all his household.
54 Again this was the second sign [vWHY did, when
He had come from Yahuḏah into Galil.
46

5 After this there was a Festival of the Yahuḏim, and
[vWHY went up to Yerushalayim.
2 And in Yerushalayim at the Sheep Gate there is a
pool, which is called in lḇri, Bĕyth Zatha, having five
porches.
3 In these were lying a great number of those who
were sick, blind, crippled, paralysed, waiting for the
stirring of the water.
4 For a messenger was going down at a certain time
into the pool and was stirring the water. Whoever
2406

YOḤANAN

stepped in first, then, after the stirring of the water,
became well of whatever disease he had.
5 And a certain man was there who had a sickness
thirty-eight years.
6 When [vWHY saw him lying there, and knowing that
he already had been a long time, He said to him, “Do
you want to become well?”
7 The sick man answered Him, “Aḏonai, I have no
man to put me into the pool when the water is stirred,
but while I am coming, another steps down before me.”
8 [vWHY said to him, “Rise, take up your bed and
walk.”
9 And immediately the man became well, and he took
up his bed and was walking. Now it was Shabbath on
that day.
10 The Yahuḏim therefore said to him who had been
healed, “It is the Shabbath, it is not right for you to take
up the bed.”
11 He answered them, “He who made me well said to
me, ‘Take up your bed and walk.’ ”
12 Therefore they asked him, “Who is the Man who
said to you, ‘Take up your bed and walk’?”
13 But the one who was healed did not know who it
was, for [vWHY had moved away, a crowd being in that
place.
14 Afterward [vWHY found him in the Miqdash, and
said to him, “See, you have been made well. Sin no
more, so that no worse befalls you.”
15 The man went away, and told the Yahuḏim that it
was [vWHY who made him well.
16 And because of this the Yahuḏim persecuted
[vWHY, and were seeking to kill Him, because He was
doing these on the Shabbath.
17 But [vWHY answered them, “My Father works until
now, and I work.”
2407

JOHN

Because of this, then, the Yahuḏim were seeking
all the more to kill Him, ‘because not only was He
breaking the Shabbath, but He also called Elohim His
own Father, making Himself equal with Elohim.’
19 Therefore [vWHY responded and said to them,
“Truly, truly, I say to you, the Bĕn is able to do naught
by Himself, but only that which He sees the Father
doing, because whatever He does, the Bĕn also does
likewise.
20 “For the Father loves the Bĕn, and shows Him all
that He Himself does. And greater works than these
He is going to show Him, in order that you marvel.
21 “For as the Father raises the dead and makes alive,
even so the Bĕn makes alive whom He wants.
22 “For the Father judges no one, but has given all the
judgment to the Bĕn,
23 that all should value the Bĕn even as they value the
Father. He who does not value the Bĕn does not value
the Father who sent Him.
24 “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who hears My Word
and believes in Him who sent Me possesses
everlasting ḥai, and does not come into judgment, but
has passed from death into ḥai.
25 “Truly, truly, I say to you, the hour is coming, and
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Bĕn
of Elohim. And those having heard shall live.
26 “For as the Father possesses ḥai in Himself, so He
gave also to the Bĕn to possess ḥai in Himself,
27 and He has given Him authority also to do
judgment, because He is the Bĕn of Aḏam.
28 “Do not marvel at this, because the hour is coming
in which all those in the tombs shall hear His voice,
29 and shall come forth - those who have done good,
to the resurrection of ḥai, and those who have
practised evil, to a resurrection of judgment.
18

2408

YOḤANAN

“Of Myself I am able to do naught. As I hear, I judge,
and My judgment is righteous, because I do not seek
My own desire, but the desire of the Father who sent
Me.
31 “If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is not true.
32 “There is another who bears witness of Me, and I
know that the witness which He witnesses of Me is
true.
33 “You have sent to Yoḥanan, and he bore witness to
the truth.
34 “But I do not receive witness from man, but I say
this in order that you might be saved.
35 “He was the burning and shining lamp, and for a
while you wanted to rejoice in his light.
36 “But I have a greater witness than that of Yoḥanan,
for the works that the Father gave Me to accomplish,
the works that I do, bear witness of Me, that the Father
has sent Me.
37 “And the Father who sent Me, He bore witness of
Me. You have neither heard His voice at any time, nor
seen His form.
38 “And you do not have His Word staying in you,
because you do not believe Him whom He sent.
39 “You search the Scriptures, because you think you
possess everlasting ḥai in them. And these are the
ones that bear witness of Me.
40 “But you do not desire to come to Me in order to
possess ḥai.
41 “I do not receive esteem from men,
42 but I know you, that you do not have the love of
Elohim in you.
43 “I have come in My Father’s Name and you do not
receive Me, if another comes in his own name, him you
would receive.
30

2409

JOHN

“How are you able to believe, when you are
receiving esteem from one another, and the esteem
that is from the only Elohim you do not seek?
45 “Do not think that I shall accuse you to the Father.
There is one who accuses you: Mosheh, in whom you
have put your expectation.
46 “For if you believed Mosheh, you would have
believed Me, since he wrote about Me.
47 “But if you do not believe his writings, how shall you
believe My Words?”
44

6 After this [vWHY went away to the other side of the
Sea of Galil, that is Lake Kinnereth.
2 And a large crowd was following Him, because they
saw His signs which He did on those who were sick.
3 And [vWHY went up on a mountain, and there He
sat down with His talmidim.
4 And the Pesaḥ was near, the Festival of the
Yahuḏim.
5 Then [vWHY, lifting up His eyes and seeing a large
crowd coming toward Him, said to Philippos, “Where
shall we buy bread for them to eat?”
6 And this He said, trying him, for He Himself knew
what He would do.
7 Philippos answered Him, “Two hundred pieces of
silver worth of bread is not sufficient for them, for every
one of them to receive a little.”
8 One of His talmidim, Andri, the brother of Shim’on
Kĕpha, said to Him,
9 “Here is a boy who has five barley loaves and two
fish, but what are these for so many?”
10 And [vWHY said, “Make the people sit down.” Now
there was much grass in the place, and the men,
numbering about five thousand, sat down.
2410

YOḤANAN

And [vWHY took the loaves, and having given
thanks He distributed them to the talmidim, and the
talmidim; to those sitting down. And the same with the
fish, as much as they wanted.
12 And when they were filled, He said to His talmidim,
“Gather the broken pieces that are left over, so that
none gets wasted.”
13 So they gathered them and filled twelve baskets
with broken pieces of the five barley loaves which were
left over by those who had eaten.
14 Then the men, having seen the sign that [vWHY did,
said, “This is truly the Naḇi who is coming to the world.”
15 Then [vWHY, knowing that they were about to come
and seize Him, that they might make Him sovereign,
withdrew again to the mountain, alone by Himself.
16 And when evening came, His talmidim went down
to the sea,
17 and entering into the boat, they were going over the
sea toward Kephar Naḥum. And it had already become
dark, and [vWHY had not yet come to them.
18 And the sea was rising because a great wind was
blowing.
19 When they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty
stadios, they saw [vWHY walking on the sea and
coming near the boat, and they were afraid.
20 And He said to them, “It is I, do not be afraid.”
21 They determined therefore to take Him into the
boat, and at once the boat was at the land where they
were going.
22 On the next day, the crowd that was standing on
the other side of the sea saw that there was no other
boat there except that one into which His talmidim had
entered, and that [vWHY had not entered the boat with
His talmidim, but His talmidim went away alone 11

2411

JOHN

but other boats came from Kinnereth, near the
place where they ate bread after the Aḏon had given
thanks 24 therefore when the crowd saw that [vWHY was not
there, nor His talmidim, they themselves also entered
into the boats and came to Kephar Naḥum, seeking
[vWHY.
25 And having found Him on the other side of the sea,
they asked Him, “Rabbi, when did You come here?”
26 [vWHY answered them and said, “Truly, truly, I say
to you, you seek Me, not because you saw signs, but
because you ate of the loaves and were satisfied.
27 “Do not labour for the food that is perishing, but for
the food that is remaining to everlasting ḥai, which the
Bĕn of Aḏam shall give you, for the Father, Elohim, has
put His seal on Him.”
28 So they said to Him, “What should we do to work
the works of Elohim?”
29 [vWHY answered and said to them, “This is the
work of Elohim, that you believe in Him whom He sent.”
30 So they said to Him, “What sign then would You do,
so that we see and believe You? What would You do?
31 “Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it
has been written, ‘He gave them bread out of the
shamayim to eat.’ ”
32 Therefore [vWHY said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to
you, Mosheh did not give you the bread out of the
shamayim, but My Father gives you the true bread out
of the shamayim.
33 “For the bread of Elohim is He who comes down
out of the shamayim and gives Ḥai to the world.”
34 So they said to Him, “Aḏonai, give us this bread
always.”
23

2412

YOḤANAN

And [vWHY said to them, “I am the bread of Ḥai. He
who comes to Me shall not get hungry at all, and he
who believes in Me shall not get thirsty at all.
36 “But I said to you that you have seen Me, and still
do not believe.
37 “All that the Father gives Me shall come to Me, and
the one who comes to Me I shall by no means cast out.
38 “Because I have come down out of the shamayim,
not to do My own desire, but the desire of Him who
sent Me.
39 “This is the desire of the Father who sent Me, that
all He has given Me I should not lose of it, but should
raise it in the last day.
40 “And this is the desire of Him who sent Me, that
everyone who sees the Bĕn and believes in Him
should possess everlasting ḥai. And I shall raise him
up in the last day.”
41 Therefore the Yahuḏim were grumbling against
Him, because He said, “I am the bread which came
down out of the shamayim.”
42 And they said, “Is not this [vWHY, the son of
Yosĕph, whose father and mother we know? How is it
then that He says, ‘I have come down out of the
shamayim’?”
43 Then [vWHY answered and said to them, “Do not
grumble with one another.
44 “No one is able to come to Me unless the Father
who sent Me draws him. And I shall raise him up in the
last day.
45 “It has been written in the Neḇi’im, ‘And they shall
all be taught by HWHY.’ Everyone, then, who has heard
from the Father, and learned, comes to Me.
46 “Not that anyone has seen the Father, except He
who is from Elohim - He has seen the Father.
35

2413

JOHN

“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in Me
possesses everlasting ḥai.
48 “I am the bread of Ḥai.
49 “Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and
they died.
50 “This is the bread which comes down out of the
shamayim, so that anyone might eat of it, and not die.
51 “I am the living bread which came down out of the
shamayim. If anyone eats of this bread, he shall live
forever. And indeed, the bread that I shall give is My
flesh, which I shall give for the ḥai of the world.”
52 The Yahuḏim, therefore, were striving with one
another, saying, “How is this One able to give us flesh
to eat?”
53 [vWHY therefore said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to
you, unless you eat the flesh of the Bĕn of Aḏam and
drink His blood, you possess no ḥai in yourselves.
54 “He who eats My flesh and drinks My blood
possesses everlasting ḥai, and I shall raise him up in
the last day.
55 “For My flesh is truly food, and My blood is truly
drink.
56 “He who eats My flesh and drinks My blood stays
in Me, and I in him.
57 “As the living Father sent Me, and I live because of
the Father, so he who feeds on Me shall live because
of Me.
58 “This is the bread which came down out of the
shamayim, not as your fathers ate the manna and died.
He who eats this bread shall live forever.”
59 He said this in a congregation, teaching in Kephar
Naḥum.
60 Therefore many of His talmidim having heard, said,
“This word is hard, who is able to hear it?”
47

2414

YOḤANAN

But [vWHY knowing within Himself that His talmidim
were grumbling about this, said to them, “Does this
make you stumble?
62 “What if you see the Bĕn of Aḏam going up where
He was before?
63 “It is the Ruaḥ, that gives ḥai, the flesh does not
profit at all. The words that I speak to you are Ruaḥ
and are ḥai.
64 “But there are some of you who do not believe.” For
[vWHY knew from the beginning who they were who
did not believe, and who would deliver Him up.
65 And He said, “Because of this I have said to you
that no one is able to come to Me unless it has been
given to him by My Father.”
66 From then on many of His talmidim withdrew and
were not walking with Him any more.
67 [vWHY therefore said to the twelve, “Do you also
want to go away?”
68 Then Shim’on Kĕpha answered Him, “Aḏonai, to
whom shall we go? You possess words of everlasting
ḥai.
69 “And we have believed, and we know that You are
ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of the living Elohim.”
70 [vWHY answered them, “Have I not chosen you, the
twelve, and one of you is a devil?”
71 He was now speaking of Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth,
of Shim’on, for he, one of the twelve, was about to
deliver Him up.
61

7 And after this [vWHY was walking in Galil, for He
did not want to walk in Yahuḏah, because the Yahuḏim
were seeking to kill Him.
2 And the Festival of the Yahuḏim was near, the
Festival of Sukkoth.
2415

JOHN

So His brothers said to Him, “Get away from here
and go into Yahuḏah, so that Your talmidim also see
the works that You are doing.
4 “For no one acts in secret while he himself seeks to
be known openly. If You do these, show Yourself to the
world.”
5 For even His brothers did not believe in Him.
6 [vWHY therefore said to them, “My time has not yet
come, but your time is always ready.
7 “It is impossible for the world to hate you, but it
hates Me because I bear witness of it, that its works
are wicked.
8 “You go up to this Festival. I am not yet going up to
this Festival, for My time has not yet been filled.”
9 And having said this to them, He stayed in Galil.
10 But when His brothers had gone up to the Festival,
then He also went up, not openly, but as it were in
secret.
11 The Yahuḏim, therefore, were seeking Him at the
Festival, and said, “Where is He?”
12 And there was much grumbling about Him among
the crowd. Some were saying, “He is good,” but others
were saying, “No, but He is leading the crowd astray.”
13 However, no one spoke openly of Him for fear of
the Yahuḏim.
14 And about the middle of the Festival [vWHY went
up into the Miqdash, and He was teaching.
15 And the Yahuḏim were marvelling, saying, “How
does this Man know letters, not having learned?”
16 [vWHY answered them and said, “My teaching is
not Mine, but His who sent Me.
17 “If anyone desires to do His desire, he shall know
concerning the teaching, whether it is from Elohim, or
I speak from Myself.
3

2416

YOḤANAN

“He who speaks from himself is seeking his own
esteem, but He who seeks the esteem of the One who
sent Him is true, and no unrighteousness is in Him.
19 “Did not Mosheh give you the Torah? Yet not one
of you does the Torah! Why do you seek to kill Me?”
20 The crowd answered and said, “You have a demon,
who seeks to kill You?”
21 [vWHY answered and said to them, “I did one work,
and you all marvel.
22 “Because of this Mosheh has given you the
circumcision - though it is not from Mosheh, but from
the fathers - and you circumcise a man on the
Shabbath.
23 “If a man receives circumcision on the Shabbath,
so that the Torah of Mosheh should not be broken, are
you wroth with Me because I made a man entirely well
on the Shabbath?
24 “Do not judge according to appearance, but judge
with righteous judgment.”
25 Therefore some of them from Yerushalayim said,
“Is this not He whom they are seeking to kill?
26 “And see! He speaks boldly, and they say none at
all to Him. Could it be that the rulers truly know that this
is truly ha’Mashiaḥ?
27 “But we know where this One is from. And when
ha’Mashiaḥ comes no one knows where He is from.”
28 [vWHY therefore cried out in the Miqdash, teaching
and saying, “You both know Me, and you know where
I am from. And I have not come of Myself, but He who
sent Me is true, whom you do not know.
29 “But I know Him, because I am from Him, and He
sent Me.”
30 So they were seeking to seize Him, but no one laid
a hand on Him, because His hour had not yet come.
18

2417

JOHN

And many of the crowd believed in Him, and said,
“When ha’Mashiaḥ comes, shall He do more signs
than these which this One did?”
32 The Pharisees heard the crowd muttering these
concerning Him, and the Pharisees and the chief
kohenim sent officers to seize Him.
33 Therefore [vWHY said to them, “Yet a little while I
am with you, then I go to Him who sent Me.
34 “You shall seek Me and you shall not find, and
where I am you are unable to come.”
35 The Yahuḏim, therefore, said to themselves,
“Where is He about to go that we shall not find Him? Is
He about to go to the Dispersion among the
Yawanites, and to teach the Yawanites?
36 “What is this word which He said, ‘You shall seek
Me and you shall not find, and where I am you are
unable to come’?”
37 And on the last Great Day of the Festival, [vWHY
stood and cried out, saying, “If anyone thirsts, let him
come to Me, and let him who believes in Me drink.
38 “As the Scripture said, out of His innermost shall
flow rivers of living water.”
39 And this He said concerning the Ruaḥ, which those
believing in Him were about to receive, for the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh was not yet, because [vWHY was not yet
esteemed.
40 Many from the crowd, when they heard the word,
then said, “This truly is the Naḇi.”
41 Others said, “This is ha’Mashiaḥ,” but others said,
“Does ha’Mashiaḥ then come out of Galil?
42 “Did not the Scripture say that ha’Mashiaḥ comes
from the seed of Dawiḏ and from the village of Bĕyth
Leḥem, where Dawiḏ was?”
43 So a division came about among the people
because of Him.
31

2418

YOḤANAN

And some of them wanted to take Him, but no one
laid hands on Him.
45 The officers therefore came to the chief kohenim
and Pharisees. And they said to them, “Why did you
not bring Him?”
46 The officers answered, “Never has any man
spoken like this Man!”
47 The Pharisees, therefore, answered them, “Have
you also been led astray?
48 “Has anyone of the rulers or of the Pharisees
believed in Him?
49 “But this crowd that does not know the Torah is
accursed.”
50 Naḵdimon - he who came to [vWHY by night, being
one of them - said to them,
51 “Does our Torah judge the man unless it hears first
from him and knows what he is doing?”
52 They answered and said to him, “Are you also from
Galil? Search and see that no naḇi has arisen out of
Galil.”
53 And each one went to his own house.
44

8 And [vWHY went to the Mount of Olives.
And at dawn He came again into the Miqdash, and
all the people were coming to Him. And having sat
down, He was teaching them.
3 And the scribes and Pharisees brought to Him a
woman caught in adultery. And having put her in the
midst,
4 they said to Him, “Teacher, this woman was caught
in the act of adultery.
5 “And in the Torah Mosheh commanded us that
such should be stoned. What then do You say?”
2

2419

JOHN

And this they said, trying Him, so that they might
accuse Him. But [vWHY, bending down, wrote on the
ground with the finger, as though He did not hear.
7 But as they kept on questioning Him, He
straightened up and said to them, “He who is without
sin among you, let him be the first to throw a stone at
her.”
8 And bending down again, He wrote on the ground.
9 And when they heard it, being reproved by
conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the
older ones until the last. And [vWHY was left alone, and
the woman standing in the middle.
10 And [vWHY, straightening up and seeing no one but
the woman, said to her, “Woman, where are those
accusers of yours? Did no one condemn you?”
11 And she said, “No one, Aḏonai.” And [vWHY said to
her, “Neither do I condemn you. Go and sin no more.”
12 Therefore [vWHY spoke to them again, saying, “I
am the Light of the world. He who follows Me shall by
no means walk in darkness, but possess the light of
ḥai.”
13 The Pharisees, therefore, said to Him, “You bear
witness about Yourself, Your witness is not true.”
14 [vWHY answered and said to them, “Even if I
witness concerning Myself, My witness is true, for I
know where I came from and where I am going. But
you do not know from where I come, or where I go.
15 “You judge according to the flesh, I judge no one.
16 “But even if I do judge, My judgment is true,
because I am not alone, but I and the Father who sent
Me.
17 “And in your Torah also, it has been written that the
witness of two men is true.
18 “I am One who witnesses concerning Myself, and
the Father who sent Me witnesses concerning Me.”
6

2420

YOḤANAN

Therefore they said to Him, “Where is Your
Father?” [vWHY answered, “You know neither Me nor
My Father. If you knew Me, you would have known My
Father also.”
20 These words [vWHY spoke in the treasury,
teaching in the Miqdash. And no one laid hands on
Him, because His hour had not yet come.
21 Therefore [vWHY said to them again, “I am going
away, and you shall seek Me, and you shall die in your
sin. Where I go you are unable to come.”
22 Then the Yahuḏim said, “Shall He kill Himself,
because He says, ‘Where I go you are unable to
come’?”
23 And He said to them, “You are from below, I am
from above. You are of this world, I am not of this
world.
24 “Therefore I said to you that you shall die in your
sins. For if you do not believe that I am, you shall die
in your sins.”
25 Then they said to Him, “Who are You?” And [vWHY
said to them, “Altogether that which I even say to you!
26 “I have much to say and to judge concerning you.
But He who sent Me is true, and what I heard from Him,
these I speak to the world.”
27 They did not know that He spoke to them of the
Father.
28 So [vWHY said to them, “When you lift up the Bĕn
of Aḏam, then you shall know that I am He, and that I
do naught of Myself, but as My Father taught Me, these
I speak.
29 “And He who sent Me is with Me. The Father has
not left Me alone, for I always do what pleases Him.”
30 As He was speaking these words, many believed
in Him.
19

2421

JOHN

So [vWHY said to those Yahuḏim who believed
Him, “If you stay in My Word, you are truly My talmidim,
32 “and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free.”
33 They answered Him, “We are the seed of Aḇraham,
and have been servants to no one at any time. How do
you say, ‘You shall become free’?”
34 [vWHY answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you,
everyone doing sin is a servant of sin.
35 “And the servant does not stay in the house forever
- a son stays forever.
36 “If, then, the Bĕn makes you free, you shall be free
indeed.
37 “I know that you are the seed of Aḇraham, but you
seek to kill Me, because My Word has no place in you.
38 “I speak what I have seen with My Father, and you
do what you have heard from your father.”
39 They answered and said to Him, “Aḇraham is our
father.” [vWHY said to them, “If you were Aḇraham’s
children, you would do the works of Aḇraham.
40 “But now you seek to kill Me, a Man who has
spoken to you the truth which I heard from Elohim.
Aḇraham did not do this.
41 “You do the works of your father.” Then they said to
Him, “We were not born of whoring, we have one
Father: Elohim.”
42 [vWHY said to them, “If Elohim were your Father,
you would love Me, for I came forth from Elohim, and
am here. For I have not come of Myself, but He sent
Me.
43 “Why do you not know what I say? Because you
are unable to hear My Word.
44 “You are of your father the devil, and the desires of
your father you want to do. He was a murderer from
the beginning, and has not stood in the truth, because
31

2422

YOḤANAN

there is no truth in him. When he speaks the lie, he
speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father of it.
45 “And because I speak the truth, you do not believe
Me.
46 “Who of you proves Me wrong concerning sin? And
if I speak the truth, why do you not believe Me?
47 “He who is of Elohim hears the Words of Elohim,
therefore you do not hear because you are not of
Elohim.”
48 The Yahuḏim answered and said to Him, “Do we
not say well that You are a Shomeronite and have a
demon?”
49 [vWHY answered, “I do not have a demon, but I
value My Father, and you do not value Me.
50 “And I do not seek My own esteem, there is One
who is seeking and is judging.
51 “Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone guards My Word
he shall never see death at all.”
52 The Yahuḏim said to Him, “Now we know that You
have a demon! Aḇraham died, and the neḇi’im. And
You say, ‘If anyone guards My Word he shall never
taste death at all.’
53 “Are You greater than our father Aḇraham, who
died? And the neḇi’im died. Whom do You make
Yourself?”
54 [vWHY answered, “If I esteem Myself, My esteem
is none at all. It is My Father who esteems Me, of
whom you say that He is your Elohim.
55 “And you have not known Him, but I know Him. And
if I say, ‘I do not know Him,’ I shall be like you, a liar.
But I do know Him and I guard His Word.
56 “Your father Aḇraham was glad that he should see
My day, and he saw it and rejoiced.”
57 The Yahuḏim, therefore, said to Him, “You are not
yet fifty years old, and have You seen Aḇraham?”
2423

JOHN

[vWHY said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you,
before Aḇraham came to be, I am.”
59 Therefore they picked up stones to throw at Him,
but [vWHY was hidden and went out of the Miqdash,
going through the midst of them, and so passed by.
58

9 And passing by, He saw a man, blind from birth.
And His talmidim asked Him, saying, “Rabbi, who
sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born
blind?”
3 [vWHY answered, “Neither this man nor his parents
sinned, but that the works of Elohim might be made
manifest in him.
4 “It is necessary for Me to work the works of Him
who sent Me while it is day - night is coming, when no
one is able to work.
5 “While I am in the world, I am the Light of the world.”
6 Having said this, He spat on the ground and made
clay with the saliva, and applied the clay to the eyes of
the blind man.
7 And He said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of
Shiloaḥ,” which translated is, sent. So he went and
washed, and came seeing.
8 Therefore the neighbours and those who saw him
before, that he was blind, said, “Is this not he who was
sitting and begging?”
9 Others said, “This is he.” Others, “He is like him.”
He said, “I am.”
10 So they said to him, “How were your eyes opened?”
11 He answered and said, “A Man called [vWHY made
clay and applied it to my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to
the pool of Shiloaḥ and wash.’ And I went and washed,
and I received sight.”
12 And they said to him, “Where is He?” He said, “I do
not know.”
2

2424

YOḤANAN

They brought to the Pharisees the one who was
once blind.
14 Now it was a Shabbath when [vWHY made the clay
and opened his eyes.
15 Therefore the Pharisees also asked him again how
he had received his sight. He said to them, “He put clay
on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.”
16 Therefore some of the Pharisees said, “This Man is
not from Elohim, because He does not guard the
Shabbath.” Others said, “How is a man who is a sinner
able to do such miracles?” And there was a division
among them.
17 So they said to the blind one again, “What do you
say about Him because He opened your eyes?” And
he said, “He is a naḇi.”
18 However, the Yahuḏim did not believe concerning
him, that he had been blind and received his sight, till
they called the parents of him who had received his
sight.
19 And they asked them, saying, “Is this your son, who
you say was born blind? How then does he now see?”
20 His parents answered them and said, “We know
that this is our son, and that he was born blind,
21 but how he now sees we do not know, or who
opened his eyes we do not know. He is of age, ask
him, he shall speak concerning himself.”
22 His parents said this because they were afraid of
the Yahuḏim, for the Yahuḏim had already agreed that
if anyone confessed that He was Mashiaḥ, he should
be put out of the congregation.
23 Because of this his parents said, “He is of age, ask
him.”
24 So for the second time they called the man who
was blind, and said to him, “Give esteem to Elohim, we
know that this Man is a sinner.”
13

2425

JOHN

Then he answered and said, “Whether He is a
sinner, I do not know. I only know that I was blind, now
I see.”
26 And they asked him once more, “What did He do to
you? How did He open your eyes?”
27 He answered them, “I have told you already, and
you did not hear. Why do you want to hear it again?
Do you want to become His talmidim too?”
28 Then they abused him and said, “You are His
talmid, but we are talmidim of Mosheh.
29 “We know that Elohim has spoken to Mosheh, but
this One, we do not know where He is from.”
30 The man answered and said to them, “Why, this is
a wonder! You do not know where He is from, yet He
opened my eyes!
31 “And we know that Elohim does not hear sinners.
But if anyone reveres Elohim and does His desire, He
hears him.
32 “From of old it has never been heard that anyone
opened the eyes of one who was born blind.
33 “If this One were not from Elohim, He could have
done naught.”
34 They answered and said to him, “You were
completely born in sins - and are you teaching us?”
And they cast him out.
35 [vWHY heard that they had cast him out, and when
He had found him, He said to him, “Do you believe in
the Bĕn of Elohim?”
36 He answered and said, “Who is He, Aḏonai, that I
might believe in Him?”
37 And [vWHY said to him, “You have both seen Him
and He who speaks with you is He.”
38 And he said, “Aḏonai, I believe,” and bowed before
Him.
25

2426

YOḤANAN

And [vWHY said, “For judgment I have come into
this world, that those not seeing might see, and those
seeing might become blind.”
40 And those of the Pharisees who were with Him
heard these words, and said to Him, “Are we blind,
too?”
41 [vWHY said to them, “If you were blind, you would
have no sin, but now you say, ‘We see,’ therefore your
sin remains.
39

10 “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter
through the door into the sheepfold, but climbs up by
another way, that one is a thief and a robber.
2 “But he who enters through the door is the
shepherd of the sheep.
3 “The doorkeeper opens for him, and the sheep hear
his voice. And he calls his own sheep by name and
leads them out.
4 “And when he has brought out his own sheep, he
goes before them. And the sheep follow him, because
they know his voice.
5 “And they shall by no means follow a stranger, but
shall flee from him, because they do not know the
voice of strangers.”
6 [vWHY used this figure of speech, but they did not
know what He had been saying to them.
7 [vWHY therefore said to them again, “Truly, truly, I
say to you, I am the door of the sheep.
8 “All who came before Me are thieves and robbers,
but the sheep did not hear them.
9 “I am the door. Whoever enters through Me, he
shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out and
find pasture.
10 “The thief does not come except to steal, and to
slaughter, and to destroy. I have come that they might
2427

JOHN

possess ḥai, and that they might possess it beyond
measure.
11 “I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays
down His ḥai for the sheep.
12 “But the hireling, and not being a shepherd - one
who does not own the sheep - sees the wolf coming
and leaves the sheep and flees. And the wolf snatches
the sheep and scatters them.
13 “Now the hireling flees because he is a hireling and
is not concerned about the sheep.
14 “I am the good shepherd. And I know Mine, and
Mine know Me,
15 even as the Father knows Me, and I know the
Father. And I lay down My ḥai for the sheep.
16 “And other sheep I have which are not of this fold I have to bring them as well, and they shall hear My
voice, and there shall be one flock, one Shepherd.
17 “Because of this the Father loves Me, because I lay
down My ḥai, in order to receive it again.
18 “No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself.
I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to
receive it again. This command I have received from
My Father.”
19 Again there came a division among the Yahuḏim
because of these words,
20 and many of them said, “He has a demon and is
mad, why do you listen to Him?”
21 Others said, “These are not the words of one
possessed by a demon. Is a demon able to open the
eyes of the blind?”
22 At that time the Ḥanukkah came to be in
Yerushalayim, and it was winter.
23 And [vWHY was walking in the Miqdash, in the
porch of Shelomoh.
2428

YOḤANAN

So the Yahuḏim surrounded Him and said to Him,
“How long do You keep us in suspense? If You are
ha’Mashiaḥ, say to us plainly.”
25 [vWHY answered them, “I have told you, and you
do not believe. The works that I do in My Father’s
Name, they bear witness concerning Me.
26 “But you do not believe, because you are not of My
sheep, as I said to you.
27 “My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and
they follow Me.
28 “And I give them everlasting ḥai, and they shall by
no means ever perish, and no one shall snatch them
out of My hand.
29 “My Father, who has given them to Me, is greater
than all. And no one is able to snatch them out of My
Father’s hand.
30 “I and My Father are one.”
31 Again the Yahuḏim picked up stones to stone Him.
32 [vWHY answered them, “Many good works I have
shown you from My Father. For which of these works
do you stone Me?”
33 The Yahuḏim answered Him, saying, “We do not
stone You for a good work, but for blasphemy, and
because You, being a Man, make Yourself Elohim.”
34 [vWHY answered them, “Is it not written in your own
Torah, ‘I said, “You are Elohim” ’?
35 “If He called them elohim, to whom the Word of
Elohim came - and it is impossible for the Scripture to
be broken 36 do you say of Him whom the Father made qadosh
and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’
because I said, ‘I am the Bĕn of Elohim’?
37 “If I do not do the works of My Father, do not believe
Me;
24

2429

JOHN

but if I do, though you do not believe Me, believe
the works, so that you know and believe that the Father
is in Me, and I in Him.”
39 Therefore they were seeking again to seize Him,
but He went forth out of their hand,
40 and went once more to the other side of the Yardĕn
to the place where Yoḥanan was immersing at first,
and there He stayed.
41 And many came to Him and said, “Yoḥanan indeed
did no sign, yet all that Yoḥanan said about this Man
was true.”
42 And many believed in Him there.
38

11 And a certain one was sick, El’azar from, Bĕyth
Anyah, the village of Miryam and her sister Martha.
2 Now it was Miryam who anointed the Aḏon with
perfume and wiped His feet with her hair, whose
brother El’azar was sick.
3 Therefore the sisters sent to Him, saying, “Aḏonai,
see, he whom You love is sick.”
4 But when [vWHY heard, He said, “This sickness is
not unto death, but for the esteem of Elohim, so that
the Bĕn of Elohim might be esteemed by it.”
5 Now [vWHY loved Martha and her sister and
El’azar.
6 Therefore, when He heard that he was sick, then
indeed He stayed at the place where He was, two more
days.
7 Then after this He said to the talmidim, “Let us go
back to Yahuḏah.”
8 The talmidim said to Him, “Rabbi, the Yahuḏim now
are seeking to stone You, and are You going back
there?”

2430

YOḤANAN

[vWHY answered, “Are there not twelve hours in the
day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble,
because he sees the light of this world.
10 “But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles,
because the Light is not in him.”
11 He said this, and after that He said to them, “Our
friend El’azar has fallen asleep, but I am going there,
to wake him up.”
12 Therefore the talmidim said to Him, “Aḏonai, if he
has fallen asleep he shall recover.”
13 But [vWHY had spoken about his death, whereas
they thought that He spoke of taking rest in sleep.
14 So then [vWHY said to them plainly, “El’azar has
died.
15 “And for your sake I am glad I was not there, in
order for you to believe. But let us go to him.”
16 T’oma, who is called the Twin, then said to his
fellow talmidim, “Let us also go, so that we die with
Him.”
17 Therefore, when [vWHY arrived, He found that he
had already been four days in the tomb.
18 Now Bĕyth Anyah was near Yerushalayim, about
fifteen stadion away.
19 And many of the Yahuḏim had come to Martha and
Miryam, to comfort them concerning their brother.
20 Martha, then, when she heard that [vWHY was
coming, met Him, but Miryam was sitting in the house.
21 Martha, then, said to [vWHY, “Aḏonai, if You had
been here, my brother would not have died.
22 “But even now I know that whatever You might ask
of Elohim, Elohim shall give You.”
23 [vWHY said to her, “Your brother shall rise again.”
24 Martha said to Him, “I know that he shall rise again
in the resurrection at the last day.”
9

2431

JOHN

[vWHY said to her, “I am the resurrection and the
ḥai. He who believes in Me, though he dies, he shall
live.
26 “And everyone that is living and believing in Me
shall never die at all. Do you believe this?”
27 She said to Him, “Yes, Aḏonai, I believe that You
are ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of Elohim, who has come into
the world.”
28 And having said this she went away and called her
sister Miryam secretly, saying, “The Teacher is here
and calls you.”
29 When she heard, she rose up quickly and came to
Him.
30 And [vWHY had not yet come into the village, but
was in the place where Martha met Him.
31 Therefore the Yahuḏim who were with her in the
house, and were comforting her, when they saw that
Miryam rose up quickly and went out, followed her,
saying, “She is going to the tomb to weep there.”
32 Miryam, therefore, when she came where [vWHY
was, and saw Him, she fell down at His feet, saying to
Him, “Aḏonai, if You had been here, my brother would
not have died.”
33 [vWHY, therefore, when He saw her weeping, and
the Yahuḏim who came with her weeping, He groaned
in the spirit and was troubled,
34 and said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to
Him, “Aḏonai, come and see.”
35 [vWHY wept.
36 The Yahuḏim therefore said, “See how He loved
him!”
37 And some of them said, “Was this One, who
opened the eyes of the blind, not also able to prevent
this one from dying?”
25

2432

YOḤANAN

[vWHY, therefore, again groaning in Himself, came
to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against
it.
39 [vWHY said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the
sister of him who had died, said to Him, “Aḏonai,
already he smells, for it is four days.”
40 [vWHY said to her, “Did I not say to you that if you
believe, you shall see the esteem of Elohim?”
41 So they took away the stone where the dead man
was laid. And [vWHY lifted up His eyes and said,
“Father, I thank You that You have heard Me.
42 “And I know that You always hear Me, but because
of the crowd standing by I said this, in order that they
believe that You sent Me.”
43 And when He had said this, He cried with a loud
voice, “El’azar, come out!”
44 And he who died came out bound feet and hands
with wrappings, and his face was wrapped with a cloth.
[vWHY said to them, “Loosen him, and let him go.”
45 Therefore many of the Yahuḏim who had come to
Miryam, and had seen what [vWHY did, believed in
Him.
46 But some of them went away to the Pharisees and
told them what [vWHY did.
47 So the chief kohenim and the Pharisees gathered
a council and said, “What shall we do? Because this
Man does many signs.
48 “If we let Him alone like this, they all shall believe in
Him, and the Romans shall come and take away from
us both our place and nation.”
49 And one of them, Qayapha, being kohĕn ha’gadol
that year, said to them, “You know naught,
50 neither do you consider that it is better for us that
one man die for the people than that the entire nation
should perish.”
38

2433

JOHN

But he did not say this from himself, but being
kohĕn ha’gadol that year he naḇu that [vWHY was
about to die for the nation,
52 and not for the nation only, but to gather together
into one the children of Elohim who were scattered
abroad.
53 So from that day on they plotted to kill Him.
54 [vWHY therefore no longer went openly among the
Yahuḏim, but went from there into the country near the
wilderness, to a city called Ephrayim, and remained
there with His talmidim.
55 Now the Pesaḥ of the Yahuḏim was near, and
many went from the country up to Yerushalayim before
the Pesaḥ, to qadosh themselves.
56 And so they were seeking [vWHY, and spoke
among one another, standing in the Miqdash, “What
do you think? Is He not coming to the Festival at all?”
57 And both the chief kohenim and the Pharisees had
given a command, that if anyone knew where He was,
he should disclose it, in order for them to seize Him.
51

12 Accordingly [vWHY, six days before the Pesaḥ,
came to Bĕyth Anyah, where El’azar was, who had
died, whom He raised from the dead.
2 So they made Him a supper there, and Martha
served, while El’azar was one of those who sat at the
table with Him.
3 Then Miryam took a litra of costly perfume of nard,
anointed the feet of [vWHY, and wiped His feet with her
hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the
perfume.
4 Then one of His talmidim, Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth,
of Shim’on, who was about to deliver Him up, said,
5 “Why was this perfume not sold for three hundred
pieces of silver and given to the poor?”
2434

YOḤANAN

And he said this, not because he was concerned
about the poor, but because he was a thief, and had
the bag, and he used to take what was put in it.
7 [vWHY then said, “Let her alone, she has kept this
for the day of My burial.
8 “For the poor you have with you always, but Me you
do not have always.”
9 Then a great crowd of the Yahuḏim learned that He
was there. And they came, not on account of [vWHY
only, but also to see El’azar, whom He had raised from
the dead.
10 And the chief kohenim resolved to kill El’azar as
well,
11 because on account of him many of the Yahuḏim
went away and believed in [vWHY.
12 On the next day a great crowd who had come to the
Festival, when they heard that [vWHY was coming to
Yerushalayim,
13 took the branches of palm trees and went out to
meet Him, and were crying out, “Hoshia-na! Baruḵ is
He who is coming in the Name of HWHY, the Sovereign
of Yisra’ĕl!”
14 And [vWHY, having found a young donkey, sat on
it, as it has been written:
15 “Do not fear, daughter of Tsiyon, see, your
Sovereign is coming, sitting on the colt of a donkey.”
16 At first His talmidim did not understand this. But
when [vWHY was esteemed, then they remembered
that this was written about Him and that they had done
this to Him.
17 Therefore the crowd, who were with Him when He
called El’azar out of his tomb and raised him from the
dead, were bearing witness.
18 On account of this the crowd also met Him,
because they heard that He had done this sign.
6

2435

JOHN

The Pharisees then said among themselves, “You
see how you are getting nowhere at all. Look, the world
has gone after Him!”
20 And there were certain Yawanites among those
coming up to worship at the Festival.
21 These then came to Philippos, who was from Bĕyth
Tsaiḏa of Galil, and were asking him, saying, “Aḏonai,
we want to see [vWHY.”
22 Philippos came and told Andri, and in turn Andri
and Philippos told [vWHY.
23 And [vWHY answered them, saying, “The hour has
come for the Bĕn of Aḏam to be esteemed.
24 “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat
falls into the ground and dies, it remains alone. But if it
dies, it bears much fruit.
25 “He who loves his life shall lose it, and he who hates
his life in this world shall preserve it for everlasting ḥai.
26 “If anyone serves Me, let him follow Me. And where
I am, there My servant also shall be. If anyone serves
Me, the Father shall value him.
27 “Now I Myself am troubled, and what shall I say?
‘Father, save Me from this hour’? But for this reason I
came to this hour.
28 “Father, esteem Your Name.” Then a voice came
from the shamayim, “I have both esteemed it and shall
esteem it again.”
29 So the crowd who stood by and heard it were
saying there had been thunder. Others said, “A
messenger has spoken to Him.”
30 [vWHY answered and said, “This voice did not
come because of Me, but for your sake.
31 “Now is the judgment of this world, now the ruler of
this world shall be cast out.
32 “And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, shall draw all
unto Myself.”
19

2436

YOḤANAN

This He said, signifying by what death He was
about to die.
34 The crowd answered Him, “We have heard out of
the Torah that ha’Mashiaḥ remains forever. And how
do You say, ‘The Bĕn of Aḏam has to be lifted up’?
Who is this Bĕn of Aḏam?”
35 [vWHY, therefore, said to them, “Yet a little while
the Light is with you. Walk while you have the Light,
lest darkness overtake you. And he who walks in
darkness does not know where he is going.
36 “While you have the Light, believe in the Light, so
that you become sons of Light.” These [vWHY spoke,
and went off and was hidden from them.
37 But though He had done so many signs before
them, they did not believe in Him,
38 that the word of Yeshayahu the naḇi might be filled,
which he spoke, “HWHY, who has believed our report?
And to whom has the arm of HWHY been revealed?”
39 Because of this they were unable to believe,
because again Yeshayahu said:
40 “He has blinded their eyes and hardened their
heart, so that they should not see with their eyes and
understand with their heart, and turn, and I should heal
them.”
41 Yeshayahu said this when he saw His esteem and
spoke of Him.
42 Still, even among the rulers many believed in Him,
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess, lest
they should be put out of the congregation,
43 for they loved the praise of men more than the
praise of Elohim.
44 Then [vWHY cried out and said, “He who believes
in Me, believes not in Me but in Him who sent Me.
45 “And he who sees Me sees Him who sent Me.
33

2437

JOHN

“I have come as a Light into the world, so that no
one who believes in Me should stay in darkness.
47 “And if anyone hears My Words but does not watch
over them, I do not judge him. For I did not come to
judge the world but to save the world.
48 “He who rejects Me, and does not receive My
Words, has one who judges him: the Word that I have
spoken shall judge him in the last day.
49 “Because I spoke not from Myself, but the Father
who sent Me has given Me a Command, what I should
say and what I should speak.
50 “And I know that His Command is everlasting ḥai.
Therefore, whatever I speak, as the Father has said to
Me, so I speak.”
46

13 And before the Festival of the Pesaḥ, [vWHY
knowing that His hour had come that He should move
out of this world unto the Father, having loved His own
who were in the world, He loved them to the end.
2 And supper taking place, the devil having already
put it into the heart of Yahuḏah from Qeriyoth, of
Shim’on, to deliver Him up,
3 [vWHY, knowing that the Father had given all into
His hands, and that He had come from HWHY and was
going to HWHY,
4 rose from supper and laid aside His garments, and
having taken a towel, He girded Himself.
5 After that He put water into a basin and began to
wash the feet of the talmidim, and to wipe them with
the towel with which He was girded.
6 And so He came to Shim’on Kĕpha, and he said to
Him, “Aḏonai, do You wash my feet?”
7 [vWHY answered and said to him, “You do not know
what I am doing now, but you shall know after this.”
2438

YOḤANAN

Kĕpha said to Him, “By no means shall You wash
my feet, ever!” [vWHY answered him, “If I do not wash
you, you have no part with Me.”
9 Shim’on Kĕpha said to Him, “Aḏonai, not my feet
only, but also my hands and my head!”
10 [vWHY said to him, “He who has had a bath does
not need to wash, except his feet, but is clean
altogether. And you are clean, but not all of you.”
11 For He knew who would deliver Him up, so He said,
“You are not all clean.”
12 So when He had washed their feet and taken His
garments, and sat down again, He said to them, “Do
you know what I have done to you?
13 “You call me Teacher and Aḏon, and you say well,
for I am.
14 “Then if I, Aḏon and Teacher, have washed your
feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet.
15 “For I gave you an example, that you should do as
I have done to you.
16 “Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater
than his master, nor is an emissary greater than he
who sent him.
17 “If you know these, baruḵ are you if you do them.
18 “I do not speak concerning all of you. I know whom
I have chosen, but that the Scripture might be filled,
‘He who eats bread with Me has lifted up his heel
against Me.’
19 “Now I say to you, before it takes place, that when
it does take place, you shall believe that I am.
20 “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who receives
whomever I send, receives Me. And he who receives
Me, receives Him who sent Me.”
21 When [vWHY had said this He was troubled in spirit,
and witnessed and said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, one
of you shall deliver Me up.”
8

2439

JOHN

The talmidim looked at one another, doubting of
whom He spoke.
23 And one of His talmidim, whom [vWHY loved, was
reclining on the bosom [vWHY.
24 Shim’on Kĕpha then motioned to him to ask who it
was of whom He spoke.
25 And leaning back on the breast of [vWHY he said to
Him, “Aḏonai, who is it?”
26 [vWHY answered, “It is he to whom I shall give a
piece of bread when I have dipped it.” And having
dipped the bread, He gave it to Yahuḏah from
Qeriyoth, of Shim’on.
27 And after the piece of bread, Satan entered into
him. [vWHY, therefore, said to him, “What you do, do
quickly.”
28 But no one at the table knew why He said this to
him,
29 for some were supposing, because Yahuḏah had
the bag, that [vWHY was saying to him, “Buy what we
need for the Festival,” or that he should give somewhat
to the poor.
30 So, having received the piece of bread, he then
went out straightaway, and it was night.
31 When, therefore, he went out, [vWHY said, “Now
the Bĕn of Aḏam has been esteemed, and HWHY has
been esteemed in Him.
32 “If HWHY has been esteemed in Him, HWHY shall
also esteem Him in Himself, and straightaway esteem
Him.
33 “Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You
shall seek Me, and as I said to the Yahuḏim, ‘Where I
am going, you are unable to come,’ I now also say to
you.
22

2440

YOḤANAN

“A renewed Command I give to you, that you love
one another, as I have loved you, that you also love
one another.
35 “By this shall all know that you are My talmidim, if
you have love for one another.”
36 Shim’on Kĕpha said to Him, “Aḏonai, where are
You going?” [vWHY answered him, “Where I am going
you are unable to follow Me now, but afterwards you
shall follow Me.”
37 Kĕpha said to Him, “Aḏonai, why am I unable to
follow You now? I shall lay down my life for You.”
38 [vWHY answered him, “Shall you lay down your life
for Me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the cock shall not
crow at all until you have denied Me three times.
34

14 “Let not your heart be troubled. Believe in HWHY,
believe also in Me.
2 “In My Father’s house are many staying places.
And if not, I would have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you.
3 “And if I go and prepare a place for you, I shall
come again and receive you to Myself, that where I am,
you might be too.
4 “And where I go you know, and the way you know.”
5 T’oma said to Him, “Aḏonai, we do not know where
You are going, and how are we able to know the way?”
6 [vWHY said to him, “I am the Way, and the Truth,
and the Ḥai. No one comes to the Father except
through Me.
7 “If you had known Me, you would have known My
Father too. From now on you know Him, and have
seen.”
8 Philippos said to Him, “Aḏonai, show us the Father,
and it is enough for us.”
2441

JOHN

[vWHY said to him, “Have I been with you so long,
and you have not known Me, Philippos? He who has
seen Me has seen the Father, and how do you say,
‘Show us the Father’?
10 “Do you not believe that I am in the Father, and the
Father is in Me? The words that I speak to you I do not
speak from Myself. But the Father who stays in Me
does His works.
11 “Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father
in Me, otherwise believe Me because of the works
themselves.
12 “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in Me,
the works that I do he shall do also. And greater than
these he shall do, because I go to My Father.
13 “And whatever you ask in My Name, that I shall do,
in order that the Father might be esteemed in the Bĕn.
14 “If you ask whatever in My Name, I shall do it.
15 “If you love Me, you shall guard My Commands.
16 “And I shall ask the Father, and He shall give you
another Helper, to stay with you forever 17 the Ruaḥ of the Truth, whom the world is unable to
receive, because it does not see Him or know Him. But
you know Him, for He stays with you and shall be in
you.
18 “I shall not leave you orphans - I am coming to you.
19 “Yet a little while, and the world no longer sees Me,
but you shall see Me, because I live, and you shall live.
20 “In that day you shall know that I am in My Father,
and you in Me, and I in you.
21 “He who possesses My Commands and guards
them, it is he who loves Me. And he who loves Me shall
be loved by My Father, and I shall love him and
manifest Myself to him.”
9

2442

YOḤANAN

Yahuḏah - not the one from Qeriyoth - said to Him,
“Aḏonai, what has come about that You are about to
manifest Yourself to us, and not to the world?”
23 [vWHY answered him, “If anyone loves Me, he shall
guard My Word. And My Father shall love him, and We
shall come to him and make Our stay with him.
24 “He who does not love Me does not guard My
Words. And the Word which you hear is not Mine but
of the Father who sent Me.
25 “These I have spoken to you while still with you.
26 “But the Helper, the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, whom the
Father shall send in My Name, He shall teach you all,
and remind you of all that I said to you.
27 “Peace I leave with you - My peace I give to you. I
do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.
28 “You heard that I said to you, ‘I am going away and
I am coming to you.’ If you loved Me, you would have
rejoiced that I said, ‘I am going to the Father,’ for My
Father is greater than I.
29 “And now I have told you before it takes place, that
when it does take place, you shall believe.
30 “I shall no longer talk much with you, for the ruler of
this world is coming, and he possesses naught in Me,
31 but, in order for the world to know that I love the
Father, and that as the Father commanded Me, so I
am doing. Rise up, let us go from here.
22

15 “I am the true vine, and My Father is the
gardener.
2 “Every branch in Me that bears no fruit He takes
away. And every branch that bears fruit He prunes, so
that it bears more fruit.
3 “You are already clean because of the Word which
I have spoken to you.
2443

JOHN

“Stay in Me, and I in you. As the branch is unable
to bear fruit of itself, unless it stays in the vine, so
neither you, unless you stay in Me.
5 “I am the vine, you are the branches. He who stays
in Me, and I in him, he bears much fruit. Because
without Me you are able to do naught!
6 “If anyone does not stay in Me, he is thrown away
as a branch and dries up. And they gather them and
throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
7 “If you stay in Me, and My Words stay in you, you
shall ask whatever you want, and it shall be done for
you.
8 “In this My Father is esteemed, that you bear much
fruit, and you shall be My talmidim.
9 “As the Father has loved Me, I have also loved you.
Stay in My love.
10 “If you guard My Commands, you shall stay in My
love, even as I have guarded My Father’s Commands
and stay in His love.
11 “These I have spoken to you, so that My joy might
be in you, and that your joy might be complete.
12 “This is My Command, that you love one another,
as I have loved you.
13 “No one has greater love than this: that one should
lay down his life for his friends.
14 “You are My friends if you do whatever I Command
you.
15 “No longer do I call you servants, for a servant does
not know what his master is doing. But I have called
you friends, for all which I heard from My Father I have
made known to you.
16 “You did not choose Me, but I chose you and
appointed you that you should go and bear fruit, and
that your fruit should remain, so that whatever you ask
the Father in My Name He might give you.
4

2444

YOḤANAN

“These I Command you, so that you love one
another.
18 “If the world hates you, know that it hated Me before
you.
19 “If you were of the world, the world would love its
own. But because you are not of the world, yet I chose
you out of the world, for that reason the world hates
you.
20 “Remember the word that I said to you, ‘A servant
is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted Me,
they shall persecute you too. If they have guarded My
Word, they would guard yours too.
21 “But all this they shall do to you because of My
Name, because they do not know Him who sent Me.
22 “If I had not come and spoken to them, they would
have no sin, but now they have no excuse for their sin.
23 “He who hates Me hates My Father as well.
24 “If I did not do among them the works which no one
else did, they would have no sin. But now they have
both seen and have hated both Me and My Father,
25 but that the word might be filled which was written
in their Torah, ‘They hated Me without a cause.’
26 “And when the Helper comes, whom I shall send to
you from the Father, the Ruaḥ of the Truth, who comes
from the Father, He shall bear witness of Me,
27 but you also bear witness, because you have been
with Me from the beginning.
17

16 “These I have spoken to you, so that you do not
stumble.
2 “They shall put you out of the congregations, but an
hour is coming when everyone who kills you shall think
he is rendering service to Elohim.
3 “And this they shall do to you because they did not
know the Father, nor Me.
2445

JOHN

“But I have said these to you, so that when the hour
comes you remember that I told them to you. And
these I did not say to you at the beginning, for I was
with you.
5 “But now I go away to Him who sent Me, and not
one of you asks Me, ‘Where are You going?’
6 “But because I have said these to you, grief has
filled your heart.
7 “But I say the truth to you. It is better for you that I
go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper shall not
come to you at all, but if I go, I shall send Him to you.
8 “And having come, He shall reprove the world
concerning sin, and concerning righteousness, and
concerning judgment 9 concerning sin because they do not believe in Me,
10 concerning righteousness because I go to My
Father and you see Me no more,
11 concerning judgment because the ruler of this
world is judged.
12 “I still have much to say to you, but you are not able
to bear them now.
13 “But when He comes, the Ruaḥ of the Truth, He
shall guide you into all the truth. For He shall not speak
from Himself, but whatever He hears He shall speak,
and He shall announce to you what is to come.
14 “He shall esteem Me, for He shall take of what is
Mine and announce it to you.
15 “All that the Father has is Mine. That is why I said
that He takes from what is Mine and announces it to
you.
16 “A little while, and you do not see Me, and again a
little while, and you shall see Me because I am going
to the Father.”
17 Therefore some of His talmidim said to one
another, “What is this that He says to us, ‘A little while,
4

2446

YOḤANAN

and you do not see Me, and again a little while, and
you shall see Me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the
Father’?”
18 So they said, “What is this that He says, ‘A little
while’? We do not know what He is saying.”
19 [vWHY, therefore, knew that they were wanting to
ask Him, and He said to them, “Are you asking one
another about what I said, ‘A little while, and you do
not see Me, and again a little while, and you shall see
Me’?
20 “Truly, truly, I say to you that you shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice. And you shall be
grieved, but your grief shall become joy.
21 “The woman has grief when she is in labour,
because her hour has come, but as soon as she has
given birth to the child, she no longer remembers the
affliction, for joy that a man was born into the world.
22 “And you, therefore, have grief now, but I shall see
you again and your heart shall rejoice, and no one
takes your joy away from you.
23 “And in that day you shall ask Me naught. Truly,
truly, I say to you, whatever you ask the Father in My
Name He shall give you.
24 “Until now you have asked naught in My Name.
Ask, and you shall receive, in order that your joy might
be complete.
25 “These I have spoken to you in figures of speech,
but an hour is coming when I shall no longer speak to
you in figures of speech, but I shall declare the Father
plainly to you.
26 “In that day you shall ask in My Name, and I do not
say to you that I shall pray the Father on your behalf,
27 for the Father Himself loves you, because you have
loved Me, and have believed that I came forth from
HWHY.
2447

JOHN

“I came forth from the Father and have come into
the world. Again, I leave the world and go to the
Father.”
29 His talmidim said to Him, “See, now You are
speaking plainly, and not using figure of speech!
30 “Now we know that You know all, and have no need
that anyone should question You. By this we believe
that You came forth from HWHY.”
31 [vWHY answered them, “Do you now believe?
32 “See, an hour is coming, and has now come, that
you are scattered, each to his own, and leave Me
alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with
Me.
33 “These I have spoken to you, that in Me you might
have peace. In the world you have pressure, but take
courage, I have overcome the world.”
28

17 [vWHY said these, and lifted up His eyes to the
shamayim, and said, “Father, the hour has come.
Esteem Your Bĕn, so that Your Bĕn also might esteem
You,
2 as You have given Him authority over all flesh, that
He should give everlasting ḥai to all whom You have
given Him.
3 “And this is everlasting ḥai, that they should know
You, the only true Elohim, and [vWHY Mashiaḥ whom
You have sent.
4 “I have esteemed You on the earth, having
accomplished the work You have given Me that I
should do.
5 “And now, esteem Me with Yourself, Father, with
the esteem which I had with You before the world was.
6 “I have revealed Your Name to the men whom You
gave Me out of the world. They were Yours, and You
gave them to Me, and they have guarded Your Word.
2448

YOḤANAN

“Now they have come to know that all You gave to
Me, is from You.
8 “Because the Words which You gave to Me, I have
given to them. And they have received them, and have
truly known that I came forth from You, and they
believed that You sent Me.
9 “I pray for them. I do not pray for the world but for
those whom You have given Me, for they are Yours.
10 “And all Mine are Yours, and Yours are Mine, and I
have been esteemed in them.
11 “And I am no more in the world, but these are in the
world, and I come to You. Qodesh Father, guard them
in Your Name which You have given Me, so that they
might be one, as We are.
12 “When I was with them in the world, I was guarding
them in Your Name which You have given Me, and I
watched over them, and not one of them perished
except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might
be filled.
13 “And now I come to You. And I speak these in the
world, so that they have My joy completed in them.
14 “I have given them Your Word, and the world hated
them because they are not of the world, as I am not of
the world.
15 “I do not pray that You should take them out of the
world, but that You keep them from the wicked.
16 “They are not of the world, as I am not of the world.
17 “Qadosh them in Your truth - Your Word is truth.
18 “As You sent Me into the world, I also sent them
into the world.
19 “And for them I qadosh Myself, so that they too
might be qadosh in truth.
20 “And I do not pray for these alone, but also for those
believing in Me through their word,
7

2449

JOHN

so that they all might be one, as You, Father, are in
Me, and I in You, so that they too might be one in Us,
so that the world might believe that You have sent Me.
22 “And the esteem which You gave Me I have given
them, so that they might be one as We are one,
23 “I in them, and You in Me, so that they might be
perfected into one, so that the world knows that You
have sent Me, and have loved them as You have loved
Me.
24 “Father, I desire that those whom You have given
Me, might be with Me where I am, so that they see My
esteem which You have given Me, because You loved
Me before the foundation of the world.
25 “O righteous Father, indeed the world did not know
You, but I knew You, and these knew that You sent
Me.
26 “And I have made Your Name known to them, and
shall make it known, so that the love with which You
loved Me might be in them, and I in them.”
21

18 Having said these, [vWHY went out with His
talmidim beyond the Qiḏron torrent, where there was a
garden, into which He and His talmidim entered.
2 And Yahuḏah, who delivered Him up, also knew the
place, because [vWHY often met there with His
talmidim.
3 Yahuḏah, then, having received the squad and
officers from the chief kohenim and Pharisees, came
there with lanterns, and torches, and weapons.
4 [vWHY, then, knowing all that would come upon
Him, went forward and said to them, “Whom do you
seek?”
5 They answered Him, “[vWHY of Natsareth.” [vWHY
said to them, “I am.” And Yahuḏah, who delivered Him
up, was also standing with them.
2450

YOḤANAN

When, therefore, He said to them, “I am,” they drew
back and fell to the ground.
7 Once more He asked them, “Whom do you seek?”
And they said, “[vWHY of Natsareth.”
8 [vWHY answered, “I said to you that I am. If, then,
you seek Me, allow these to go,”
9 in order that the word might be filled which He
spoke, “Of those whom You have given Me, I have lost
none.”
10 Then Shim’on Kĕpha, having a sword, drew it and
struck the kohĕn ha’gadol’s servant, and cut off his
right ear. And the servant’s name was Meleḵ.
11 Then [vWHY said to Kĕpha; “Put your sword into
the sheath. Shall I not drink the cup which My Father
has given Me?”
12 Then the squad and the commander and the
officers of the Yahuḏim seized [vWHY and bound Him,
13 and they led Him away to Ḥanan first, for he was
the father-in-law of Qayapha who was kohĕn ha’gadol
that year.
14 Now Qayapha was the one who gave counsel to
the Yahuḏim that it was better that one man should die
for the people.
15 And Shim’on Kĕpha followed [vWHY, with another
talmid, and that talmid was known to the kohĕn
ha’gadol, and went with [vWHY into the courtyard of
the kohĕn ha’gadol.
16 But Kĕpha was standing outside at the door. So the
other talmid, who was known to the kohĕn ha’gadol,
went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and
brought Kĕpha in.
17 Then the servant girl who kept the door said to
Kĕpha, “Are you also one of this Man’s talmidim?” He
said, “I am not.”
6

2451

JOHN

And the servants and officers who had made a fire
of coals stood there, because it was cold, and they
warmed themselves. And Kĕpha was standing with
them and warming himself.
19 Then the kohĕn ha’gadol asked [vWHY about His
talmidim and His teaching.
20 [vWHY answered him, “I spoke openly to the world.
I always taught in the congregation and in the
Miqdash, where the Yahuḏim always meet, and I
spoke naught in secret.
21 “Why do you ask Me? Ask those who have heard
Me what I said to them. See, they know what I said.”
22 And when He had said this, one of the officers who
stood by slapped [vWHY in the face, saying, “Do You
answer the kohĕn ha’gadol this way?”
23 [vWHY answered him, “If I have spoken evilly, bear
witness of the evil, but if well, why do you strike Me?”
24 Then Ḥanan sent Him bound to the kohĕn ha’gadol,
Qayapha.
25 And Shim’on Kĕpha was standing and warming
himself. Then they said to him, “Are you also one of
His talmidim?” He denied it and said, “I am not!”
26 One of the servants of the kohĕn ha’gadol, a
relative of the one whose ear Kĕpha cut off, said, “Did
I not see you in the garden with Him?”
27 Then Kĕpha again denied it, and immediately a
cock crowed.
28 Then they led [vWHY from Qayapha to the palace,
and it was early. And they themselves did not go into
the palace, lest they should be defiled, but that they
might eat the Pesaḥ.
29 Pilatus, therefore, came out to them and said,
“What accusation do you bring against this Man?”
30 They answered and said to him, “If He were not an
evil-doer, we would not have delivered Him up to you.”
18

2452

YOḤANAN

Then Pilatus said to them, “You take Him and judge
Him according to your law.” The Yahuḏim said to him,
“It is not right for us to put anyone to death,”
32 in order that the word of [vWHY might be filled
which He spoke, signifying by what death He was
about to die.
33 Then Pilatus went back into the palace, and called
[vWHY, and said to Him, “You are the Sovereign of the
Yahuḏim?”
34 [vWHY answered him, “Do you say this from
yourself, or did others talk to you about Me?”
35 Pilatus answered, “Am I Yahuḏi? Your own nation
and the chief kohenim have delivered You to me. What
did You do?”
36 [vWHY answered, “My reign is not of this world. If
My reign were of this world, My servants would fight,
so that I should not be delivered to the Yahuḏim. But
now My reign is not from here.”
37 Then Pilatus said to Him, “You are a Sovereign,
then?” [vWHY answered, “You say it, because I am a
Sovereign. For this I was born, and for this I have come
into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.
Everyone who is of the truth hears My voice.”
38 Pilatus said to Him, “What is truth?” And when he
had said this, he went out again to the Yahuḏim, and
said to them, “I find no guilt in Him.
39 “But you have a custom that I shall release
someone to you at the Pesaḥ. Do you want, then, that
I release to you the Sovereign of the Yahuḏim?”
40 Then they all shouted again, saying, “Not this One,
but Barabba!” And Barabba was a robber.
31

19 Then, therefore, Pilatus took [vWHY and flogged.
2453

JOHN

And the soldiers plaited a crown of thorns and
placed it on His head, and they put a purple robe on
Him,
3 and came to Him and said, “Greetings, Sovereign
of the Yahuḏim!” And they slapped Him in the face.
4 And Pilatus went outside again, and said to them,
“See, I am bringing Him out to you, to let you know that
I find no guilt in Him.”
5 Then [vWHY came outside, wearing the crown of
thorns and the purple robe. And Pilatus said to them,
“See the Man!”
6 So when the chief kohenim and officers saw Him,
they shouted, saying, “Impale! Impale!” Pilatus said to
them, “You take Him and impale Him, for I find no guilt
in Him.”
7 The Yahuḏim answered him, “We have a law, and
according to our law He ought to die, for He has made
Himself the Bĕn of Elohim.”
8 So when Pilatus heard this word, he was more
afraid,
9 and went back into the palace, and asked [vWHY,
“Where are You from?” But [vWHY gave him no
answer.
10 Then Pilatus said to Him, “Do You not speak to me?
Do You not know that I possess authority to impale
You, and I possess authority to release You?”
11 [vWHY answered, “You would possess no authority
against Me if it were not given you from above.
Because of this, he who delivered Me to you has
greater sin.”
12 From then on Pilatus was seeking to release Him,
but the Yahuḏim shouted, saying, “If you release this
One, you are not Kaisar’s friend. Everyone who makes
himself a sovereign, speaks against Kaisar.”
2

2454

YOḤANAN

Therefore, when Pilatus heard these words, he
brought [vWHY out and sat down in the judgment seat
in a place that is called Pavement, but in lḇri,
Gabbatha.
14 And it was the Preparation of the Pesaḥ, and about
the sixth hour. And he said to the Yahuḏim, “See your
Sovereign!”
15 But they shouted, “Away, away, impale Him!”
Pilatus said to them, “Shall I impale your Sovereign?”
The chief kohenim answered, “We have no sovereign
except Kaisar!”
16 At that time, then, he delivered Him to them to be
impaled. And they took [vWHY and led away.
17 And bearing His stake, He went out to the so-called
Place of a Skull, which is called in Iḇri, Golgotha,
18 where they impaled Him, and two others with Him,
one on this side and one on that side, and [vWHY in
the middle.
19 And Pilatus wrote a title too, and put it on the stake,
and it was written: [vWHY OF NATSARETH, THE
SOVEREIGN OF THE YAHUḎIM.
20 Many of the Yahuḏim therefore read this title, for
the place where [vWHY was impaled was near the city,
and it was written in lḇri, in Yawanite, in Roman.
21 So the chief kohenim of the Yahuḏim said to
Pilatus, “Do not write, ‘The Sovereign of the Yahuḏim,’
but, ‘He said, “I am the Sovereign of the Yahuḏim.” ’ ”
22 Pilatus answered, “What I have written, I have
written.”
23 Then the soldiers, when they had impaled [vWHY,
took His outer garments and made four parts, to each
soldier a part, and the inner garment. But the inner
garment was without seam, woven from the top in one
piece.
13

2455

JOHN

So they said to each other, “Let us not tear it, but
cast lots for it - whose it shall be,” in order that the
Scripture might be filled which says, “They divided My
garments among them, and for My clothing they cast
lots.” The soldiers therefore indeed did this.
25 And by the stake of [vWHY stood His mother, and
His mother’s sister, Miryam the wife of Ḥĕleph, and
Miryam from Maḡdala.
26 Then [vWHY, seeing His mother and the talmid
whom He loved standing by, He said to His mother,
“Woman, see your son!”
27 Then to the talmid He said, “See, your mother!” And
from that hour that talmid took her to his own home.
28 After this, [vWHY, knowing that all had been
accomplished, in order that Scripture might be
accomplished, said, “I thirst!”
29 A bowl of vinegar stood there, and they filled a
sponge with vinegar, put it on hyssop, and held it to
His mouth.
30 So when [vWHY took the vinegar He said, “It has
been accomplished!” And bowing His head, He gave
up His spirit.
31 Therefore, since it was the Preparation, that the
bodies should not remain on the stake on the
Shabbath - for that Shabbath was a high one - the
Yahuḏim asked Pilatus to have their legs broken, and
be taken away.
32 Therefore the soldiers came and broke the legs of
the first, and of the other who was impaled with Him,
33 but when they came to [vWHY and saw that He was
already dead, they did not break His legs.
34 But one of the soldiers pierced His side with a
spear, and instantly blood and water came out.
24

2456

YOḤANAN

And he who has seen has witnessed, and his
witness is true. And he knows that he is speaking the
truth, in order that you might believe.
36 For this took place in order for the Scripture to be
filled: “Not one of His bones shall be broken.”
37 And again another Scripture says, “They shall look
on Him whom they pierced.”
38 And after this, Yosĕph of Ramathayim, being a
talmid of [vWHY, but secretly, for fear of the Yahuḏim,
asked Pilatus that he might take the body of [vWHY,
and Pilatus gave permission. Therefore he came and
took the body of [vWHY.
39 And Naḵdimon, who at first came to [vWHY by
night, also came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred litras.
40 Then they took the body of [vWHY, and bound it in
linen wrappings with the spices, as was the habit of the
Yahuḏim for burial.
41 And at the place where He was impaled there was
a garden, and in the garden a fresh tomb in which no
one had been had yet been laid.
42 There, then, because of the Preparation of the
Yahuḏim, they laid [vWHY, because the tomb was
near.
35

20 And on one of the shabbathoth, Miryam from
Maḡdala came to the tomb in the morning, when it was
still dim, and saw that the stone had been removed
from the tomb.
2 So she ran and came to Shim’on Kĕpha, and to the
other talmid whom [vWHY loved, and said to them,
“They have taken the Aḏon out of the tomb, and we do
not know where they laid Him.”
3 Then Kĕpha and the other talmid went out, and they
were going to the tomb,
2457

JOHN

and the two were running together, but the other,
talmid outran Kĕpha and came to the tomb first.
5 And stooping down he saw the linen wrappings
lying, but he did not go in.
6 Then Shim’on Kĕpha came, following him, and
went into the tomb. And he saw the linen wrappings
lying,
7 and the cloth which had been on His head, not lying
with the linen wrappings, but folded up in a place by
itself.
8 So, then, the other talmid, who came to the tomb
first, also went in. And he saw and believed.
9 For they did not yet know the Scripture, that He has
to rise again from the dead.
10 Therefore the talmidim went away again, by
themselves.
11 But Miryam was standing outside by the tomb
weeping. Then as she wept, she stooped down to the
tomb,
12 and saw two messengers in white sitting, one at the
head and the other at the feet, where the body of
[vWHY had been laid.
13 And they said to her, “Woman, why do you weep?”
She said to them, “Because they took away Aḏonai,
and I do not know where they laid Him.”
14 And having said this, she turned around and saw
[vWHY standing, but she did not know that it was
[vWHY.
15 [vWHY said to her, “Woman, why do you weep?
Whom do you seek?” Thinking He was the gardener,
she said to Him, “Aḏonai, if You have carried Him
away, say to me where You put Him, and I shall take
Him away.”
16 [vWHY said to her, “Miryam!” She turned and said
to Him, “Rabboni!” which translated is, Teacher.
4

2458

YOḤANAN

[vWHY said to her, “Do not hold on to Me, for I have
not yet ascended to My Father. But go to My brothers
and say to them, ‘I am ascending to My Father and
your Father, and to My Elohim and your Elohim.’ ”
18 Miryam from Maḡdala came announcing to the
talmidim that she had seen the Aḏon, and that He had
told her this.
19 When therefore it was evening on that day, one of
the shabbathoth, and when the doors were shut where
the talmidim met, for fear of the Yahuḏim, [vWHY came
and stood in the midst, and said to them, “Peace to
you.”
20 And having said this, He showed them His hands
and His side. The talmidim therefore rejoiced when
they saw the Aḏon.
21 Then [vWHY said to them again, “Peace to you! As
the Father has sent Me, I also send you.”
22 And having said this, He breathed on them, and
said to them, “Receive the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven
them; if you retain the sins of any, they have been
retained.”
24 But T’oma, called the Twin, one of the twelve, was
not with them when [vWHY came,
25 so the other talmidim said to him, “We have seen
the Aḏon.” But he said to them, “Unless I see in His
hands the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the
imprint of the nails, and put my hand into His side, I
shall by no means believe.”
26 And after eight days His talmidim were again
inside, and T’oma with them. [vWHY came, the doors
having been shut, and He stood in the midst, and said,
“Peace to you!”
17

2459

JOHN

Then He said to T’oma, “Bring your finger here, and
see My hands. And bring your hand and put it into My
side - and do not be unbelieving, but believing.”
28 And T’oma answered and said to Him, “Aḏonai and
my Elohim!”
29 [vWHY said to him, “T’oma, because you have seen
Me, you have believed. Baruḵ are those who have not
seen and have believed.”
30 There were indeed many other signs that [vWHY
did in the presence of His talmidim, which are not
written in this book,
31 but these have been written so that you believe that
[vWHY is ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of HWHY, and that,
believing, you might possess ḥai in His Name.
27

21 After this [vWHY manifested Himself again to the
talmidim at the Sea of Kinnereth, and He manifested
this way:
2 Shim’on Kĕpha, and T’oma called the Twin, and
Nethan’ĕl of Qanah in Galil, of Zaḇdai, and two others
of His talmidim were together.
3 Shim’on Kĕpha said to them, “I am going to fish.”
They said to him, “We are also coming with you.” They
went out and immediately entered into the boat. And
that night they caught none at all.
4 But when it became early morning, [vWHY stood on
the beach. However, the talmidim did not know that it
was [vWHY.
5 Then [vWHY said to them, “Children, have you any
food?” They answered Him, “No.”
6 And He said to them, “Throw the net on the right
side of the boat, and you shall find.” So they threw, and
they were no longer able to draw it in because of the
large number of fish.
2460

YOḤANAN

That talmid whom [vWHY loved then said to Kĕpha,
“It is the Aḏon!” Then Shim’on Kĕpha, hearing that it
was the Aḏon, put on his outer garment - for he was
stripped - and plunged into the sea.
8 And the other talmidim came in the little boat - for
they were not far from land, but about two hundred
pĕḵun - dragging the net with fish.
9 So when they had come to land, they saw a fire of
coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread.
10 [vWHY said to them, “Bring some of the fish which
you have now caught.”
11 Shim’on Kĕpha went up and dragged the net to
land, filled with one hundred and fifty-three big fish.
And though there were so many, the net was not
broken.
12 [vWHY said to them, “Come, have breakfast.” And
not one of the talmidim had the courage to ask Him,
“Who are You?,” knowing that it was the Aḏon.
13 [vWHY came and took the bread and gave it to
them, and the same with the fish.
14 This was now the third time [vWHY was manifested
to His talmidim after He was raised from the dead.
15 When, therefore, they had eaten breakfast, [vWHY
said to Shim’on Kĕpha, “Shim’on, of Yonah, do you
love Me more than these?” He said to Him, “Yes,
Aḏonai, You know that I love You.” He said to him,
“Feed My lambs.”
16 He said to him again, the second time, “Shim’on, of
Yonah, do you love Me?” He said to Him, “Yes, Aḏonai,
You know that I love You.” He said to him, “Shepherd
My sheep.”
17 He said to him the third time, “Shim’on, of Yonah,
do you love Me?” Kĕpha was sad because He said to
him the third time, “Do you love Me?” And he said to
7

2461

JOHN

Him, “Aḏonai, You know all, You know that I love You.”
[vWHY said to him, “Feed My sheep.
18 “Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were younger
you girded yourself and walked where you wanted, but
when you are old you shall stretch out your hands, and
another shall gird you and bring where you do not
want.”
19 Now this He said, signifying by what death he would
esteem Elohim. And having said this, He said to him,
“Follow Me.”
20 And Kĕpha, turning around, saw the talmid whom
[vWHY loved following, who also had leaned on His
breast at the supper, and said, “Aḏonai, who is the one
who is delivering You up?”
21 Seeing him, Kĕpha said to [vWHY, “But Aḏonai,
what about this one?”
22 [vWHY said to him, “If I want him to remain till I
come, what is that to you? You follow Me.”
23 Therefore this word went out among the brothers
that this talmid would not die. However, [vWHY did not
say to him that he would not die, but, “If I desire him to
remain until I come, what is it to you?”
24 This is the talmid who bears witness about these,
and wrote these. And we know that his witness is true.
25 Now there is much else that [vWHY did. If every one
of them were written down, I think that the world itself
would not contain the written books. Amĕn.

2462

ACTS

MA’ASĔH
‫ מעשה‬hv[m

1 The first account I made, O Theophilos, of all that
{fWHY began both to do and to teach,
2 until the day when He was taken up, after giving
instructions through the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh to the
emissaries whom He had chosen,
3 to whom He also presented Himself alive after His
suffering by many infallible proofs, being seen by
them for forty days, speaking concerning the reign of
Elohim.
4 And meeting with them, He commanded them not
to leave Yerushalayim, but to wait for the Promise of
the Father, “which you have heard from Me 5 because Yoḥanan truly immersed in water, but
you shall be immersed in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh not
many days from now.”
6 So when they had come together, they asked Him,
saying, “Aḏonai, would You at this time restore the
reign to Yisra’ĕl?”
7 And He said to them, “It is not for you to know
times or seasons which the Father has put in His own
authority.
8 “But you shall receive power when the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh has come upon you, and you shall be My
witnesses in Yerushalayim, and in all Yahuḏah and
Shomeron, and to the end of the earth.”
9 And having said this, while they were looking on,
He was taken up, and a cloud hid Him from their sight.
10 And as they were gazing into the shamayim as He
went up, see, two men stood by them dressed in
white,
2463

MA’ASĔH

who also said, “Men of Galil, why do you stand
looking up into the shamayim? This same {fWHY,
who was taken up from you into the shamayim, shall
come in the same way as you saw Him go into the
shamayim.”
12 Then they went back to Yerushalayim from the
Mount of Olives, which is near Yerushalayim, a
Shabbath day’s journey.
13 And when they came in, they went up into the
upper room where they were staying: both Kĕpha and
Ya’aqoḇ and Yoḥanan and Andri, Philippos and
T’oma, Bartholomi and Mattithyahu, Ya’aqoḇ of
Ḥĕleph and Shim’on ‘the Enthusiast’, and Yahuḏah of
Ya’aqoḇ.
14 All these were continuing with one mind in prayer
and supplication, with the women and Miryam the
mother of {fWHY, and with His brothers.
15 And in those days Kĕpha, standing up in the midst
of the talmidim - and there was a gathering of about
a hundred and twenty - said,
16 “Men and brothers, this Scripture had to be filled
which the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh spoke before by the
mouth of Dawiḏ concerning Yahuḏah, who became a
guide to those who seized {fWHY,
17 because he was numbered with us and received
his share in this service.”
18 This one, therefore, purchased a field with the
wages of unrighteousness, and falling forward, he
burst open in the middle and all his intestines gushed
out.
19 And it became known to all those dwelling in
Yerushalayim, so that in their own language that field
was called, Ḥaqal Dema, that is, Field of Blood.
11

2464

ACTS

“For it has been written in the Book of Tehillim, ‘Let
his dwelling lie waste, and let no one live in it,’ and,
‘Let another take his office.’
21 “It is therefore necessary that of the men who have
been with us all the time that the Aḏon {fWHY went in
and out among us,
22 beginning from the immersion of Yoḥanan to that
day when He was taken up from us, that one of these
should become a witness with us of His resurrection.”
23 And they put forward two: Yosĕph called
Barsabba, who was also called Yustos, and
Mattithyahu.
24 And praying they said, “You, HWHY, who know the
hearts of all, show which one of these two You have
chosen
25 to receive the share in this service and office of the
emissary from which Yahuḏah by transgression fell,
to go to his own place.”
26 And they cast their lots, and the lot fell on
Mattithyahu. And he was numbered with the eleven
emissaries.
20

2 And when the Day of the Festival of Shaḇuoth had
come, they were all with one mind in one place.
2 And suddenly there came a sound from the
shamayim, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled
all the house where they were sitting.
3 And there appeared to them divided tongues, as
of fire, and settled on each one of them.
4 And they were all filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh
and began to speak with other tongues, as the Ruaḥ
gave them to speak.
5 Now in Yerushalayim there were dwelling
Yahuḏim, dedicated men from every nation under the
shamayim.
2465

MA’ASĔH

And when this sound came to be, the crowd came
together, and were confused, because everyone
heard them speak in his own language.
7 And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying
to each other, “Look, are not all these who speak
Galileans?
8 “And how do we hear, each one in our own
language in which we were born?
9 “Parthians and Maḏites and Ĕylamites, and those
dwelling in Aram Naharayim, both Yahuḏah and
Kappadokia, Pontus and Asia,
10 both Phrugia and Pamphulia, Mitsrayim and the
parts of Libuĕ around Kurĕnĕ, visitors from Rome,
both Yahuḏim and converts,
11 “Krĕtĕans and Araḇs, we hear them speaking in
our own tongues the great deeds of Elohim.”
12 And they were all amazed, and were puzzled,
saying to each other, “What does this mean?”
13 And others mocking said, “They have been filled
with sweet wine.”
14 But Kĕpha, standing up with the eleven, lifted up
his voice and said to them, “Men of Yahuḏah and all
those dwelling in Yerushalayim, let this be known to
you, and listen closely to my words.
15 “For these men are not drunk, as you imagine,
since it is only the third hour of the day.
16 “But this is what was spoken by the naḇi Yo’ĕl:
17 ‘And it shall be in the last days, says HWHY, that I
shall pour out of My Ruaḥ on all flesh. And your sons
and your daughters shall naḇa, and your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams,
18 and also on My male servants and on My female
servants I shall pour out My Ruaḥ in those days, and
they shall naḇa.
6

2466

ACTS

‘And I shall show wonders in the shamayim above
and signs in the earth beneath: blood and fire and
vapour of smoke.
20 ‘The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood, before the coming of the great and
splendid day of HWHY.
21 ‘And it shall be that everyone who calls on the
Name of HWHY shall be saved.’
22 “Men of Yisra’ĕl, hear these words: {fWHY of
Natsareth, a Man from Elohim, having been pointed
out to you by mighty works, and wonders, and signs
which Elohim did through Him in your midst, as you
yourselves also know,
23 this One, given up by the marked purpose and
foreknowledge of Elohim, you have impaled and put
to death through the hands of lawless men 24 “Him HWHY raised up, having loosed the pangs of
death, because it was impossible that He could be
held in its grip.
25 “For Dawiḏ says concerning Him, ‘I put HWHY
before me continually, because He is at my right
hand, in order that I should not be shaken.
26 ‘For this reason my heart rejoiced, and my tongue
was glad, and now my flesh shall also rest in
expectation,
27 because You shall not leave my being in the
grave, nor shall You give Your Kind One to see
corruption.
28 ‘You have made known to me the Ways of ḥai,
You shall fill me with joy in Your presence.’
29 “Men and brothers, let me speak boldly to you of
the ancestor Dawiḏ, that he died and was buried, and
his tomb is with us to this day.
30 “Being a naḇi, then, and knowing that Elohim had
sworn with an oath to him: of the fruit of his loins,
19

2467

MA’ASĔH

according to the flesh, to raise up ha’Mashiaḥ to sit
on his throne,
31 foreseeing
this he spoke concerning the
resurrection of ha’Mashiaḥ, that His being was neither
left in the grave, nor did His flesh see corruption.
32 “HWHY has raised up this {fWHY, of which we are
all witnesses.
33 “Therefore, having been exalted to the right hand
of HWHY, and having received from the Father the
promise of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, He poured out this
which you now see and hear.
34 “For Dawiḏ did not ascend into the shamayim, but
he himself said, ‘HWHY said to Aḏoni, “Sit at My right
hand,
35 until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your
feet.” ’
36 “Therefore let all the house of Yisra’ĕl know for
certain that HWHY has made this {fWHY, whom you
impaled, both Aḏon and Mashiaḥ.”
37 And having heard this, they were pierced to the
heart, and said to Kĕpha and the rest of the
emissaries, “Men, brothers, what shall we do?”
38 And Kĕpha said to them, “Repent, and let each
one of you be immersed in the Name of {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ for the forgiveness of sins. And you shall
receive the gift of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
39 “For the promise is to you and to your children, and
to all who are far off, as many as HWHY our Elohim
shall call.”
40 And with many other words he earnestly
witnessed and urged them, saying, “Be saved from
this crooked generation.”
41 Then those, indeed, who gladly received his word,
were immersed. And on that day about three
thousand beings were added to them.
2468

ACTS

And they were continuing steadfastly in the
teaching of the emissaries, and in the fellowship, and
in the breaking of bread, and in the prayers.
43 And fear came upon every being, and many
wonders and signs were being done through the
emissaries.
44 And all those who believed were together, and had
all in common,
45 and sold their possessions and property, and
divided them among all, as anyone might have need.
46 And day by day, continuing with one mind in the
Miqdash, and breaking bread from house to house,
they ate their food with gladness and simplicity of
heart,
47 praising Elohim and having favour with all the
people. And the Aḏon added to the assembly those
who were being saved, day by day.
42

3 And Kĕpha and Yoḥanan were going up to the
Miqdash at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
2 And a certain man, lame from his birth, was
carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the
Miqdash which is called Yaphah, to ask alms from
those entering into the Miqdash,
3 who, seeing Kĕpha and Yoḥanan about to go into
the Miqdash, asked for alms.
4 And Kĕpha, with Yoḥanan, looking steadfastly at
him, said, “Look at us.”
5 And he gave heed to them, expecting to receive
whatever from them.
6 But Kĕpha said, “I do not have silver and gold, but
what I do possess, this I give you: In the Name of
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ of Natsareth, rise up and walk.”

2469

MA’ASĔH

And taking him by the right hand he lifted him up,
and immediately his feet and ankle bones were made
firm.
8 And leaping up, he stood and walked, and went in
with them into the Miqdash, walking and leaping and
praising Elohim.
9 And all the people saw him walking and praising
Elohim.
10 And they recognised him, that it was he who sat
begging alms at the Lovely Gate of the Miqdash. And
they were filled with wonder and amazement at what
befell him.
11 And as the lame man who was healed was
clinging to Kĕpha and Yoḥanan, all the people ran
together to them in the porch which is called
Shelomoh’s, greatly amazed.
12 And seeing it, Kĕpha responded to the people,
“Men of Yisra’ĕl, why do you marvel at this? Or why
look so intently at us, as though by our own power or
reverence we have made him walk?
13 “The Elohim of Aḇraham, and of Yitsḥaq, and of
Ya’aqoḇ, the Elohim of our fathers, esteemed His
Servant {fWHY, whom you delivered up and denied
in the presence of Pilatus, when he had decided to
release Him.
14 “But you denied the Qodesh and Righteous One,
and asked that a man, a murderer, be granted you.
15 “But you killed the Leader of ḥai, whom HWHY
raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.
16 “And by the belief in His Name, this one whom you
see and know, His Name made strong, and the belief
which comes through Him has given him this perfect
healing before all of you.
17 “And now, brothers, I know that you did it in
ignorance, as your rulers did too.
7

2470

ACTS

“But this is how HWHY has filled what He had
announced beforehand through the mouth of all the
neḇi’im, that His Mashiaḥ was to suffer.
19 “Repent therefore and turn back, for the blotting
out of your sins, in order that times of refreshing might
come from the presence of the Aḏon,
20 and that He sends {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, preappointed for you,
21 whom the shamayim needs to receive until the
times of restoration of all, of which HWHY spoke
through the mouth of all His qodesh neḇi’im since of
old.
22 “For Mosheh truly said to the fathers, ‘HWHY your
Elohim shall raise up for you a Naḇi like me from your
brothers. Him you shall hear according to all of what
He says to you.
23 ‘And it shall be that every being who does not hear
that Naḇi shall be utterly destroyed from among the
people.’
24 “And likewise, all the neḇi’im who have spoken,
from Shemu’ĕl and those following, have also
announced these days.
25 “You are sons of the neḇi’im, and of the Covenant
which HWHY made with our fathers, saying to
Aḇraham, ‘And in your seed all the nations of the
earth shall be baruḵ.’
26 “To you first, HWHY, having raised up His Servant
{fWHY, sent Him to baraḵ you, in turning away each
one of you from your wicked ways.”
18

4 And as they were speaking to the people, the
kohenim and the captain of the Miqdash, and the
Sadducees, came upon them,

2471

MA’ASĔH

being annoyed because they taught the people
and announced the resurrection from the dead in
{fWHY.
3 And they arrested them, and put them in jail until
the next day, for it was already evening.
4 But many of those who had heard the word
believed, and the number of the men became about
five thousand.
5 And it came to be, on the next day, that their rulers
and elders and scribes,
6 as well as Ḥanan the kohĕn ha’gadol, and
Qayapha, and Yoḥanan, and Alexandros, and as
many as were descendants of the kohĕn ha’gadol
assembled at Yerushalayim.
7 And having placed them in the middle, they asked,
“By what power or in what Name did you do this?”
8 Then Kĕpha, filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, said
to them, “Rulers of the people and elders of Yisra’ĕl:
9 “If today we are called to account for a good deed
towards a sick man, by whom he has been healed,
10 let it be known to all of you, and to all the people
of Yisra’ĕl, that in the Name of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ of
Natsareth, whom you impaled, whom HWHY raised
from the dead, by Him this one stands before you,
healthy.
11 “This is ‘the stone which was rejected by you
builders, which has become the chief cornerstone.’
12 “And there is no deliverance in anyone else, for
there is no other Name under the shamayim given
among men by which we need to be saved.”
13 And seeing the boldness of Kĕpha and Yoḥanan,
and perceiving that they were unlearned and ordinary
men, they marvelled. And they recognised that they
had been with {fWHY.
2

2472

ACTS

And seeing the man who had been healed
standing with them, they could not contradict it.
15 But when they had commanded them to go aside
out of the council, they consulted with one another,
16 saying, “What shall we do to these men? For,
indeed, that an outstanding miracle has been done
through them is apparent to all those dwelling in
Yerushalayim, and we are unable to deny it.
17 “But in order that it spreads no further among the
people, let us strongly threaten them, to speak no
more to anyone in this Name.”
18 And they called them and commanded them not to
speak at all nor to teach in the Name of {fWHY.
19 But Kĕpha and Yoḥanan answering them, said,
‘Whether it is right in the sight of Elohim to listen to
you more than to Elohim, you judge.
20 “For it is impossible for us not to speak of what we
saw and heard.”
21 And having threatened them further, they released
them, finding no way of punishing them, because of
the people, because they were all praising Elohim for
what had been done.
22 For the man was over forty years old on whom this
miracle of healing had been done.
23 And having been released, they went to their own
and reported all that the chief kohenim and elders
said to them.
24 And having heard that, they lifted up their voice to
Elohim with one mind and said, “HWHY, You are
Elohim, who made the shamayim and the earth and
the sea, and all that is in them,
25 who by the mouth of Your servant Dawiḏ have
said, ‘Why did the gentiles rage, and the people plot
in vain?
14

2473

MA’ASĔH

‘The sovereigns of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against HWHY and
against His Mashiaḥ.’
27 “For truly, in this city there were gathered together
against Your qodesh Servant {fWHY, whom You
anointed, both Hĕrodĕs and Pontius Pilatus, with the
gentiles and the people of Yisra’ĕl
28 to do whatever Your hand and Your purpose
decided before to be done.
29 “And now, HWHY, look on their threats, and give to
Your servants all boldness to speak Your Word,
30 by stretching out Your hand for healing, and signs,
and wonders to take place through the Name of Your
qodesh Servant {fWHY.”
31 And when they had prayed, the place where they
came together was shaken. And they were all filled
with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, and they spoke the Word
of HWHY with boldness.
32 And the group of those who believed were of one
heart and one being. And no one claimed that any of
his possessions was his own, but they had all in
common.
33 And with great power the emissaries gave witness
to the resurrection of the Aḏon {fWHY, and great
favour was upon them all.
34 For there was not anyone needy among them, for
all who were possessors of lands or houses sold
them, and brought the prices of what was sold,
35 and laid them at the feet of the emissaries, and
they distributed to each as anyone had need.
36 And Yosĕph, who was also called Barnaḇah by
the emissaries - which translated means, son of
encouragement - a Lĕwite, a native of Kupros,
37 having land, sold it, and brought the proceeds and
laid it at the feet of the emissaries.
26

2474

ACTS

5 But a certain man named Ḥananyah, with
Sappirah his wife, sold a possession.
2 And he kept back from the price, his wife also
being aware of it, and brought a certain part and laid
it at the feet of the emissaries.
3 But Kĕpha said, “Ḥananyah, why has Satan filled
your heart to lie to the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh and keep
back from the price of the land for yourself?
4 “While it remained, did it not remain your own?
And after it was sold, was it not in your authority? Why
have you conceived this deed in your heart? You
have not lied to men but to Elohim.”
5 Then Ḥananyah, hearing these words, fell down
and breathed his last. And great fear came upon all
those who heard of this.
6 But the young men arose and wrapped him up,
carried him out and buried him.
7 And it came to be, about three hours later, that his
wife came in, not knowing what had taken place.
8 And Kĕpha responded to her, “Say to me whether
you sold the land for so much?” And she said, “Yes,
for so much.”
9 So Kĕpha said to her, “Why have you agreed to
try the Ruaḥ of HWHY? Look, the feet of those who
have buried your husband are at the door, and they
shall carry you out.”
10 And immediately she fell down at his feet and
breathed her last. And the young men came in and
found her dead, and carrying her out, they buried her
beside her husband.
11 And great fear came upon all the assembly and
upon all who heard of this.

2475

MA’ASĔH

And through the hands of the emissaries many
signs and wonders were done among the people. And
they were all with one mind in Shelomoh’s Porch.
13 But of the rest no one had the courage to join
them, however, the people made much of them.
14 And more believers were added to the Aḏon, large
numbers of both men and women,
15 so that they brought the sick out into the streets
and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the
shadow of Kĕpha, passing by, might fall on some of
them.
16 A
large number also gathered from the
surrounding cities to Yerushalayim, bringing sick
ones and those who were troubled by unclean spirits,
and they were all healed.
17 But the kohĕn ha’gadol rose up, and all those with
him, which is the sect of the Sadducees, and they
were filled with jealousy,
18 and seized the emissaries and put them in the
public jail.
19 But a messenger of HWHY opened the prison doors
at night and brought them out, and said,
20 “Go and stand in the Miqdash and speak to the
people all the Words of this ḥai.”
21 Now when they heard, they went into the Miqdash
early in the morning, and were teaching. But the
kohĕn ha’gadol and those with him came and called
the council together, with all the elders of the children
of Yisra’ĕl, and sent to the prison for them to be
brought.
22 But having come, the officers did not find them in
the prison, and they went back and reported it,
23 saying, “We found the prison shut in all safety, and
the watches standing outside before the doors. But
having opened them, we found no one inside!”
12

2476

ACTS

And as the kohĕn ha’gadol and the captain of the
Miqdash and the chief kohenim heard these words,
they were puzzled and wondered what this might be.
25 But one came and reported to them, saying, “Look,
the men whom you put in prison are standing in the
Miqdash and teaching the people!”
26 Then the captain went with the officers and
brought them, not with force, for they feared the
people, lest they should be stoned.
27 And having brought them, they put them before
the council and the kohĕn ha’gadol asked them,
28 saying, “Did we not strictly command you not to
teach in this Name? And look, you have filled
Yerushalayim with your teaching, and intend to bring
the blood of this Man upon us!”
29 And Kĕpha and the other emissaries answering,
said, “We have to obey Elohim rather than men.
30 “The Elohim of our fathers raised up {fWHY whom
you laid hands on and hung on a timber.
31 “Him, a Prince and a Saviour, Elohim has exalted
to His right hand, to give repentance to Yisra’ĕl and
forgiveness of sins.
32 “And we are His witnesses to these matters, and
so also is the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh whom Elohim has
given to those who obey Him.”
33 And those hearing were cut through, and took
counsel to kill them.
34 But a certain one in the council stood up, a
Pharisee named Gamli’ĕl, a teacher of the Torah,
respected by all the people, and ordered them to put
the emissaries outside for a little while,
35 and said to them, “Men of Yisra’ĕl, take heed to
yourselves what you intend to do to these men.
36 “For before these days Toḏah rose up, claiming to
be somebody. A number of men, about four hundred,
24

2477

MA’ASĔH

joined him. He was slain, and all who obeyed him
were dispersed, and came to naught.
37 “After him, Yahuḏah of Galil rose up in the days of
the census, and drew away many people after him.
He also perished, and all who obeyed him were
scattered.
38 “And now I say to you, stay away from these men
and leave them alone, because if this plan or this
work is of men, it shall be overthrown,
39 but if it is of Elohim, you are unable to overthrow
it, lest you even be found to fight against Elohim.”
40 And they heeded his advice, and having called for
the emissaries, beating them, they commanded that
they should not speak in the Name of {fWHY, and let
them go.
41 Then indeed they went rejoicing from the
presence of the council, because they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for His Name.
42 And daily in the Miqdash, and in every house, they
did not cease teaching and bringing the Good News:
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ!

6 And in those days, when the talmidim were
increasing, there arose a grumbling against the Iḇrim
by the Yawanites, because their widows were
overlooked in the daily serving.
2 So the twelve summoned the group of the talmidim
and said, “It is not pleasing for us to leave the Word
of HWHY and serve tables.
3 “Therefore, brothers, seek out from among you
seven men who are known to be filled with the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh and wisdom, whom we shall appoint for
this duty,
4 but we shall give ourselves continually to prayer
and to serving the Word.”
2478

ACTS

And the word pleased the entire group. And they
chose Stephanos, a man filled with belief and the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, and Philippos, and Proḵoros, and
Nikanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nikolaos, a
convert from Antioḵeus,
6 whom they put before the emissaries. And when
they had prayed, they laid hands on them.
7 And the Word of HWHY spread, and the number of
the talmidim increased greatly in Yerushalayim, and
a great many of the kohenim were obedient to the
belief.
8 And Stephanos, filled with belief and power, did
great wonders and signs among the people.
9 But some of those of the so-called Congregation
of the Freedmen - Kurĕnaions, Alexandrians, and
those from Kilikia and Asia - rose up, disputing with
Stephanos,
10 but they were unable to resist the wisdom and the
Ruaḥ by which he spoke.
11 Then they instigated men to say, “We have heard
him speak blasphemous words against Mosheh and
Elohim.”
12 And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and
the scribes, so they came upon him, seized him, and
brought him to the council.
13 And they presented false witnesses who said,
“This man does not cease to speak blasphemous
words against this Miqdash and the Torah,
14 for we have heard him saying that this {fWHY of
Natsareth shall overthrow this place and change the
institutes which Mosheh delivered unto us.”
15 And all who sat in the council, looking steadily at
him, saw his face was like the face of a messenger.
5

7 And the kohĕn ha’gadol said, “Is this so?”
2479

MA’ASĔH

And he replied, “Men, brothers and fathers, listen:
The Elohim of esteem appeared to our father
Aḇraham when he was in Aram Naharayim, before he
dwelt in Ḥaran,
3 and said to him, ‘Come out of your land and from
your relatives, and come here, into a land that I shall
show you.’
4 “Then he came out of the land of the Kasdites and
dwelt in Ḥaran. And from there, after the death of his
father, He removed him to this land in which you now
dwell.
5 “And He gave him no inheritance in it, not a foot of
it. But He promised to give it to him for a possession,
and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.
6 “And Elohim spoke in this way: that his seed would
be sojourning in a foreign land, and that they would
be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years.
7 ‘And the nation to whom they shall be enslaved, I
shall judge,’ said Elohim, ‘and after that they shall
come out and serve Me in this place.’
8 “And He gave him the covenant of circumcision.
And so he brought forth Yitsḥaq and circumcised him
on the eighth day. And Yitsḥaq - Ya’aqoḇ, and
Ya’aqoḇ - the twelve ancestors.
9 “And the ancestors, becoming jealous, sold
Yosĕph into Mitsrayim. But Elohim was with him,
10 and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and
gave him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh,
sovereign of Mitsrayim. And he appointed him
governor over Mitsrayim and all his house.
11 “Then a scarcity of food and great distress came
over all the land of Mitsrayim and Kena’an, and our
fathers found no food.
12 “But Ya’aqoḇ heard that there was grain in
Mitsrayim, and he sent out our fathers the first time,
2

2480

ACTS

and at the second time Yosĕph was made known
to his brothers, and Yosĕph’s race became known to
the Pharaoh.
14 “And Yosĕph sent and called his father Ya’aqoḇ
and all his relatives to him, seventy-five people.
15 “And Ya’aqoḇ went down to Mitsrayim, and died,
he and our fathers,
16 and they were brought over to Sheḵem and laid in
the tomb that Aḇraham bought for a price of silver
from the sons of Ḥamor, of Sheḵem.
17 “But as the time of the promise drew near which
Elohim had sworn to Aḇraham, the people increased
and multiplied in Mitsrayim
18 until another sovereign arose who did not know
Yosĕph.
19 “Having dealt treacherously with our race, this one
mistreated our fathers, making them expose their
children, so that they should not live.
20 “At that time Mosheh was born, and he was wellpleasing to Elohim. And he was reared three months
in the house of his father.
21 “But when he was exposed, the daughter of
Pharaoh took him up and reared him as her own son.
22 “And Mosheh was instructed in all the wisdom of
the Mitsrites, and was mighty in words and works.
23 “And when he was forty years old, it came into his
heart to visit his brothers, the children of Yisra’ĕl.
24 “And seeing one of them being wronged, he
defended and revenged him who was oppressed,
smiting the Mitsrite.
25 “And he thought that his brothers would have
understood that Elohim would give deliverance to
them by his hand, but they did not understand.
26 “And the next day he appeared to two of them as
they were fighting, and urged them to peace, saying,
13

2481

MA’ASĔH

‘Men, you are brothers, why do you wrong one
another?’
27 “But he who was wronging his neighbour pushed
him away, saying, ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge
over us?
28 ‘Do you want to kill me as you killed the Mitsrite
yesterday?’
29 “And at this saying, Mosheh fled and became a
sojourner in the land of Miḏyan, where he fathered
two sons.
30 “And after forty years were completed, a
Messenger of HWHY appeared to him in a flame of fire
in a bush, in the wilderness of Mount Sinai.
31 “And Mosheh, seeing it, marvelled at the sight, and
coming near to look, the voice of HWHY came to him,
32 saying, ‘I am the Elohim of your fathers, the Elohim
of Aḇraham and the Elohim of Yitsḥaq and the Elohim
of Ya’aqoḇ.’ And Mosheh trembled and did not have
the courage to look.
33 ‘But HWHY said to him, “Take your sandals off your
feet, for the place where you stand is qodesh ground.
34 “I have certainly seen the evil treatment of my
people who are in Mitsrayim, and I have heard their
groaning and have come down to deliver them. And
now come, let Me send you to Mitsrayim.” ’
35 “This Mosheh whom they had refused, saying,
‘Who made you a ruler and a judge?’ - this one Elohim
sent to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the
Messenger who appeared to him in the bush.
36 “This one led them out, after he had done wonders
and signs in the land of Mitsrayim, and in the Red
Sea, and in the wilderness forty years.
37 “This is the Mosheh who said to the children of
Yisra’ĕl, ‘HWHY your Elohim shall raise up for you a
Naḇi like me from your brothers. Him you shall hear.’
2482

ACTS

“This is he who was in the assembly in the
wilderness with the Messenger who spoke to him on
Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, who received the
living Words to give to us,
39 unto whom our fathers would not become
obedient, but thrust away, and in their hearts they
turned back to Mitsrayim,
40 saying to Aharon, ‘Make us mighty ones to go
before us, for this Mosheh who led us out of the land
of Mitsrayim, we do not know what has become of
him.’
41 “And they made a calf in those days, and brought
an offering to the idol, and were rejoicing in the works
of their own hands.
42 “So Elohim turned and gave them up to worship
the host of the shamayim, as it has been written in the
Book of the Neḇi’im, ‘Did you bring slaughtered
beasts and offerings unto Me during forty years in the
wilderness, O house of Yisra’ĕl?
43 ‘And you took up the tent of Moleḵ, and the star of
your mighty one Kiyyun, images which you made to
bow before them. Therefore I shall remove you
beyond Baḇel.’
44 “The Tent of Witness was with our fathers in the
wilderness, as He appointed, instructing Mosheh to
make it according to the pattern that he had seen,
45 which our fathers, having received it in turn, also
brought with Yahoshua into the land possessed by
the gentiles, whom Elohim drove out before the face
of our fathers until the days of Dawiḏ,
46 who found favour before Elohim and asked to find
a dwelling for the Elohim of Ya’aqoḇ,
47 but Shelomoh built Him a house.
48 “However, the Most High does not dwell in
dwellings made with hands, as the naḇi says:
38

2483

MA’ASĔH

‘The shamayim is My throne, and earth is My
footstool. What house shall you build for Me? Says
HWHY, or what is the place of My rest?
50 ‘Has My hand not made all these?’
51 “You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears! You always resist the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, as your
fathers did, you also do.
52 “Which of the neḇi’im did your fathers not
persecute? And they killed those who before
announced the coming of the Righteous One, of
whom you now have become the betrayers and
murderers,
53 who received the Torah as it was ordained by
messengers, but did not watch over it.”
54 And hearing this they were cut to the heart and
gnashed the teeth at him.
55 But he, being filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
looked steadily into the shamayim and saw the
esteem of Elohim, and {fWHY standing at the right
hand of HWHY,
56 and he said, “Look! I see the shamayim opened
and the Bĕn of Aḏam standing at the right hand of
HWHY!”
57 And crying out with a loud voice, they stopped their
ears, and rushed upon him with one mind,
58 and threw him out of the city and stoned him. And
the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of
a young man named Sha’ul.
59 And they were stoning Stephanos as he was
calling and saying, “Aḏonai {fWHY, receive my spirit.”
60 And kneeling down he cried out with a loud voice,
“Aḏonai, do not hold this sin against them.” And
having said this, he fell asleep.
49

2484

ACTS

8 And Sha’ul was giving approval to his death. And
on that day there was a great persecution against the
assembly which was at Yerushalayim, and they were
all scattered throughout the countries of Yahuḏah and
Shomeron, except the emissaries.
2 And dedicated men buried Stephanos, and made
great lamentation over him.
3 But Sha’ul was ravaging the assembly, entering
every house, and dragging off men and women,
putting them in prison.
4 Then those who had been scattered went
everywhere bringing the Good News: the Word!
5 And going down to the city of Shomeron Philippos
proclaimed Mashiaḥ to them.
6 And the crowds with one mind heeded what
Philippos said, hearing and seeing the miracles which
he did.
7 For unclean spirits came out of many who were
possessed, crying with a loud voice, and many who
were paralysed and lame were healed.
8 And there came to be great joy in that city.
9 Now there was a certain man called Shim’on, who
formerly was practising magic in the city and
astonishing the people of Shomeron, claiming to be
someone great,
10 to whom they all were giving heed, from the least
to the greatest, saying, “This one is the power of
Elohim, which is great.”
11 And they were giving heed to him because for a
long time he had amazed them with his magic.
12 And when they believed Philippos as he brought
the Good News about the reign of Elohim and the
Name of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, both men and women
were immersed.
2485

MA’ASĔH

And Shim’on himself also believed. And when he
was immersed he continued with Philippos, and was
amazed, seeing the miracles and signs which took
place.
14 And
when the emissaries who were at
Yerushalayim heard that Shomeron had received the
Word of HWHY, they sent Kĕpha and Yoḥanan to
them,
15 who, when they had come down, prayed for them
to receive the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
16 which had not yet fallen, on any of them, but they
had only been immersed in the Name of the Aḏon
{fWHY.
17 Then they laid hands on them, and they received
the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
18 And Shim’on, seeing that through the laying on of
the hands of the emissaries the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh was
given, he offered them money,
19 saying, “Give me this authority too, so that anyone
I lay hands on shall receive the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.”
20 But Kĕpha said to him, “Let your silver perish with
you, because you thought to buy the gift of Elohim
through money!
21 “You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for
your heart is not right before Elohim.
22 “Repent therefore of this evil of yours, and plead
with Elohim to forgive you the intention of your heart.
23 “For I see that you are poisoned by bitterness and
bound by unrighteousness.”
24 But Shim’on answering, said, “Plead with the Aḏon
for me, so that none of what you had said shall come
upon me.”
25 Then after they had earnestly witnessed and
spoken the Word of HWHY, they returned to
13

2486

ACTS

Yerushalayim, bringing the Good News in many
villages of the Shomeronites.
26 But a messenger of HWHY spoke to Philippos,
saying, “Arise and go toward the south along the way
which goes down from Yerushalayim to Azzah.” This
is desert.
27 And he arose and went, and saw, a man of Kush,
a eunuch of great authority under Kandakĕ the
sovereigness of the Kushites, who was in charge of
all her treasury, and had come to Yerushalayim to
worship,
28 and was returning. And sitting in his chariot, he
was reading the naḇi Yeshayahu.
29 And the Ruaḥ said to Philippos, “Go near and join
him in that chariot.”
30 And running up, Philippos heard him reading the
naḇi Yeshayahu, and said, “Do you know what you
are reading?”
31 And he said, “How am I able, unless someone
guides me?” And he called Philippos near, to come
up and sit with him.
32 And the passage of the Scripture which he was
reading was this, “He was led as a sheep to slaughter,
and like a lamb silent before its shearer, so He
opened not His mouth.
33 “In His humiliation He was deprived of right-ruling.
And who shall declare His generation? Because His
ḥai was taken from the earth.”
34 And the eunuch, answering Philippos, said, “I ask
you, about whom does the naḇi say this, about
himself or about some other?”
35 And Philippos opening his mouth, and beginning
at this Scripture, brought to him the Good News:
{fWHY!
2487

MA’ASĔH

And as they were going on the way, they came to
some water. And the eunuch said, “Look, water! What
hinders me from being immersed?”
37 And Philippos said, “If you believe with all your
heart, it is permitted.” And he answering, said, “I
believe that {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ is the Bĕn of HWHY.”
38 And he commanded the chariot to stand still. And
both Philippos and the eunuch went down into the
water, and he immersed him.
39 And when they came up out of the water, the Ruaḥ
of HWHY caught Philippos away, and the eunuch saw
him no more, for he went his way, rejoicing.
40 Philippos, however, was found at Ashdoḏ. And
passing through, he brought the Good News in all the
cities until he came to Kaisereia.
36

9 But Sha’ul, still breathing threats and murder
against the talmidim of the Aḏon, having come to the
kohĕn ha’gadol,
2 asked from him letters to the congregations of
Dammeseq, so that if he found any who were of the
Way, whether men or women, to bring them bound to
Yerushalayim.
3 And it came to be, that as he journeyed, he came
near Dammeseq, and suddenly a light flashed around
him from the shamayim.
4 And he fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying
to him, “Sha’ul, Sha’ul, why do you persecute Me?”
5 And he said, “Who are You, Aḏonai?” And the
Aḏon said, “I am {fWHY, whom you persecute. It is
hard for you to kick against the prods.”
6 Both trembling, and being astonished, he said,
“Aḏonai, what do You want me to do?” And the Aḏon
said to him, “Arise and go into the city, and you shall
be told what you have to do.”
2488

ACTS

And the men journeying with him stood
speechless, hearing indeed the voice but seeing no
one.
8 And Sha’ul arose from the ground, but when his
eyes were opened he saw no one. And leading him
by the hand they brought him into Dammeseq.
9 And he was three days without sight, and did not
eat nor drink.
10 And there was at Dammeseq a certain talmid, by
name Ḥananyah. And the Aḏon said unto him in a
vision, “Ḥananyah!” And he said, “Here I am, Aḏonai.”
11 And the Aḏon said to him, “Arise and go to the
street called Straight, and seek in the house of
Yahuḏah for one called Sha’ul of Tarsos, for look, he
is praying,
12 and has seen in a vision a man named Ḥananyah
coming in and laying his hand on him, so as to see
again.”
13 And Ḥananyah answered, “Aḏonai, I have heard
from many about this man, how many evils he did to
Your qodeshim in Yerushalayim,
14 and here he has authority from the chief kohenim
to bind all those calling on Your Name.”
15 But the Aḏon said to him, “Go, for he is a chosen
vessel of Mine to bear My Name before nations,
sovereigns, and the children of Yisra’ĕl.
16 “For I shall show him how much he has to suffer
for My Name.”
17 And Ḥananyah went away and went into the
house. And laying his hands on him he said, “Brother
Sha’ul, the Aḏon {fWHY, who appeared to you on the
way as you came, has sent me, so that you might see
again and be filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.”
7

2489

MA’ASĔH

And immediately there fell from his eyes, as it were
scales, and he received his sight. And rising up, he
was immersed.
19 And having received food, he was strengthened.
And Sha’ul was with the talmidim at Dammeseq some
days.
20 And immediately he proclaimed ha’Mashiaḥ in the
congregations, that He is the Bĕn of HWHY.
21 And all who heard were amazed, and said, “Is this
not he who destroyed those calling on this Name in
Yerushalayim, and has come here for this, to take
them bound to the chief kohenim?”
22 But Sha’ul kept increasing in strength, and was
confounding the Yahuḏim who dwelt in Dammeseq,
proving that this is ha’Mashiaḥ.
23 And after many days had elapsed, the Yahuḏim
plotted to kill him.
24 But their plot became known to Sha’ul. And they
were closely watching the gates day and night, to kill
him.
25 But taking him by night, the talmidim let him down
through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
26 And having arrived at Yerushalayim, Sha’ul tried
to join the talmidim, but they were all afraid of him, not
believing that he was a talmid.
27 But Barnaḇah took him and brought him to the
emissaries, and told them how he had seen the Aḏon
on the way, and that He had spoken to him, and how
he was speaking boldly at Dammeseq in the Name of
{fWHY.
28 And he was with them at Yerushalayim, coming in
and going out,
29 and speaking boldly in the Name of the Aḏon
{fWHY and disputed with the Yawanites, but they
undertook to kill him.
18

2490

ACTS

And when the brothers learned of this, they
brought him down to Kaisereia and sent him out to
Tarsos.
31 Then indeed the assemblies throughout all
Yahuḏah, and Galil, and Shomeron had peace and
were built up, and walking in the reverence of HWHY
and in the encouragement of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
they were being increased.
32 And it came to be, as Kĕpha was passing all
throughout, that he also came down to the qodeshim
who were dwelling at Loḏ.
33 And there he found a certain man named Aineas,
who had been bedridden for eight years, being
paralytic.
34 And Kĕpha said to him, “Aineas, {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ heals you! Rise up and make your bed.”
And immediately he rose up.
35 And all those dwelling at Loḏ and Sharon saw him
and turned to the Aḏon.
36 And in Yapho there was a certain talmid named
Taḇitha, which means Dorkas. This woman was filled
with good works and kind deeds which she did.
37 And it came to be in those days that she became
sick and died. And having washed her, they laid her
in an upper room.
38 And Loḏ being near to Yapho, and the talmidim
having heard that Kĕpha was there, they sent two
men to him, urging him not to delay in coming to them.
39 And having risen up, Kĕpha went with them. And
when he arrived, they brought him to the upper room.
And all the widows stood beside him weeping,
showing the inner garments and outer garments
which Dorkas had made while she was with them.
40 But Kĕpha sent them all out, and knelt down and
prayed. And turning to the body he said, “Taḇitha,
30

2491

MA’ASĔH

arise.” And she opened her eyes, and seeing Kĕpha,
she sat up.
41 And giving her his hand, he lifted her up. And
calling the qodeshim and widows, he presented her
alive.
42 And it became known throughout all Yapho, and
many believed on the Aḏon.
43 And it came to be that he stayed for many days in
Yapho with Shim’on, a leather-tanner.

10 Now there was a certain man in Kaisereia called
Kornĕlius, a captain of what was called the Italian
Regiment,
2
dedicated, and revering Elohim with all his
household, doing many kind deeds to the people, and
praying to Elohim always.
3
He clearly saw in a vision, about the ninth hour of
the day, a messenger of Elohim coming to him, and
saying to him, “Kornĕlius!”
4
And looking intently at him, and becoming afraid,
he said, “What is it, master?” And he said to him,
“Your prayers and your kind deeds have come up for
a remembrance before Elohim.
5
“And now send men to Yapho, and send for
Shim’on who is also called Kĕpha.
6
“He is staying with Shim’on, a leather-tanner,
whose house is by the sea.”
7
And when the messenger who spoke to him went
away, Kornĕlius called two of his household servants,
and a dedicated soldier from among those who
waited on him continually.
8
And having explained to them all, he sent them to
Yapho.

2492

ACTS

And on the next day, as they were on their way
and approaching the city, Kĕpha went up on the
house-top to pray, about the sixth hour.
10 And he became hungry and wanted to eat. But
while they were preparing, he fell into a trance,
11 and he saw the shamayim opened and a certain
vessel like a great sheet bound at the four corners,
descending to him and let down to the earth,
12 in which were all kinds of four-footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping creatures, and
the birds of the shamayim.
13 And a voice came to him, “Rise up, Kĕpha, slay
and eat.”
14 But Kĕpha said, “Not at all, Aḏonai! Because I
have never eaten whatever is common or unclean.”
15 And a voice came to him again the second time,
“What Elohim has cleansed you do not consider
common.”
16 And this took place three times, and the vessel
was taken back to the shamayim.
17 And while Kĕpha was doubting within himself
about what the vision might mean, look, the men who
had been sent from Kornĕlius, having asked for the
house of Shim’on, stood at the gate,
18 and calling out, they enquired whether Shim’on,
also known as Kĕpha, was staying there.
19 And as Kĕpha was thinking about the vision, the
Ruaḥ said to him, “See, three men seek you.
20 “But rise up, go down and go with them, not
doubting at all, for I have sent them.”
21 So Kĕpha went down to the men who had been
sent to him from Kornĕlius, and said, “Look, I am the
one you seek. Why have you come?”
22 And they said, “Kornĕlius the captain, a righteous
man and one who reveres Elohim and well spoken of
9

2493

MA’ASĔH

by the entire nation of the Yahuḏim, was instructed by
a qodesh messenger to send for you to his house,
and to hear words from you.”
23 So inviting them in, he housed them. And on the
next day Kĕpha went away with them, and some
brothers from Yapho went with him.
24 And the following day they entered into Kaisereia.
And Kornĕlius was waiting for them, having called
together his relatives and close friends.
25 And it came to be, that when Kĕpha entered,
Kornĕlius met him and fell down at his feet and bowed
before him.
26 But Kĕpha raised him up, saying, “Stand up, I
myself am also a man.”
27 And talking with him, he went in and found many
who had come together.
28 And he said to them, “You know that a Yahuḏi is
not allowed to associate with, or go to one of another
race. But Elohim has shown me that I should not call
any man common or unclean.
29 “That is why I came without hesitation when I was
sent for. So I ask, why have you sent for me?”
30 And Kornĕlius said, “Four days ago I was fasting
until this hour. And at the ninth hour I prayed in my
house, and see, a man stood before me in shining
garments,
31 and said, ‘Kornĕlius, your prayer has been heard,
and your kind deeds were remembered before
Elohim.
32 ‘Now send to Yapho and call Shim’on here, who is
also called Kĕpha. He is staying in the house of
Shim’on, a leather-tanner, by the sea. When he
comes, he shall speak to you.’
33 “So I sent to you immediately, and you have done
well to come. And now, we are all present before
2494

ACTS

Elohim, to hear all that you have been commanded
by Elohim.”
34 And opening his mouth, Kĕpha said, “Truly I see
that Elohim shows no partiality,
35 but in every nation, he who reveres Him and works
righteousness is accepted by Him.
36 “He sent the Word to the children of Yisra’ĕl,
bringing the Good News: peace through {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ! He is Aḏon of all.
37 “You know what Word came to be throughout all
Yahuḏah, beginning from Galil after the immersion
which Yoḥanan proclaimed:
38 how HWHY anointed {fWHY of Natsareth with the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh and with power, who went about
doing good and healing all who were oppressed by
the devil, for HWHY was with Him.
39 “And we are witnesses of all He did, both in the
country of the Yahuḏim and in Yerushalayim, whom
they even killed by hanging on a timber.
40 “HWHY raised up this One on the third day, and let
Him be seen,
41 not to all the people, but to witnesses, those
having been chosen before by Elohim - to us who ate
and drank with Him after He arose from the dead.
42 “And He commanded us to proclaim to the people,
and to witness that it is He who was appointed by
HWHY to be Judge of the living and the dead.
43 “To this One all the Neḇi’im bear witness, that
through His Name, everyone believing in Him
receives forgiveness of sins.”
44 While Kĕpha was still speaking these words, the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh fell upon all those hearing the Word.
45 And those of the circumcision who believed were
astonished, as many as came with Kĕpha, because
2495

MA’ASĔH

the gift of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh had been poured out
on the gentiles also,
46 for they were hearing them speaking with tongues
and extolling Elohim. Then Kĕpha answered,
47 “Is anyone able to forbid water, that these should
not be immersed who have received the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh - even as also we?”
48 And he commanded them to be immersed in the
Name of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ. Then they asked him to
remain a few days.

11 And the emissaries and brothers who were in
Yahuḏah heard that the gentiles also received the
Word of HWHY.
2 And when Kĕpha went up to Yerushalayim, those
of the circumcision were contending with him,
3 saying, “You went in to uncircumcised men and
ate with them!”
4 But Kĕpha began and lay it forth in order, saying:
5 “I was in the city of Yapho praying. And in a trance
I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending like a
great sheet, let down from the shamayim by four
corners, and it came to me.
6 “Having looked into it, I perceived and I saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping creatures, and the birds of the shamayim.
7 “And I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise up,
Kĕpha, slay and eat.’
8 “But I said, ‘Not at all, Aḏonai! Because whatever
is common or unclean has never entered into my
mouth.’
9 “And the voice answered me again from the
shamayim, ‘What Elohim has cleansed you do not
consider common.’
2496

ACTS

“And this took place three times, and all were
drawn up again into the shamayim.
11 “And see, immediately three men stood before the
house where I was, having been sent to me from
Kaisereia.
12 “And the Ruaḥ said to me to go with them, not
doubting at all. And these six brothers also went with
me, and we went into the man’s house.
13 “And he told us how he had seen a messenger
standing in his house, who said to him, ‘Send men to
Yapho, and call for Shim’on who is also called Kĕpha,
14 who shall speak to you words, by which you shall
be saved, you and all your house.’
15 “And as I began to speak, the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh fell
upon them, as upon us at the beginning.
16 “And I remembered the word of the Aḏon, how He
said, ‘Yoḥanan indeed immersed in water, but you
shall be immersed in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.’
17 “So if Elohim gave them the same gift as He gave
us when we believed on the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
how was I able to withstand Elohim?”
18 And having heard this, they were silent, and
praised Elohim, saying, “Then Elohim has indeed also
given to the gentiles repentance to ḥai.”
19 Then, indeed, they who were scattered because
of the pressure that arose over Stephanos passed
through to Phoinikĕ, and Kupros, and Antioḵeia,
speaking the Word to no one except the Yahuḏim
only.
20 But some of them were men from Kupros and
Kurĕnĕ, who, when they had come to Antioḵeia,
spoke to the Yawanites, bringing the Good News: the
Aḏon {fWHY!
21 And the hand of the Aḏon was with them, and a
great number having believed turned to the Aḏon.
10

2497

MA’ASĔH

And Word of it came to the ears of the assembly
in Yerushalayim, and they sent out Barnaḇah to go as
far as Antioḵeia,
23 who, having come, and seeing the favour of
Elohim, was glad, and encouraged them all with
purpose of heart to cling to the Aḏon.
24 Because he was a good man, and filled with the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh and with belief. And large numbers
were added to the Aḏon.
25 Then Barnaḇah went to Tarsos to seek Sha’ul,
26 and having found him, he brought him to
Antioḵeia. And it came to be that for an entire year
they came together in the assembly and taught large
numbers. And the talmidim were called ‘Mashiaḥiyim’
first in Antioḵeia.
27 And
in those days neḇi’im came from
Yerushalayim to Antioḵeia.
28 And one of them, named Ḥaḡaḇ, stood up and
indicated by the Ruaḥ that there was going to be a
great scarcity of food over all the world - which also
took place under Klaudius Kaisar.
29 So the talmidim, each according to his ability,
decided to send relief to the brothers dwelling in
Yahuḏah.
30 This they also did, and sent it to the elders by the
hands of Barnaḇah and Sha’ul.
22

12 And about that time Hĕrodĕs the sovereign put
forth his hands to do evil to some from the assembly.
2 And he killed Ya’aqoḇ the brother of Yoḥanan with
the sword.
3 And seeing that it was pleasing to the Yahuḏim, he
proceeded further to arrest Kĕpha as well - and they
were the Days of Matstsoth.
2498

ACTS

So when he had seized him, he put him in prison,
and delivered him to four squads of soldiers to watch
over him, intending to bring him before the people
after Pesaḥ.
5 So Kĕpha was indeed kept in prison, but prayer
was earnestly made to HWHY on his behalf by the
assembly.
6 And when Hĕrodĕs was about to bring him out,
that night Kĕpha was sleeping, bound with two chains
between two soldiers. And the guards before the door
were keeping the prison.
7 And see, a messenger of HWHY stood by, and a
light shone in the building. And smiting the side of
Kĕpha he raised him up, saying, “Get up quickly!” And
his chains fell off his hands.
8 And the messenger said to him, “Gird yourself and
bind on your sandals,” and he did so. And he said to
him, “Put on your garment and follow me.”
9 And coming out he followed him, and knew not
that what was done by the messenger was true, but
thought he was seeing a vision.
10 And when they had passed the first and the
second guard posts, they came to the iron gate that
leads to the city, which opened to them by itself. And
they went out and went down one street, and the
messenger instantly withdrew from him.
11 And when Kĕpha had come to himself, he said,
“Now I truly know that HWHY has sent His messenger,
and delivered me from the hand of Hĕrodĕs and all
the anticipation of the Yahuḏim.”
12 And having realised this, he went to the house of
Miryam, the mother of Yoḥanan who was also called
Markos, where many had gathered to pray.
13 And when Kĕpha knocked at the door of the gate,
a girl named Rhodĕ came to answer.
4

2499

MA’ASĔH

And when she recognised Kĕpha’s voice, she did
not open the gate because of her joy, but ran in and
reported that Kĕpha stood before the gate.
15 And they said to her, “You are mad!” But she kept
insisting that it was so, and they said, “It is his
messenger.”
16 And Kĕpha continued knocking, and having
opened they saw him and were amazed.
17 And motioning to them with his hand to be silent,
he told them how the Aḏon brought him out of the
prison. And he said, “Report this to Ya’aqoḇ and to
the brothers.” And he left and went to another place.
18 Now when day came, there was no small stir
among the soldiers about what had become of
Kĕpha.
19 And when Hĕrodĕs had searched for him and did
not find him, he examined the guards and ordered
them to be led away. And he went down from
Yahuḏah to Kaisereia, and stayed there.
20 Now Hĕrodĕs had been highly displeased with the
people of Tsor and Tsiḏon, but with one mind they
came to him, and having made Blastos the
sovereign’s eunuch their friend, they were asking for
peace, because their country was supplied with food
by the sovereign.
21 And on an appointed day Hĕrodĕs, having put on
his royal clothes, sat on his throne and gave an
address to them.
22 And the people kept shouting, “The voice of a
mighty one and not of a man!”
23 And instantly a messenger of HWHY smote him,
because he did not give the esteem to Elohim. And
becoming worm-eaten, he died.
24 And the Word of HWHY went on growing and
spreading.
14

2500

ACTS

And Barnaḇah and Sha’ul returned from
Yerushalayim, having completed the service, and
having taken with them Yoḥanan who was also called
Markos.

25

13 And in the assembly that was at Antioḵeia there
were certain neḇi’im and teachers: both Barnaḇah
and Shim’on who was called Niger, and Lukios of
Kurĕnĕ, and Manaḥĕm who had been brought up with
Hĕrodĕs the district ruler, and Sha’ul.
2 And as they were doing service to the Aḏon and
fasted, the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh said, “Separate unto Me
Barnaḇah and Sha’ul for the work to which I have
called them.”
3 Then having fasted and prayed, and having laid
hands on them, they sent them away.
4 So they, having been sent out by the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh, went down to Seleukeia, and from there
they sailed to Kupros.
5 And having come into Salamis, they proclaimed
the Word of HWHY in the congregations of the
Yahuḏim. And they also had Yoḥanan as an
attendant.
6 And having passed through all the island to
Paphos, they found a certain magician, a false
prophet, a Yahuḏi whose name was Bar-Yahoshua,
7 who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a
man of understanding. This man, having called for
Barnaḇah and Sha’ul, earnestly sought to hear the
Word of HWHY.
8 But Elumas the magician - for so his name is
translated - withstood them, seeking to turn the
proconsul away from the belief.
9 Then Sha’ul, filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
looked intently at him,
2501

MA’ASĔH

and said, “O son of the devil, filled with all deceit
and all recklessness, you enemy of all righteousness,
shall you not cease corrupting the straight Ways of
HWHY?
11 “And now, see, the hand of HWHY is upon you, and
you shall be blind, not seeing the sun for a time.” And
instantly a dark mist fell on him, and he went around
seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
12 And having seen what took place, the proconsul
believed, being astonished at the teaching of the
Aḏon.
13 And having put out from Paphos, Sha’ul and those
with him came to Pergĕ in Pamphulia. And Yoḥanan,
having left them, returned to Yerushalayim.
14 But passing through from Pergĕ, they came to
Antioḵeia in Pisidia, and went into the congregation
on the Shabbath day and sat down.
15 And after the reading of the Torah and the Neḇi’im,
the rulers of the congregation sent to them, saying,
“Men, brothers, if you have any word of
encouragement for the people, speak.”
16 And Sha’ul, standing up and motioning with his
hand said, “Men, Yisra’ĕlites, and those revering
Elohim, listen:
17 “The Elohim of this people Yisra’ĕl chose our
fathers, and exalted the people in their sojourning in
the land of Mitsrayim, and with a high arm He brought
them out of it.
18 “Now for a time of about forty years He sustained
them in the wilderness.
19 “And having destroyed seven nations in the land
of Kena’an, He gave their land to them as an
inheritance.
20 “And after that He gave judges for about four
hundred and fifty years, until Shemu’ĕl the naḇi.
10

2502

ACTS

“But then they asked for a sovereign, and Elohim
gave them Sha’ul the son of Qish, a man of the tribe
of Binyamin, for forty years.
22 “And having removed him, He raised up for them
Dawiḏ as sovereign, to whom also He gave witness
and said, ‘I have found Dawiḏ the son of Yishai, a man
after My own heart, who shall do all My desires.’
23 “From this one’s seed, according to the promise,
HWHY raised up for Yisra’ĕl a Saviour, {fWHY,
24 after Yoḥanan had first proclaimed the immersion
of repentance to all the people of Yisra’ĕl, before His
coming.
25 “And as Yoḥanan was completing his mission, he
said, ‘Who do you suppose I am? I am not He. But
see, there comes One after me, the sandals of whose
feet I am not worthy to loose.’
26 “Men, brothers, sons of the race of Aḇraham, and
those among you revering Elohim, to you the Word of
this deliverance has been sent,
27 for those dwelling in Yerushalayim, and their
rulers, because they did not know Him, nor even the
voices of the Neḇi’im which are read every Shabbath,
have filled them in having judged Him.
28 “And having found not one cause for death, they
asked Pilatus that He should be put to death.
29 “And when they had accomplished all that was
written concerning Him, taking Him down from the
timber, they laid Him in a tomb.
30 “But HWHY raised Him from the dead,
31 and He was seen for many days by those who
came up with Him from Galil to Yerushalayim, who
are His witnesses to the people.
32 “And we bring you the Good News, the promise
made to the fathers,
21

2503

MA’ASĔH

that HWHY has filled this for us, their children,
having raised up {fWHY, as it has also been written
in the second Tehillah, ‘You are My Bĕn, today I have
brought You forth.’
34 “And that He raised Him out of the dead, no more
to return to corruption, He has said thus, ‘I shall give
you the trustworthy kindnesses of Dawiḏ.’
35 “For this reason He also says in another Tehillah,
‘You shall not give Your Kind One to see corruption.’
36 “For Dawiḏ, indeed, having served his own
generation by the counsel of Elohim, fell asleep, was
buried with his fathers, and saw corruption,
37 but He whom HWHY raised up saw no corruption.
38 “Let it therefore be known to you, brothers, that
through this One forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to
you,
39 and by Him everyone who believes is declared
right from all of which you were not able to be
declared right by the Torah of Mosheh.
40 “Watch then that what was said in the Neḇi’im
does not come upon you:
41 “See, you despisers, marvel and perish, for I work
a work in your days, a work which you would in no
way believe if someone were to declare it to you.’ ”
42 And when the Yahuḏim went out of the
congregation, the gentiles begged to have these
words spoken to them the next Shabbath.
43 And when the congregation had broken up, many
of the Yahuḏim and of the worshipping converts
followed Sha’ul and Barnaḇah, who, speaking to
them, were urging them to continue in the favour of
Elohim.
44 And on the next Shabbath almost all the city came
together to hear the Word of HWHY.
33

2504

ACTS

But when the Yahuḏim saw the crowds, they were
filled with jealousy. And contradicting and speaking
evil, they opposed what Sha’ul was saying.
46 But speaking boldly, Sha’ul and Barnaḇah said, “It
was necessary that the Word of Elohim should be
spoken to you first, but since you thrust it away, and
judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting ḥai, see, we
turn to the gentiles.
47 “For so the Aḏon has commanded us, ‘I have
appointed you to be a light to the gentiles, that you
should be for deliverance to the ends of the earth.’ ”
48 And when the gentiles heard this, they were glad
and praised the Word of HWHY. And as many as had
been appointed to everlasting ḥai believed.
49 And the Word of HWHY was being spread
throughout the entire country.
50 But the Yahuḏim stirred up the worshipping and
noble women and the chief men of the city, and raised
up persecution against Sha’ul and Barnaḇah, and
threw them out of their borders.
51 And shaking off the dust from their feet against
them, they came to Ikonion.
52 And the talmidim were filled with joy and the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.
45

14 And it came to be in Ikonion that they went
together into the congregation of the Yahuḏim, and
spoke in such a way that a great number of both
Yahuḏim and Yawanites believed.
2 But the Yahuḏim who would not obey stirred up
the gentiles and evilly influenced their beings against
the brothers.
3 So they remained a long time, speaking boldly in
the Aḏon, who was bearing witness to the Word of His
2505

MA’ASĔH

favour, giving signs and wonders to be done by their
hands.
4 And the crowd of the city was divided, and some
sided with the Yahuḏim, and some with the
emissaries.
5 But when a move took place by both the gentiles
and Yahuḏim, with their rulers, to mistreat and stone
them,
6 they became aware of it and fled to Lustra and
Derbĕ, cities of Lukaonia, and the country round
about.
7 And they were bringing the Good News there.
8 And in Lustra there was sitting a certain man,
disabled in his feet, a cripple from his mother’s womb,
who had never walked.
9 This one heard Sha’ul speaking, who, looking
intently at him and seeing that he had belief to be
healed,
10 said with a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet!”
And he sprang up and began to walk.
11 And when the crowds saw what Sha’ul had done,
they lifted up their voices, saying in Lukaonian, “The
mighty ones have become like men and come down
to us!”
12 And they called Barnaḇah - Zeus, and Sha’ul Hermĕs, since he was the chief speaker.
13 And the priest of Zeus, being in front of their city,
brought oxen and wreaths to the gates, and wanted
to offer with the crowds.
14 And when the emissaries Barnaḇah and Sha’ul
heard this, they tore their garments and ran in among
the crowd, crying out
15 and saying, “Men, why are you doing this? We
also are men with the same nature as you, bringing
to you the Good News: to turn from these worthless
2506

ACTS

matters to the living Elohim, who made the
shamayim, and the earth, and the sea, and all that is
in them,
16 who in past generations allowed all the nations to
walk in their own ways,
17 though, indeed, He did not leave Himself without
witness, doing good - giving us rain from the
shamayim and fruit-bearing seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness.”
18 Even with these words they still had difficulty in
stopping the crowds from offering to them.
19 But Yahuḏim arrived from Antioḵeia and Ikonion,
and having won over the crowds, they stoned Sha’ul,
dragged him out of the city, thinking he was dead.
20 But while the talmidim gathered around him, he
rose up and went into the city. And on the next day he
went away with Barnaḇah to Derbĕ.
21 And having brought the Good News to that city,
and having instructed many, they returned to Lustra,
and Ikonion, and Antioḵeia,
22 strengthening the beings
of the talmidim,
encouraging them to continue in the belief, and that
through many pressures we have to enter the reign of
Elohim.
23 And having appointed elders in every assembly,
having prayed with fasting, they committed them to
the Aḏon in whom they had believed.
24 And having passed through Pisidia, they came to
Pamphulia.
25 And having spoken the Word in Pergĕ, they went
down to Attaleia,
26 and from there they sailed to Antioḵeia, where they
had been committed to the favour of Elohim for the
work which they had completed.
2507

MA’ASĔH

And having arrived, and having gathered together
the assembly, they related all that Elohim had done
with them, and that He had opened the door of belief
to the gentiles.
28 And they remained there a long time with the
talmidim.
27

15 And certain men came down from Yahuḏah and
were teaching the brothers, “Unless you are
circumcised, according to the practice of Mosheh, you
are unable to be saved.”
2 So when Sha’ul and Barnaḇah had no small
dissension and dispute with them, they arranged for
Sha’ul and Barnaḇah and certain others of them to go
up to Yerushalayim, to the emissaries and elders,
about this question.
3 So, being sent on their way by the assembly, they
passed through Phoinikĕ and Shomeron, relating the
conversion of the gentiles. And they were causing
great joy to all the brothers.
4 And having arrived in Yerushalayim, they were
received by the assembly and the emissaries and the
elders. And they reported all that Elohim had done
with them.
5 And some of the believers who belonged to the
sect of the Pharisees, rose up, saying, “It is necessary
to circumcise them, and to command them to keep
the Torah of Mosheh.”
6 And the emissaries and elders came together to
look into this matter.
7 And when there had been much dispute, Kĕpha
rose up and said to them, “Men, brothers, you know
that a good while ago Elohim chose among us, that
by my mouth the gentiles should hear the Word of the
Good News and believe.
2508

ACTS

“And Elohim, who knows the heart, bore witness
to them, by giving them the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, as also
to us,
9 and made no distinction between us and them,
cleansing their hearts by belief.
10 “Now then, why do you try Elohim by putting a
yoke on the neck of the talmidim which neither our
fathers nor we were able to bear?
11 “But through the favour of the Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ we trust to be saved, in the same way as
they.”
12 And all the crowd was silent and were listening to
Barnaḇah and Sha’ul declaring how many miracles
and wonders Elohim did among the gentiles, through
them.
13 And after they were silent, Ya’aqoḇ answered,
saying, “Men, brothers, listen to me:
14 “Shim’on has declared how Elohim first visited the
gentiles to take out of them a people for His Name.
15 “And the words of the Neḇi’im agree with this, as it
has been written:
16 ‘After this I shall return and rebuild the Booth of
Dawiḏ which has fallen down. And I shall rebuild its
ruins, and I shall straighten it,
17 so that the remnant of mankind shall seek HWHY,
even all the gentiles on whom My Name has been
called, says HWHY who is doing all this,’
18 who has made this known from of old.
19 “Therefore I judge that we should not trouble those
from among the gentiles who are turning to Elohim,
20 but that we write to them to abstain from the
defilements of idols, and from whoring, and from what
is strangled, and from blood.
8

2509

MA’ASĔH

“For from ancient generations Mosheh has, in
every city, those proclaiming him - being read in the
congregations every Shabbath.”
22 Then it seemed good to the emissaries and elders,
with all the assembly, to send chosen men from
among them to Antioḵeia with Sha’ul and Barnaḇah:
Yahuḏah being called Barsabba, and Sila, leading
men among the brothers,
23 having written by their hand this: The emissaries
and the elders and the brothers, To the brothers who
are of the gentiles in Antioḵeia, and Suria, and Kilikia:
Greetings.
24 Since we have heard that some who went out from
us have troubled you with words, unsettling your lives,
to whom we gave no command 25 it seemed good to us, having become of one mind,
to send chosen men to you with our beloved
Barnaḇah and Sha’ul,
26 men who have given up their lives for the Name of
our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
27 We have therefore sent Yahuḏah and Sila, who
are also confirming this by word of mouth.
28 For it seemed good to the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, and
to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these
necessities:
29 that you abstain from what is offered to idols, and
blood, and what is strangled, and whoring. If you keep
yourselves from these, you shall do well. Be strong!
30 They, therefore, being sent off, went to Antioḵeia.
And having gathered the crowd together, they
delivered the letter.
31 And having read it, they rejoiced over its
encouragement.
21

2510

ACTS

And Yahuḏah and Sila, being themselves also
neḇi’im, encouraged the brothers with many words
and strengthened them.
33 And having spent some time, they were sent back
in peace from the brothers to the emissaries.
34 But it seemed good to Sila to remain.
35 And Sha’ul and Barnaḇah continued in Antioḵeia,
teaching and bringing, with many others also, the
Good News: the Word of HWHY!
36 And after some days Sha’ul said to Barnaḇah, “Let
us now go back and visit our brothers in every city
where we proclaimed the Word of HWHY, and see how
they are.”
37 And Barnaḇah purposed to take with them
Yoḥanan called Markos.
38 But Sha’ul thought it not fit to take with them the
one who withdrew from them in Pamphulia, and had
not gone with them to the work.
39 A sharp feeling therefore came to be, so that they
parted from one another. And so Barnaḇah took
Markos and sailed to Kupros.
40 And Sha’ul chose Sila and went off, being
committed by the brothers to the favour of Elohim.
41 And
he went through Suria and Kilikia,
strengthening the assemblies.
32

16 And he came to Derbĕ and Lustra. And see, a
certain talmid was there, named Timotiyos, the son of
a certain Yahuḏi woman who believed - but his father
was Yawanite 2 who was well spoken of by the brothers who were
at Lustra and Ikonion.
3 Sha’ul wanted to have this one go with him. And
he took him and circumcised him because of the
2511

MA’ASĔH

Yahuḏim who were in those places, for they all knew
that his father was Yawanite.
4 And as they went through the cities, they delivered
to them the regulations to keep, which were decided
by the emissaries and elders at Yerushalayim.
5 Then, indeed, the assemblies were strengthened
in the belief, and increased in number every day.
6 And having passed through Phrugia and the
Galatian country, they were forbidden by the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh to speak the Word in Asia.
7 When they came to Musia, they tried to go into
Bithunia, but the Ruaḥ did not allow them.
8 And having passed by Musia, they came down to
Troas.
9 And in the night a vision appeared to Sha’ul: A
man of Makedonia was standing, begging him and
saying, “Come over to Makedonia and help us.”
10 And when he saw the vision, immediately we
sought to go to Makedonia, concluding that the Aḏon
had called us to bring the Good News to them.
11 Therefore, sailing from Troas, we ran a straight
course to Samothrakĕ, and the next day came to
Neapolis,
12 and from there to Philippos, which is the principal
city of that part of Makedonia, a colony. And we were
staying in that city for some days.
13 And on the Shabbath we went outside the city by
a river, where there used to be prayer. And having sat
down we were speaking to the women who met there.
14 And a certain woman named Ludia, a seller of
purple from the city of Thuatira, worshipping Elohim,
was hearing, whose heart the Aḏon opened to pay
attention to what Sha’ul said.
15 And when she was immersed, and her household,
she begged us, saying, “If you have judged me to be
2512

ACTS

believing in the Aḏon, come to my house and stay.”
And she urged us.
16 And it came to be, as we went to prayer, that a
certain slave girl possessed with a spirit of Puthon,
met us, who brought her masters much profit by
foretelling.
17 Having followed Sha’ul and us, she cried out,
saying, “These men are the servants of the Most High
Elohim, who proclaim to us the Way of deliverance.”
18 And she was doing this for many days. But Sha’ul,
greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, “I
command you in the Name of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ to
come out of her.” And it came out that same hour.
19 But when her masters saw that their anticipation
of money-making was gone, they seized Sha’ul and
Sila and dragged them into the market-place to the
rulers.
20 And having brought them to the captains, they
said, “These men, being Yahuḏim, greatly disturb our
city,
21 and they proclaim practices which are not right for
us to receive nor to do, being Romans.”
22 And the crowd rose up together against them. And
the captains tore off their garments and commanded
them to be beaten with rods.
23 And having laid many blows upon them, they
threw them into prison, commanding the jailer to keep
them safely,
24 who, having received such a command, put them
into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the
stocks.
25 And at midnight Sha’ul and Sila were praying and
singing songs to Elohim, and the prisoners were
listening to them.
2513

MA’ASĔH

And suddenly a great earthquake took place, so
that the foundations of the prison were shaken, and
immediately all the doors were opened and all the
chains came loose.
27 And the jailer, awaking from sleep and seeing the
prison doors open, thinking the prisoners had fled,
drew his sword and was about to kill himself.
28 But Sha’ul called with a loud voice, saying, “Do no
harm to yourself, for we are all here.”
29 And asking for a light, he ran in, and fell down
trembling before Sha’ul and Sila.
30 And having led them outside he said, “Masters,
what do I have to do to be saved?”
31 And they said, “Believe on the Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, and you shall be saved, you and your
household.”
32 And they spoke the Word of HWHY to him and to all
who were in his house.
33 And taking them in that hour of the night, he
washed their wounds, and immediately he was
immersed, he and all that were his.
34 And having brought them into his house, he put
food before them. And he rejoiced with all his
household, having believed in Elohim.
35 And when day came, the authorities sent the
officers, saying, “Let these men go.”
36 And the jailer reported these words to Sha’ul,
saying, “The captains have sent to let you go. Now
then, come out and go in peace.”
37 But Sha’ul said to them, “They have beaten us
publicly, uncondemned, being Romans. They have
thrown us into prison, and now, do they throw us out
secretly? No indeed! Let them come themselves and
bring us out.”
26

2514

ACTS

And the officers reported these words to the
authorities, and they were afraid when they heard that
they were Romans.
39 And having come, they pleaded with them and
brought them out, and asked them to leave the city.
40 So coming out of the prison they went to Ludia,
and seeing the brothers, they encouraged them, and
went forth.
38

17 And having passed through Amphipolis and
Apollonia, they came to Thessalonikĕ, where there
was a congregation of the Yahuḏim.
2 And according to his practice, Sha’ul went in unto
them, and for three Shabbathoth was reasoning with
them from the Scriptures,
3 explaining and pointing out that ha’Mashiaḥ had to
suffer and rise again from the dead, and that, “This is
ha’Mashiaḥ, {fWHY, whom I proclaim to you.”
4 And some of them believed, and a large number
of the worshipping Yawanites, and not a few of the
leading women, joined Sha’ul and Sila.
5 But the Yahuḏim who did not believe, having
become envious, took some of the wicked men from
the market-place, and gathering a mob, disturbed all
the city and came upon the house of Yason, and were
seeking to bring them out to the people.
6 But not finding them, they dragged Yason and
some of the brothers to the city rulers, crying out,
“They who have turned the world upside down have
come here too,
7 whom Yason has received. And all of them are
acting contrary to the dogmas of Kaisar, saying there
is another sovereign, {fWHY.”
8 And they troubled the crowd and the city rulers
when they heard this.
2515

MA’ASĔH

And when they had received a pledge from Yason
and the rest, they let them go.
10 And the brothers immediately sent Sha’ul and Sila
away by night to Beroia, who, having come, went into
the congregation of the Yahuḏim.
11 Now these were more noble than those in
Thessalonikĕ, who received the Word with great
eagerness, and searched the Scriptures daily, if these
were so.
12 Then many of them truly believed, and also not a
few of the Yawanites, decent women as well as men.
13 And when the Yahuḏim from Thessalonikĕ came
to know that the Word of HWHY was proclaimed by
Sha’ul at Beroia, they came there also and stirred up
the crowds.
14 And then immediately the brothers sent Sha’ul
away, to go to the sea, but both Sila and Timotiyos
stayed there.
15 And those who arranged for Sha’ul brought him to
Athĕnai. And receiving a command for Sila and
Timotiyos to join him as soon as possible, they
departed.
16 But while Sha’ul was waiting for them at Athĕnai,
his spirit was stirred up within him when he saw that
the city was utterly idolatrous.
17 Therefore, indeed, he was reasoning in the
congregation with the Yahuḏim and with the gentile
worshippers, and in the market-place daily with those
who met there.
18 And
some of the Epikurean and Stoic
philosophers encountered him. And some were
saying, “What does this babbler want to say?” Others
said, “He seems to be a proclaimer of strange mighty
ones” - because to them he brought the Good News:
{fWHY and the resurrection!
9

2516

ACTS

So they laid hold of him and brought him to the
Areopagus, saying, “Are we able to know what this
fresh teaching is of which you speak?
20 “For you are bringing some strangeness to our
ears. We want, then, to know what these mean.”
21 For all the Athĕnians and the strangers living there
spent their leisure time in doing naught but to speak
or to hear what is fresh.
22 And having stood in the midst of the Areopagus
Sha’ul said, “Men of Athĕnai, I see that you are very
religious in all.
23 “For passing through and observing the objects of
your worship, I even found an altar with this
inscription: TO THE UNKNOWN MIGHTY ONE. Not
knowing then whom you worship, I make Him known
to you:
24 “HWHY, who made the world and all that is in it, this
One being Aḏon of the shamayim and earth, does not
dwell in dwellings made with hands.
25 “Nor is He served with men’s hands - as if needing
any - Himself giving to all ḥai, and breath, and all.
26 “And He has made from one blood every nation of
men to dwell on all the face of the earth, having
ordained beforehand the times and the boundaries of
their dwelling,
27 to seek the Aḏon, if at least they would reach out
for Him and find Him, though He is not far from each
one of us.
28 “For in Him we live and move and are, as also
some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also
His offspring.’
29 “Now then, since we are the offspring of Elohim,
we should not think that the Elohim is like gold or
silver or stone, an image made by the skill and
thought of man.
19

2517

MA’ASĔH

“Truly, then, having overlooked these times of
ignorance, Elohim now commands all men
everywhere to repent,
31 because He has appointed a day on which He is
going to judge the world in righteousness by a Man
whom He has appointed, having given proof of this to
all by raising Him from the dead.”
32 And hearing of the resurrection of the dead, some
indeed mocked, while others said, “We shall hear you
again concerning this.”
33 And so Sha’ul went out from among them.
34 But some men joined him and believed, among
them Dionusios the Areopagite, and a woman named
Damaris, and others with them.
30

18 And after this Sha’ul left Athĕnai and went to
Korinthos.
2 And he found a certain Yahuḏi named Aqulas,
born in Pontus, who had recently come from Italia
with his wife Priskilla - because Klaudius had
commanded all the Yahuḏim to leave Rome - and he
came to them.
3 And because he was of the same trade, he stayed
with them and was working, for they were tentmakers
by trade.
4 And he was reasoning in the congregation every
Shabbath, and won over both Yahuḏim and
Yawanites.
5 And when Sila and Timotiyos came down from
Makedonia, Sha’ul was pressed by the Ruaḥ, and
earnestly witnessed to the Yahuḏim that {fWHY is
ha’Mashiaḥ.
6 However, when they resisted and blasphemed, he
shook his garments and said to them, “Your blood is
2518

ACTS

upon your head, I am clean. From now on I shall go
to the gentiles.”
7 And having left there he came to the house of a
certain man named Yustos, who worshipped Elohim,
whose house was next to the congregation.
8 And Krispus, the ruler of the congregation,
believed in the Aḏon with all his household. And many
of the Korinthians, hearing, believed and were
immersed.
9 And the Aḏon spoke to Sha’ul in the night by a
vision, “Do not be afraid, but speak, and do not be
silent,
10 because I am with you, and no one shall attack
you to do you evil, because I have much people in this
city.”
11 And he remained a year and six months, teaching
the Word of HWHY among them.
12 And when Gallion was proconsul of Aḵaia, the
Yahuḏim with one mind rose up against Sha’ul and
brought him to the judgment seat,
13 saying, “This one seduces men to worship Elohim
contrary to the Torah.”
14 And as Sha’ul was about to open his mouth,
Gallion said to the Yahuḏim, “If it were a matter of
wrongdoing or wicked recklessness, O Yahuḏim,
there would be reason why I should bear with you.
15 “But if it is a question of words and names and a
law which is among you, see to it yourselves, for I do
not want to be a judge of these.”
16 And he drove them away from the judgment seat.
17 And all the Yawanites took Sosthenĕs, the ruler of
the congregation, and beat him before the judgment
seat. But Gallion showed no concern whatever.
18 And Sha’ul, having stayed several days more,
having taken leave of the brothers, was sailing for
2519

MA’ASĔH

Suria, and Priskilla and Aqulas were with him, having
shaved his hair at Kengḵreai, for he had taken a vow.
19 And he came to Ephesos, and left them there, but
he himself went into the congregation and reasoned
with the Yahuḏim.
20 And when they asked him to stay a longer time
with them, he declined,
21 but took leave of them, saying, “I have to keep this
coming Festival in Yerushalayim by all means, but I
shall come back to you, Elohim desiring so.” And he
sailed from Ephesos.
22 And having come to Kaisereia, going up and
greeting the assembly, he went down to Antioḵeia.
23 And having spent some time there, he went forth,
passing through the country of Galatia and on through
Phrugia, strengthening all the talmidim.
24 And a certain Yahuḏi named Apollos, born at
Alexandria, a learned man and mighty in the
Scriptures, came to Ephesos.
25 This one had been instructed in the Way of the
Aḏon. And being fervent in spirit, he was speaking
and teaching that about the Aḏon exactly, though he
knew only the immersion of Yoḥanan.
26 And he began to speak boldly in the congregation.
And when Aqulas and Priskilla heard him, they took
him aside and explained to him the Way of Elohim
more exactly.
27 And when he intended to pass through to Aḵaia,
the brothers, having encouraged him, wrote to the
talmidim to receive him, who, having arrived, greatly
helped those who believed through favour,
28 for with power he refuted the Yahuḏim publicly,
showing from the Scriptures that {fWHY is
ha’Mashiaḥ.
2520

ACTS

19 And it came to be, while Apollos was at
Korinthos, that Sha’ul, having passed through the
upper parts, came to Ephesos. And having found
some talmidim,
2
he said to them, “Did you receive the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh when you believed?” And they said to him,
“No, we have not even heard that there is a Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.”
3
And he said to them, “Into what then were you
immersed?” And they said, “Into Yoḥanan’s
immersion.”
4
And Sha’ul said, “Yoḥanan indeed immersed with
an immersion of repentance, saying to the people that
they should believe in the One who is coming after
him, that is, in Mashiaḥ {fWHY.”
5
And when they heard this, they were immersed in
the Name of the Aḏon {fWHY.
6
And when Sha’ul had laid hands on them, the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh came upon them, and they were
speaking in tongues and naḇu.
7
And all the men were about twelve.
8
And having gone into the congregation he spoke
boldly for three months, reasoning and persuading
concerning the reign of Elohim.
9
But when some were hardened and did not
believe, speaking evil of the Way before the crowd,
he withdrew from them and separated the talmidim,
reasoning daily in the school of Turannos.
10 And this took place for two years, so that all who
dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Aḏon {fWHY, both
Yahuḏim and Yawanites.
11 And Elohim worked unusual miracles through the
hands of Sha’ul,
2521

MA’ASĔH

so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were
brought from his body to the sick, and the diseases
left them and the wicked spirits went out of them.
13 But certain roving Yahuḏi exorcists took it upon
themselves to call the Name of the Aḏon {fWHY over
those who had wicked spirits, saying, “We exorcise
you by {fWHY whom Sha’ul proclaims.”
14 And there were seven sons of a certain Skeua, a
Yahuḏi chief kohĕn, who were doing this.
15 And the wicked spirit answering, said, “{fWHY I
know, and Sha’ul I know, but who are you?”
16 And the man in whom the wicked spirit was leaped
on them, overpowered them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of that house naked and
wounded.
17 And this became known to all, both Yahuḏim and
Yawanites dwelling in Ephesos. And fear fell on them
all, and the Name of the Aḏon {fWHY was made
great.
18 And many who had believed came confessing and
declaring their deeds.
19 And many of those who had practised magic
brought their books together, burning them before all.
And they reckoned up the value of them, and found it
to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.
20 So the Word of the Aḏon was growing mightily and
prevailing.
21 Now when these had been completed, Sha’ul
purposed in the Ruaḥ, when he had passed through
Makedonia and Aḵaia, to go to Yerushalayim, saying,
“After I have been there, I have to see Rome too.”
22 And having sent into Makedonia two of those
assisting him, Timotiyos and Ĕrastos, he himself
remained in Asia for a time.
12

2522

ACTS

And about that time there came to be a great
commotion about the Way.
24 For
a certain man named Dĕmĕtrìos, a
silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis,
provided no little business to the craftsmen,
25 who, having called them together, with the
workers of the same, said, “Men, you know that our
wealth is from this business.
26 “And you see and hear that not only at Ephesos,
but throughout almost all Asia, this Sha’ul has
persuaded and turned away a large number, saying
that they are not mighty ones which are made with
hands.
27 “And not only is this trade of ours in danger of
coming to rejection, but also that the temple of the
great female mighty one Artemis whom all Asia and
the world worship, shall be regarded as worthless and
her greatness diminished.”
28 And having heard this, they were filled with rage
and cried out, saying, “Great is Artemis of the
Ephesians!”
29 And the entire city was filled with confusion, and
they rushed with one mind into the theatre, having
seized Gaios and Aristarḵos, Makedonians, Sha’ul’s
fellow travellers.
30 And Sha’ul, intending to go in among the mob, the
talmidim did not allow him.
31 And some of the officials of Asia, being his friends,
sent to him begging him not to risk himself into the
theatre.
32 Then others indeed shouted this and others that,
for the assembly was confused, and most of them did
not know why they had come together.
33 And some of the crowd instructed Alexandros - the
Yahuḏim putting him forward. And Alexandros
23

2523

MA’ASĔH

motioned with his hand, and wanted to make his
defence to the people.
34 But having recognised that he was Yahuḏi, all with
one voice cried out for about two hours, “Great is
Artemis of the Ephesians!”
35 And the city clerk, having calmed the crowd, said,
“Men of Ephesos, what man is there who does not
know that the city of the Ephesians is the guardian of
the temple of the great female mighty one Artemis,
and of that which fell down from Zeus?
36 “Therefore, if these are undeniable, you need to
be calm, and do not act rashly.
37 “For you have brought these men here who are
neither temple-robbers nor speaking evil of your
female mighty one.
38 “If truly then Dĕmĕtrios and his fellow craftsmen
have a case against anyone, the courts are open and
there are proconsuls. Let them accuse one another.
39 “And if you have any further complaint, it shall be
settled in the regular assembly.
40 “For we are in danger of being accused of riot
concerning today, there being no reason which we
could give to account for this disorderly gathering.”
41 And having said this, he dismissed the assembly.

20 After the uproar had ceased, Sha’ul called the
talmidim to him, and having embraced them, went
away to go to Makedonia.
2 And having gone through those parts, and having
encouraged them with many words, he came to
Yawan,
3 where he spent three months. When he was about
to sail to Suria, he decided to return through
Makedonia, as a plot was made against him by the
Yahuḏim.
2524

ACTS

And he was accompanied by Sopatros of Beroia,
and Aristarḵos and Sekundos of the Thessalonians,
and Gaios of Derbĕ, and Timotiyos, and Tuḵikos and
Trophimos of Asia.
5 And these, going ahead, waited for us at Troas.
6 And we sailed away from Philippos after the Days
of Matstsoth, and came to them at Troas in five days,
where we stayed seven days.
7 And on one of the shabbathoth, the talmidim
having gathered together to break bread, Sha’ul,
intending to depart the next day, was reasoning with
them and was extending the Word till midnight.
8 And there were many lamps in the upper room
where they were assembled.
9 And a certain young man, by name Eutuḵos, was
sitting in a window, being overpowered by a deep
sleep. As Sha’ul kept on reasoning, he was overcome
by sleep and fell down from the third storey, and was
picked up dead.
10 And Sha’ul, having gone down, fell on him, and
embracing him said, “Do not be upset, for his life is in
him.”
11 Then going up again, and having broken bread
and eaten, he talked a long while, even till daybreak,
and so went forth.
12 And they brought the young man in alive, and were
encouraged, not a little.
13 And we, going ahead to the ship, sailed to Assos,
intending to take Sha’ul on board there, for so he had
arranged, intending himself to go on foot.
14 And when he met us at Assos, we took him on
board and came to Mitulĕnĕ.
15 And from there we sailed, and the next day came
opposite Ḵios. And the next day we arrived at Samos
4

2525

MA’ASĔH

and remained at Trogullion. And the following day we
came to Milĕtos.
16 For Sha’ul had decided to sail past Ephesos, so
that he might lose no time in Asia, for he was hurrying
to be at Yerushalayim, if possible, on the Day of the
Festival of Shaḇuoth.
17 And from Milĕtos he sent to Ephesos and called
for the elders of the assembly.
18 And when they had come to him, he said to them,
“You know, from the first day that I came to Asia, how
I was with you all the time,
19 serving the Aḏon with all humility, with many tears
and trials which befell me by the plotting of the
Yahuḏim,
20 as I kept back none that was profitable, but
proclaimed it to you, and taught you publicly and from
house to house,
21 witnessing to Yahuḏim, and also to Yawanites:
repentance toward Elohim and belief in our Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ
22 “And now see, I go bound in the spirit to
Yerushalayim, not knowing what is going to meet me
there,
23 except that the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh witnesses in
every city, saying that chains and pressures await
me.
24 “But I do not count my life of any value to me, so
that I might accomplish my mission with joy, and the
service which I received from the Aḏon {fWHY, to
bear witness to the Good News of the favour of
Elohim.
25 “And now see, I know that you all, among whom I
went about proclaiming the reign of Elohim, shall see
my face no more.
2526

ACTS

“Therefore I witness to you this day that I am clear
from the blood of all.
27 “For I did not keep back from declaring to you all
the counsel of Elohim.
28 “Therefore take heed to yourselves and to all the
flock, among which the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh has made
you overseers, to shepherd the assembly of Elohim
which He has purchased with His own blood.
29 “For I know this, that after my departure savage
wolves shall come in among you, not sparing the
flock.
30 “Also from among yourselves men shall arise,
speaking distortions, to draw away the talmidim after
themselves.
31 “Therefore watch, remembering that for three
years, night and day, I did not cease to warn each one
with tears.
32 “And now, brothers, I commit you to Elohim and to
the Word of His favour, which is able to build you up
and give you an inheritance among all those having
been qadosh.
33 “I have coveted no one’s silver or gold or
garments.
34 “And you yourselves know that these hands
supplied my needs, and for those who were with me.
35 “All this I showed you, by labouring like this, that
you ought to help the weak. And remember the words
of the Aḏon {fWHY, that He said, ‘It is more baruḵ to
give than to receive.’ ”
36 And having said this, he knelt down and prayed
with them all.
37 And there was much weeping among them all, and
falling on Sha’ul’s neck, they kissed him,
26

2527

MA’ASĔH

distressed most of all because of the word which
he had said, that they would see his face no more.
And they went with him to the ship.

38

21 And it came to be, when we had torn ourselves
away from them, and had launched, we ran a straight
course and came to Kos, and the next day to Rhodos,
and from there to Patara.
2 And having found a ship passing over to Phoinikĕ,
we went aboard and launched.
3 And having sighted Kupros, and having passed it
on the left, we sailed to Suria, and landed at Tsor, for
the ship was to unload her cargo there.
4 And having found talmidim, we remained there
seven days. And they told Sha’ul through the Ruaḥ
not to go up to Yerushalayim.
5 And when it came to be that our days there were
ended, we left and went on, all of them accompanying
us, with wives and children, till we were out of the city.
And kneeling down on the beach, we prayed.
6 And having embraced one another, we boarded
the ship, and they returned to their homes.
7 And when we had completed our voyage from
Tsor, we came to Ptolemais. And having greeted the
brothers we stayed with them one day.
8 And on the next day we left and came to Kaisereia,
and went into the house of Philippos the evangelist,
who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
9 Now this one had four maiden daughters who
naḇu.
10 And as we were staying many days, a certain naḇi
named Ḥaḡaḇ came down from Yahuḏah,
11 and having come to us, he took the girdle of
Sha’ul, bound his own hands and feet, and said,
“Thus says the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, ‘Thus shall the
2528

ACTS

Yahuḏim at Yerushalayim bind the man who owns
this girdle, and deliver him into the hands of the
gentiles.’ ”
12 And when we heard this, both we and those from
that place begged him not to go up to Yerushalayim.
13 And Sha’ul answered, “What do you mean by
weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not
only to be bound, but also to die at Yerushalayim for
the Name of the Aḏon {fWHY.”
14 And as he could not be persuaded, we ceased,
saying, “Let the desire of the Aḏon be done.”
15 And after those days, having made ready, we went
up to Yerushalayim.
16 And also some of the talmidim from Kaisereia went
with us and brought with them one, Mnason of
Kupros, an early talmid, with whom we were to lodge.
17 And when we had arrived in Yerushalayim, the
brothers received us gladly.
18 And on the following day Sha’ul went in with us to
Ya’aqoḇ, and all the elders came.
19 And having greeted them, he was relating one by
one what Elohim had done among the gentiles
through his service.
20 And when they heard it, they praised the Aḏon.
And they said to him, “You see, brother, how many
thousands of Yahuḏim there are who have believed,
and all are ardent for the Torah.
21 “And they have been informed about you that you
teach all the Yahuḏim who are among the gentiles to
forsake Mosheh, saying not to circumcise the children
nor to walk according to the practices.
22 “What then is it? They shall certainly hear that you
have come.
23 “So do this, what we say to you: We have four men
who have taken a vow.
2529

MA’ASĔH

“Take them and be cleansed with them, and pay
their expenses so that they shave their heads. And all
shall know that what they have been informed about
you is not so, but that you yourself also walk orderly,
keeping the Torah.
25 “But concerning the gentiles who believe, we have
written and decided that they should keep themselves
from what is offered to idols, and blood, and what is
strangled, and whoring.”
26 Then Sha’ul took the men on the next day, and
having been cleansed with them, went into the
Miqdash to announce the completion of the days of
separation - until the offering should be presented for
each one of them.
27 And when the seven days were almost ended, the
Yahuḏim from Asia, seeing him in the Miqdash, were
stirring up all the crowd, and they laid hands on him,
28 crying out, “Men of Yisra’ĕl, help! This is the man
who is teaching all men everywhere against the
people, and the Torah, and this place. And besides,
he also brought Yawanites into the Miqdash and has
profaned this Miqdash.”
29 Because they had previously seen Trophimos the
Ephesian with him in the city, whom they thought that
Sha’ul had brought into the Miqdash.
30 And the entire city was moved, and the people
rushed together, seized Sha’ul, and dragged him out
of the Miqdash. And immediately the doors were shut.
31 And while they were seeking to kill him, a report
came to the commander of the squad that all
Yerushalayim was in confusion.
32 At once he took soldiers and captains, and ran
down to them. And they, having seen the commander
and the soldiers, stopped beating Sha’ul.
24

2530

ACTS

Then the commander came near and took him,
and commanded him to be bound with two chains,
and was asking who he was and what he had done.
34 And in the crowd some were shouting this and
others that. And not being able to ascertain the truth
because of the uproar, he commanded him to be
taken into the barracks.
35 And when he came to the stairs, he had to be
carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the
crowd.
36 For a large number of the people followed after,
crying out, “Away with him!”
37 And as Sha’ul was about to be led into the
barracks, he said to the commander, “Am I allowed to
say somewhat to you?” And he said, “Do you know
Yawanite?
38 “Are you not the Mitsrite who some time ago
stirred up a revolt and led the four thousand
assassins out into the wilderness?”
39 But Sha’ul replied, “I am a Yahuḏi from Tarsos, in
Kilikia, a citizen of no mean city. And I beg you, allow
me to speak to the people.”
40 And having given him permission, Sha’ul, standing
on the stairs motioned with his hand to the people.
And when there was a great silence, he spoke in the
Iḇri language, saying,
33

22 “Men, brothers, and fathers, hear my defence
before you now.”
2 And when they heard that he spoke to them in the
Iḇri language, they kept greater silence. And he said:
3 “I am indeed Yahuḏi, having been born in Tarsos
of Kilikia, but brought up in this city at the feet of
Gamli’ĕl, having been instructed according to the
2531

MA’ASĔH

exactness of the Torah of our fathers, being ardent
for Elohim, as you all are today,
4 who persecuted this Way to the death, binding and
delivering up into prisons both men and women,
5 as also the kohĕn ha’gadol bears me witness, and
all the eldership, from whom I also received letters to
the brothers, and went to Dammeseq to bring in
chains even those who were there to Yerushalayim to
be punished.
6 “And it came to be, as I was journeying and
coming near Dammeseq, about noon, suddenly a
great light shone around me out of the shamayim,
7 and I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying
to me, ‘Sha’ul, Sha’ul, why do you persecute Me?’
8 “And I answered, ‘Who are You, Aḏonai?’ And He
said to me, ‘I am {fWHY of Natsareth, whom you
persecute.’
9 “And those who were with me indeed saw the light
and were afraid, but they did not hear His voice
speaking to me.
10 “And I said, ‘What shall I do, Aḏonai?’ And the
Aḏon said to me, ‘Rise up, go into Dammeseq, and
there you shall be told all that you have been
appointed to do.’
11 “And as I could not see because of the esteem of
that light, being led by the hand of those who were
with me, I came into Dammeseq.
12 “And a certain Ḥananyah, a dedicated man
according to the Torah, being well spoken of by all the
Yahuḏim dwelling there,
13 came to me, and stood by and said to me, ‘Brother
Sha’ul, look up.’ And at that same hour I looked up at
him.

2532

ACTS

“And he said, ‘The Elohim of our fathers has
appointed you to know His desire, and to see the
Righteous One, and to hear the voice from His mouth.
15 ‘Because you shall be His witness to all men of
what you have seen and heard.
16 ‘And now, why do you delay? Rise up, be
immersed, and wash away your sins, calling on the
Name of HWHY.’
17 “And it came to be, when I returned to
Yerushalayim, and while I was praying in the
Miqdash, I came to be in a trance,
18 and I saw Him saying to me, ‘Hurry and get out of
Yerushalayim, speedily, because they shall not
accept your witness concerning Me.’
19 “And I said, ‘Aḏonai, they know that in every
congregation I was imprisoning and beating those
who believe on You.
20 ‘And when the blood of Your witness Stephanos
was shed, I also was standing by giving my approval
to his death, and keeping the garments of those who
were killing him.’
21 “And He said to me, ‘Go, because I shall send you
far from here to the gentiles.’ ”
22 And they were listening to him until this word, and
then they lifted up their voice, saying, “Away with such
a one from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live!”
23 As they were shouting and tearing their garments,
and throwing dust into the air,
24 the commander ordered him to be brought into the
barracks, and said that he should be examined by
flogging, in order to find out why they were shouting
so against him.
25 And as they were stretching him out with straps,
Sha’ul said to the captain who was standing by, “Is it
14

2533

MA’ASĔH

permitted for you to whip a man who is a Roman, and
uncondemned?”
26 And when the captain heard, he went and reported
to the commander, saying, “Watch what you are
about to do, for this man is a Roman.”
27 And having come, the commander said to him,
“Say to me, are you a Roman?” And he said, “Yes.”
28 And the commander answered, “With a large sum
I obtained this citizenship.” And Sha’ul said, “But I
was even born so.”
29 Then at once those who were about to examine
him withdrew from him. And the commander was also
afraid after he found out that he was a Roman, and
because he had bound him.
30 And on the next day, intending to know for certain
why he was accused by the Yahuḏim, he released
him, and commanded the chief kohenim and all their
council to come, and brought Sha’ul down and put
him before them.

23 And Sha’ul, looking intently at the council, said,
“Men, brothers, I have lived in all good conscience
before Elohim until this day.”
2 And the kohĕn ha’gadol Ḥananyah commanded
those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth.
3 Then Sha’ul said to him, “Elohim is going to strike
you, whitewashed wall! And do you sit judging me
according to the Torah, and do you command me to
be struck contrary to the Torah?”
4 And those who stood by said, “Do you revile the
kohĕn ha’gadol of Elohim?”
5 And Sha’ul said, “I did not know, brothers, that he
was the kohĕn ha’gadol, for it has been written, ‘You
shall not speak evil of the ruler of your people.’ ”
2534

ACTS

Now Sha’ul, perceiving that one part were
Sadducees and the other Pharisees, cried out in the
council, “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, the son of a
Pharisee, I am being judged concerning the
expectation and resurrection of the dead!”
7 And when he had said this, there came a
dissension between the Pharisees and the
Sadducees. And the crowd was divided.
8 For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, nor messenger nor spirit, but the
Pharisees confess both.
9 And there was a great uproar. And certain of the
scribes of the party of Pharisees were earnestly
contending, saying, “We find no evil in this man. And
if a spirit or a messenger has spoken to him, let us not
fight against Elohim.”
10 And a great dissension having come, the
commander, fearing lest Sha’ul would be pulled to
pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down
and seize him from their midst, and bring him into the
barracks.
11 And on the following night the Aḏon stood by him
and said, “Take courage, Sha’ul, for as you have
witnessed for Me in Yerushalayim, so you have to
bear witness at Rome too.”
12 And when it became day, some of the Yahuḏim
made a conspiracy and bound themselves under an
oath, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until
they had killed Sha’ul.
13 And those making this conspiracy were more than
forty,
14 who, having come to the chief kohenim and elders,
said, “We have bound ourselves under a great oath
not to eat at all until we have killed Sha’ul.
6

2535

MA’ASĔH

“Now, then, you, with the council, inform the
commander to have him brought down to you
tomorrow, as intending to examine more exactly all
about him. And we are ready to kill him before he
comes near.”
16 And when Sha’ul’s sister’s son heard of their
ambush, he went and entered into the barracks and
reported to Sha’ul.
17 And Sha’ul, having called one of the captains to
him, said, “Take this young man to the commander,
for he has somewhat to report to him.”
18 He indeed then took him and led him to the
commander and said, “The prisoner Sha’ul called me
to him and asked me to bring this young man to you,
having somewhat to say to you.”
19 And the commander, having taken him by the
hand, went aside by themselves and asked, “What is
it that you have to report to me?”
20 And he said, “The Yahuḏim have agreed to ask
that you bring Sha’ul down to the council tomorrow,
as intending to inquire more exactly about him.
21 “Therefore, do not let them persuade you, for more
than forty of them lie in wait for him, men who have
bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor to
drink until they have killed him. And now they are
ready, waiting for the promise from you.”
22 Then the commander dismissed the young man,
having commanded him, “Inform no one that you
reported this to me.”
23 And having called near a certain two captains, he
said, “Get two hundred soldiers ready to go to
Kaisereia, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred
spearmen, after the third hour of the night,
24 and provide beasts, on which to place Sha’ul, and
bring him safely to Phĕlix the governor,”
15

2536

ACTS

having written a letter in this form:
26 Klaudius Lusias, to the most excellent governor
Phĕlix: Greetings.
27 This man, having been seized by the Yahuḏim,
and being about to be killed by them, I rescued,
having come with soldiers, having learned that he
was a Roman.
28 And, desiring to know the reason they accused
him, I brought him before their council.
29 I found out that he was accused concerning
questions of their Torah, but there was no charge
against him deserving death or chains.
30 And when I was informed that there was to be a
plot against the man by the Yahuḏim, I sent him
immediately to you, having also commanded his
accusers to state before you the charges against him.
Be strong!
31 So the soldiers, as they were commanded, took
Sha’ul and brought him by night to Antipatris.
32 And on the next day they left the horsemen to go
on with him, and returned to the barracks,
33 who, having come to Kaisereia, and delivered the
letter to the governor, they also presented Sha’ul to
him.
34 And the governor, having read it, and having
asked of what province he was, and being informed
that he was from Kilikia,
35 said, “I shall hear you when your accusers arrive
also.” And he commanded him to be kept in Hĕrodĕs’
palace.
25

24 And after five days the kohĕn ha’gadol
Ḥananyah came down, with the elders, and a certain
speaker - Tertullus. And they brought charges against
Sha’ul before the governor.
2537

MA’ASĔH

And when he was called upon, Tertullus began to
accuse him, saying, “Having obtained great peace
through you, and reforms being brought to this nation
by your forethought,
3 we accept it always and in all places, most
excellent Phĕlix, with all thanks.
4 “But in order not to hinder you any further, I beg
you to hear us briefly in your gentleness.
5 “For having found this man a plague, who stirs up
dissension among all the Yahuḏim throughout the
world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Natsarenes,
6 who also tried to profane the Miqdash, and whom
we seized, and wanted to judge him according to our
law,
7 but the commander Lusias came along and with
much violence took him out of our hands,
8 commanding his accusers to come to you. And by
examining him yourself you shall be able to know all
these of which we accuse him.”
9 And the Yahuḏim also agreed, maintaining that
these were so.
10 And when the governor had motioned him to
speak, Sha’ul answered, “Knowing that for many
years you have been a judge of this nation, I gladly
defend myself,
11 seeing you are able to know that it is not more than
twelve days since I went up to Yerushalayim to
worship.
12 “And they neither found me in the Miqdash
disputing with anyone nor stirring up the crowd, either
in the congregations or in the city.
13 “Nor are they able to prove the charges of which
they now accuse me.
14 “And this I confess to you, that according to the
Way which they call a sect, so I worship the Elohim of
2

2538

ACTS

my fathers, believing all that has been written in the
Torah and in the Neḇi’im,
15 having an expectation in Elohim, which they
themselves also wait for, that there is to be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the righteous and the
unrighteous.
16 “And in this I exercise myself to have a clear
conscience toward Elohim and men always.
17 “And after many years I came to bring kind deeds
to my nation and offerings,
18 at which time certain Yahuḏim from Asia found me
cleansed in the Miqdash, neither with a crowd nor
with disturbance,
19 who ought to be present before you to bring
charges if they have any against me.
20 “Or else let these themselves say if they found any
wrongdoing in me while I stood before the council,
21 other than for this one declaration which I cried
out, standing among them, ‘Concerning the
resurrection of the dead I am being judged by you
today.’ ”
22 And having heard this, having known more exactly
about the Way, Phĕlix put them off, saying, “When
Lusias the commander comes down, I shall decide
your case.”
23 And he ordered the captain to keep Sha’ul and to
have ease, and not to forbid any of his friends to
attend to him.
24 And after some days, when Phĕlix came with his
wife Drousilla, who was a female Yahuḏi, he sent for
Sha’ul and heard him concerning the belief in
Mashiaḥ.
25 And as he reasoned about righteousness, and
self-control, and the judgment to come, Phĕlix
2539

MA’ASĔH

became frightened and said, “For the present, go.
And when I find time I shall send for you.”
26 At the same time too he was anticipating that
money would be given him by Sha’ul, that he might
release him. Therefore he sent for him more often and
conversed with him.
27 But after two years had passed Porkios Phĕstos
succeeded Phĕlix. And wanting to do the Yahuḏim a
favour, Phĕlix left Sha’ul bound.

25 Phĕstos therefore, having come to the province,
three days later went up from Kaisereia to
Yerushalayim.
2 And the kohĕn ha’gadol and the chief men of the
Yahuḏim informed him against Sha’ul, and they
begged him,
3 asking a favour against him, that he would send
him to Yerushalayim - making a plot along the way to
kill him.
4 Then, indeed, Phĕstos answered that Sha’ul
should be kept at Kaisereia, and that he himself was
about to depart shortly.
5 “Therefore,” he said, “let those who have authority
among you go down with me and accuse this man, to
see if there is any fault in him.”
6 And having spent more than ten days among
them, he went down to Kaisereia. And on the next
day, sitting on the judgment seat, he commanded
Sha’ul to be brought.
7 And when he had come, the Yahuḏim who had
come down from Yerushalayim stood about, bringing
many and heavy charges against Sha’ul, which they
were unable to prove,

2540

ACTS

while Sha’ul said in his own defence, “Neither
against the Torah of the Yahuḏim, nor against the
Miqdash, nor against Kaisar did I commit any sin.”
9 But Phĕstos, wanting to do the Yahuḏim a favour,
answering Sha’ul, said, “Do you want to go up to
Yerushalayim and be judged before me there
concerning these?”
10 And Sha’ul said, “I am standing at Kaisar’s
judgement seat, where I should be judged. To the
Yahuḏim I have done no wrong, as you know well
enough.
11 “For if indeed I do wrong, or have committed
whatever deserving death, I do not refuse to die. But
if there is naught in these of which these men accuse
me, no one is able to give me up to them. I appeal to
Kaisar.”
12 Then Phĕstos, having talked with the council,
answered, “You have appealed to Kaisar? To Kaisar
you shall go!”
13 And certain days having passed, Sovereign
Agrippas and Bernikĕ came to Kaisereia to greet
Phĕstos.
14 And when they had spent many days there,
Phĕstos laid Sha’ul’s case before the sovereign,
saying, “There is a man here whom Phĕlix left as a
prisoner,
15 about whom the chief kohenim and the elders of
the Yahuḏim informed me, when I was in
Yerushalayim, asking for a judgment against him.
16 “To them I answered, ‘It is not the Roman practice
to give up any man to destruction before the accused
meets the accusers face to face, and has a chance to
answer for himself concerning the charge against
him.’
8

2541

MA’ASĔH

“They, therefore, having come together, without
any delay, I sat on the judgment seat the next day and
commanded the man to be brought in.
18 “When the accusers stood up, they brought no
charge against him such as I expected,
19 but had some questions against him about their
own worship and about a certain {fWHY, who had
died, whom Sha’ul was claiming to be alive.
20 “And being uncertain how to investigate these
matters, I asked whether he wanted to go to
Yerushalayim and there be judged concerning these
matters.
21 “But when Sha’ul appealed to be kept for the
decision of Augustus, I ordered him to be kept until I
send him to Kaisar.”
22 And Agrippas said to Phĕstos, “I was wanting also
to hear the man myself.” And he said, “Tomorrow, you
shall hear him.”
23 Therefore, on the next day, Agrippas and Bernikĕ
having come with great show, and having entered the
place of hearing with the commanders and the
eminent men of the city, Sha’ul was brought in at the
order of Phĕstos.
24 And Phĕstos said, “Sovereign Agrippas and all the
men present here with us, you see this one about
whom all the community of the Yahuḏim pleaded with
me, both at Yerushalayim and here, shouting that he
ought not to be living any longer.
25 “But I, having found that he had committed naught
deserving death, and that he himself had appealed to
Augustus, I decided to send him.
26 “I have none definite to write to my master
concerning him. Therefore I have brought him out
before you, and most of all before you, Sovereign
17

2542

ACTS

Agrippas, so that after the examination has taken
place I might have somewhat to write.
27 “For it seems to me unreasonable to send a
prisoner and not to signify the charges against him.”

26 And Agrippas said to Sha’ul, “You are allowed
to speak for yourself.” Then Sha’ul stretched out his
hand and made his defence:
2 “I think myself baruḵ, Sovereign Agrippas,
because today I shall make my defence before you
concerning all of which I am accused by the Yahuḏim,
3 you being most of all an expert, knowing of all
practices and questions which have to do with the
Yahuḏim. So, please hear me patiently.
4 “Truly, then, all the Yahuḏim know my way of life
from youth, which I led from the beginning among my
own nation at Yerushalayim,
5 since they have known me from the first, if they
want to witness, that I lived as a Pharisee according
to the strictest sect of our observance.
6 “And now I stand and am judged for the
expectation of the promise made by Elohim to our
fathers,
7 to which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving
Elohim night and day, expect to attain. Concerning
this expectation, O Sovereign Agrippas, I am accused
by the Yahuḏim.
8 “Why is it considered ‘unbelievable’ among you if
Elohim raises the dead?
9 “Therefore, indeed, I thought within myself that I
ought to do much against the Name of {fWHY of
Natsareth,
10 which also I did in Yerushalayim, and I shut up
many of the qodeshim in prison, having received
2543

MA’ASĔH

authority from the chief kohenim. And when they were
put to death, I gave my vote against them.
11 “And
punishing them often in all the
congregations, I compelled them to blaspheme. And
being exceedingly enraged against them, I
persecuted them even to foreign cities.
12 “While thus engaged, as I was journeying to
Dammeseq with authority and commission from the
chief kohenim,
13 at midday, O sovereign, I saw a light from the
shamayim, brighter than the sun, shining around me
and those who journeyed with me.
14 “And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard
a voice speaking to me, and saying in the Iḇri
language, ‘Sha’ul, Sha’ul, why do you persecute Me?
It is hard for you to kick against the prods.’
15 “And I said, ‘Who are You, Aḏonai?’ And He said,
‘I am {fWHY, whom you persecute.
16 ‘But rise up, and stand on your feet, for I have
appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you a
servant and a witness both of what you saw and of
those which I shall reveal to you,
17 delivering you from the people, and the gentiles,
to whom I now send you,
18 to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to
light, and the authority of Satan to Elohim, in order for
them to receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance
among those who are qadosh by belief in Me.’
19 “Therefore, Sovereign Agrippas, I was not
disobedient to the vision of the shamayim,
20 but declared first to those in Dammeseq and in
Yerushalayim, and in all the country of Yahuḏah, and
to the gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to
Elohim, and do works worthy of repentance.
2544

ACTS

“That is why the Yahuḏim seized me in the
Miqdash and tried to kill me.
22 “Therefore, having obtained help from Elohim, to
this day I stand, witnessing both to small and great,
saying nil else than what the Neḇi’im and Mosheh
said would come 23 that ha’Mashiaḥ would suffer, would be the first to
rise from the dead, He would proclaim light to the
people and to the gentiles.”
24 And while saying this in his defence, Phĕstos said
with a loud voice, “Sha’ul, you are mad! Much
learning is turning you to madness!”
25 But Sha’ul said, “I am not mad, most excellent
Phĕstos, but I speak words of truth and sense.
26 “For the sovereign, before whom I also speak
boldly, knows this. For l am persuaded that none of
these are hidden from him, for this has not been done
in a corner.
27 “Sovereign Agrippas, do you believe the Neḇi’im?
I know that you do believe.”
28 And Agrippas said to Sha’ul, “With a little you
might persuade me to become a Mashiaḥiyim!”
29 And Sha’ul said, “Much or little, I pray to Elohim
that not only you, but also all who hear me today,
might become such as I also am, except for these
chains.”
30 And having said this, the sovereign stood up, as
well as the governor and Bernikĕ and those sitting
with them,
31 and having withdrawn, they spoke to each other,
saying, “This man is doing naught deserving death or
chains.”
32 And Agrippas said to Phĕstos, “This man could
have been released if he had not appealed to Kaisar.”
21

2545

MA’ASĔH

27 And when it was decided that we should sail to
Italia, they delivered Sha’ul and some other prisoners
to one named Yulios, captain of the Augustan
regiment.
2 And having embarked in a ship from Adramyttium,
about to sail along the coasts of Asia, launched.
Aristarḵos, a Makedonian of Thessalonikĕ, was with
us.
3 And on the next day we landed at Tsiḏon. And
Yulios treated Sha’ul kindly and allowed him to go to
his friends to receive attention.
4 And from there we put out to sea and sailed close
to Kupros, because the winds were against us.
5 And having sailed over the sea along Kilikia and
Pamphulia, we came to Mura, of Lukia.
6 And
there the captain, having found an
Alexandrian ship sailing to Italia, put us on board.
7 And having sailed slowly many days, and arriving
with difficulty off Knidos, the wind not allowing us to
proceed, we sailed close to Krĕtĕ, off Salmonĕ.
8 And passing it with difficulty, we came to a place
called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasaia.
9 And much time having passed, and the sailing now
being dangerous, because the Fast was already over,
Sha’ul advised them,
10 saying, “Men, I see that this voyage is going to end
with damage and great loss, not only of the cargo and
ship, but also our lives.”
11 But the captain was persuaded by the pilot and the
owner of the ship, rather than what Sha’ul said.
12 And because the harbour was unsuitable to winter
in, the greater part advised to launch from there too,
if somehow they were able to reach Phoinikĕ, a
2546

ACTS

harbour of Krĕtĕ facing southwest and northwest, to
pass the winter.
13 And a south wind blowing softly, thinking they had
obtained their purpose, having lifted anchor, they
sailed close along Krĕtĕ.
14 And not long after, a stormy head wind rushed
down from it, called Northeaster.
15 And when the ship was caught, and unable to
head against the wind, we let her go and were driven.
16 And having run under a small island called Klaudĕ,
we were hardly able to control the small boat.
17 And having hoisted it, they used helps to undergird
the ship. And fearing lest they should run aground on
Surtis, they lowered the tackle and so were driven.
18 And because we were exceedingly storm-tossed,
the next day they began to throw overboard.
19 And on the third day we threw out the ship’s tackle
with our own hands.
20 When, now, neither sun nor stars appeared for
many days, and no small storm beat on us, all
expectancy that we would be saved was taken away.
21 And when there had been a long abstinence from
food, then Sha’ul, standing in the midst of them, said,
“Truly, men, you should have listened to me not to
have sailed from Krĕtĕ and sustained this damage
and loss.
22 “And now I urge you to take courage, for there
shall be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
23 “For tonight a messenger of the Elohim to whom I
belong and whom I serve, stood by me,
24 saying, ‘Do not be afraid, Sha’ul, you have to be
brought before Kaisar. And look, Elohim has
favourably given you all those who sail with you.’

2547

MA’ASĔH

“Therefore take courage, men, for I believe Elohim
that it shall be according to the way it was spoken to
me.
26 “However, we need to run aground on some
island.”
27 And when the fourteenth night came, as we were
driven up and down in the Adriatic Sea, about
midnight the sailors suspected that they were drawing
near some land.
28 So, taking soundings, they found it to be twenty
fathoms. And a little farther on they took soundings
again and found it to be fifteen fathoms.
29 And, fearing lest we should run aground on the
rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern, and
were praying for day to come.
30 But when the sailors were seeking to escape from
the ship, when they had let down the boat into the
sea, under pretence of going to cast out anchors from
the prow,
31 Sha’ul said to the captain and the soldiers, “If
these do not remain in the ship, it is impossible for
you to be saved.”
32 Then the soldiers cut the ropes of the boat and let
it fall off.
33 And when day was about to come, Sha’ul urged
them all to take food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth
day you have continued without food, and eaten
naught.
34 “So I urge you to take food, for this concerns your
safety, since not a hair shall fall from the head of any
of you.”
35 And having said this, he took bread and gave
thanks to Elohim in the presence of them all. And
when he had broken it he began to eat.
25

2548

ACTS

And they were all encouraged, and also took food
themselves.
37 And all of us were two hundred and seventy-six
beings in the ship.
38 And being satisfied with food, they were lightening
the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
39 And when day came, they did not recognise the
land, but they noted a certain bay with a beach, onto
which they planned to run the ship if possible.
40 And having cast off the anchors, they left them in
the sea, meanwhile untying the rudder ropes. And
they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the
beach.
41 But coming upon a place where two seas met,
they grounded the ship, and the prow stuck fast and
remained immovable, but the stern was broken by the
pounding of the surf.
42 And the soldiers intended to kill the prisoners, lest
any of them should swim away and escape.
43 But the captain, intending to save Sha’ul, kept
them from their intention, and commanded those able
to swim to jump first and get to land,
44 and the rest, some indeed on boards, and some
on items of the ship. And so it came to be that all
reached the land in safety.
36

28 And having come to safety, they then learned
that the island was called Melitĕ.
2 And the foreigners showed us extraordinary
kindness, for they kindled a fire and received us all,
because of the rain that was falling and because of
the cold.
3 But Sha’ul, having gathered a bundle of sticks,
and having laid them on the fire, an adder came out
because of the heat, and fastened itself on his hand.
2549

MA’ASĔH

And when the foreigners saw the creature hanging
from his hand, they said to each other, “This man is
certainly a murderer, whom, though saved from the
sea, still right-ruling does not allow to live.”
5 Then, indeed, he shook off the creature into the
fire and suffered no evil.
6 And expecting that he would swell up or suddenly
fall down dead, they waited for a long time and saw
no harm come to him, changing their minds they said
that he was a mighty one.
7 And in the neighbourhood of that place there were
lands of the chief of the island, whose name was
Poplius, who received us and housed us in a friendly
way for three days.
8 And it came to be that the father of Poplius lay sick
with inflammation and dysentery. Sha’ul went in to
him, and having prayed he laid his hands on him and
healed him.
9 And when this took place, the rest of those on the
island who had diseases also came and were healed,
10 who also respected us in many ways. And when
we were departing, they provided for our needs.
11 And after three months we launched in an
Alexandrian ship which had wintered at the island,
and whose figurehead was “Twin Brothers.”
12 And having landed at Surakousai, we stayed three
days,
13 from which place we went round and arrived at
Rhegium. And after one day the south wind blew, and
the second day we came to Potioloi,
14 where we found brothers, and were invited to stay
with them seven days. And so we went toward Rome.
15 And when the brothers there heard about us, they
came to meet us as far as Forum of Appius and Three
4

2550

ACTS

Taverns. When Sha’ul saw them, he thanked Elohim
and took courage.
16 And when we came to Rome, the captain
delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but
Sha’ul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldiers
guarding him.
17 And it came to be after three days that Sha’ul
called the leaders of the Yahuḏim together. And when
they had come together, he said to them, “Men,
brothers, though I have done naught against our
people or the practices of our fathers, I was delivered
as a prisoner from Yerushalayim into the hands of the
Romans,
18 who, when they had examined me, intended to let
me go, because there was no cause for putting me to
death.
19 “But the Yahuḏim spoke against it, and I was
compelled to appeal to Kaisar, not that I had any
accusation against my nation.
20 “This therefore is the reason I called for you, to see
you and speak with you. It is because of the
expectation of Yisra’ĕl that I am bound with this
chain.”
21 And they said to him, “We neither received letters
from Yahuḏah concerning you, nor have any of the
brothers who came reported or spoken whatever
wicked about you.
22 “And we think it right to hear from you what you
think, for indeed, concerning this sect, we know that
it is spoken against everywhere.”
23 And having appointed him a day, many came to
him where he was staying, to whom he was
explaining, earnestly witnessing about the reign of
Elohim, and persuading them concerning {fWHY from
2551

MA’ASĔH

both the Torah of Mosheh and the Neḇi’im, from
morning until evening.
24 And some indeed were persuaded by what was
said, but some believed not.
25 And disagreeing with one another, they began to
leave, after Sha’ul had spoken one word, “The Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh rightly spoke through Yeshayahu the naḇi
to our fathers,
26 saying, ‘Go to this people and say, “Hearing you
shall hear but by no means understand, and seeing
you shall see but by no means perceive,
27 for the heart of this people has become thickened,
and with their ears they heard heavily, and they have
closed their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes
and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and turn back, and I should heal them.” ’
28 “Therefore let it be known to you that the
deliverance of Elohim has been sent to the gentiles,
and they shall hear!”
29 And when he had said these words, the Yahuḏim
went away and had a great dispute among
themselves.
30 And Sha’ul stayed two entire years in his own
rented house, and was receiving all who came to him,
31 proclaiming the reign of Elohim and teaching
about the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ with all boldness,
unhindered.

29 And Sha’ul, full of the blessings of Mashiaḥ, and
abounding in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, departed out of
Rome, determining to go into Spania, for he had a
long time purposed to journey thitherward, and was
minded also to go from thence into Britain.
2 For he had heard in Phoinikĕ that certain of the
children of Yisra’ĕl, about the time of the captivity into
the land of Ashshur, had escaped by sea to the isles
2552

ACTS

afar off, as spoken by the neḇi’im, and called by the
Romans, Britain.
3 And HWHY commanded the Besorah to be
preached far hence to the other nations, and to the
lost sheep of the house of Yisra’ĕl.
4 And no man hindered Sha’ul; for he testified boldly
of {fWHY before the tribunes and among the people
and he took with him certain of the brethren which
abode with him at Rome, and they took shipping at
Ostium, and have the winds fair, were brought safely
into a haven of Spania.
5 And much people were gathered from the towns
and villages, and the hill country; for they had heard
of the conversion of the talmid, and the many miracles
which he had wrought.
6 And Sha’ul preached mightily in Spania, and great
multitudes believed and were converted, for they
perceived he was a talmid sent from Elohim.
7 And they departed out of Spania, and Sha’ul and
his company finding a ship in Armorica sailed unto
Britain, they went therein, and passing along the
south coast they reached a port called Raphinus.
8 Now when it was noised abroad that the apostle
had landed on their coast, great multitudes of the
inhabitants met him, and they treated Sha’ul
courteously, and he entered in at the east gate of their
city, and lodged in the house of an Iḇri and one of his
own nation.
9 And on the morrow he came and stood upon
Mount Luḏ; and the people thronged at the gate, and
assembled in the Broadway, and he preached
Mashiaḥ unto them, and many believed the word and
the testimony of {fWHY.
10 And at evening the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh fell upon
Sha’ul, and he naḇu, saying, “Behold in the last days
HWHY Shalom shall dwell in the cities, and the
inhabitants thereof shall be numbered; and in the
seventh numbering of the people, their eyes shall be
2553

MA’ASĔH

opened, and the glory of their inheritance shine forth
before them. And nations shall come up to worship on
the Mount that testifies the patience and longsuffering
of a servant of HWHY.
11 “And in the latter days, new tidings of the Besorah
shall issue forth out of Yerushalayim, and the hearts
of the people shall rejoice, and behold, fountains shall
be opened, and there shall be no more plague.
12 “In those days there shall be wars and rumors of
wars; and a Sovereign shall rise up, and his sword
shall be for the healing of the nations, and his peace
making shall abide, and the glory of his Reign a
wonder among princes.”
13 And it came to pass that certain of the Druids
came unto Sha’ul privately, and showed by their rites
and ceremonies they were descended from the
Yahuḏim which escaped from bondage in the land of
Mitsrayim, and the apostle believed these things, and
he gave them the kiss of peace.
14 And Sha’ul abode in his lodging three months,
confirming in the faith and preaching Mashiaḥ
continually.
15 And after these things Sha’ul and his brethren
departed from Raphinus, and sailed unto Atium, in
Gaul.
16 And Sha’ul preached in the Romaiy garrisons and
among the people, exhorting all men to repent and
confess their sins.
17 And there came to him certain of the Belgae to
inquire of him of the new doctrine, and of the man
{fWHY; and Sha’ul opened his heart unto them, and
told them all things that had befallen him, howbeit that
Mashiaḥ {fWHY came into the world to save sinners;
and they departed, pondering among themselves
upon the things which they had heard.
18 And after much preaching and toil, Sha’ul and his
fellow laborers passed into Helvetia, and came unto
Mount Pontius Pilatus, where he who condemned
2554

ACTS

Aḏonai {fWHY dashed himself down headlong, and
so miserably perished.
19 And after much preaching and toil, Sha’ul and his
fellow laborers passed into Helvetia, and came unto
Mount Pontius Pilatus, where he who condemned
Aḏonai {fWHY dashed himself down headlong, and
so miserably perished. And immediately a torrent
gushed out of the mountain and washed his broken
body in pieces into a lake.
20 And Sha’ul stretched forth his hands upon the
water, and prayed unto HWHY, saying, “O HWHY
Elohim, give a sign unto all nations that here Pontius
Pilatus, which condemned your only brought-forth
Bĕn, plunged headlong into the pit.”
21 And while Sha’ul was yet speaking, behold there
came a great earthquake, and the face of the waters
was changed, and the form of the lake like unto the
Bĕn of Aḏam hanging in the agony upon the stake.
22 And a voice came out of heaven saying, “Even
Pilatus has escaped the wrath to come, for he
washed his hands before the multitude at the blood
shedding of Aḏonai {fWHY.”
23 When, therefore, Sha’ul and those that were with
him saw the earthquake, and heard the voice of the
messenger, they glorified Yah, and were mightily
strengthened in the Ruaḥ.
24 And they journeyed and came to Mount Yulios,
where stood two pillars, one on the right hand and
one on the left hand, erected by Kaisar Augustus.
25 And Sha’ul, filled with the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, stood
up between the two pillars, saying, “Men and
brethren, these stones which ye see this day shall
testify of my journey hence; and indeed I say, they
shall remain until the outpouring of the Ruaḥ upon all
nations, neither shall the way be hindered throughout
all generations.”
26 And they went forth and came unto Illurikon,
intending to go by Makedonia into Asia, and grace
2555

MA’ASĔH

was found in all the called out assemblies; and they
prospered and had peace. Amĕn.

2556

GALATIANS

GALATIYIM
‫ גלאטים‬mYjALg

1 Sha’ul, an emissary - not from men, nor by a man,
but by {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ and HWHY the Father who
raised Him from the dead 2 and all the brothers who are with me, to the
assemblies of Galatia:
3 Favour to you and peace from HWHY the Father
and our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
4 who gave Himself for our sins, to deliver us out of
this present wicked age, according to the desire of our
Elohim and Father,
5 to whom be the praise forever and ever. Amĕn.
6 I marvel that you are so readily turning away from
Him who called you in the favour of Mashiaḥ, to a
different ‘good news,’
7 which is not another, only there are some who are
troubling you and wanting to corrupt the Good News
of Mashiaḥ.
8 However, even if we, or a messenger out of the
shamayim, bring a ‘good news’ to you beside what we
announced to you, let him be accursed.
9 As we have said before, and now I say again, if
anyone brings a ‘good news’ to you beside what you
have received, let him be accursed.
10 For do I now persuade men, or Elohim? Or do I
seek to please men? For if I still pleased men, I should
not be a servant of Mashiaḥ.
11 And I make known to you, brothers, that the Good
News announced by me is not according to man.
12 For I did not receive it from man, nor was I taught
it, but through a revelation of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
2557

GALATIYIM

For you have heard of my former behaviour in
Yahuḏaism, how intensely I persecuted the assembly
of Elohim, and ravaged it.
14 And I progressed in Yahuḏaism beyond many of
my age in my race, being more exceedingly ardent for
the traditions of my fathers.
15 But when it pleased Elohim, who separated me
from my mother’s womb and called me by His favour,
16 to reveal His Bĕn in me, that I might bring Him, the
Good News, to the gentiles, I did not immediately
consult with flesh and blood,
17 neither did I go up to Yerushalayim, to those who
were emissaries before me. But I went to Araḇia, and
returned again to Dammeseq.
18 Then after three years I went up to Yerushalayim
to learn from Kĕpha, and remained with him for fifteen
days.
19 And I saw no other of the emissaries except
Ya’aqoḇ, the brother of the Aḏon.
20 And what I write to you, see, before Elohim, I do
not lie.
21 Then I went into the districts of Suria and of Kilikia.
22 And I was not known by sight to the assemblies of
Yahuḏah which were in Mashiaḥ,
23 but they were hearing only that, “The one who
once persecuted us now brings as Good News the
belief which he once ravaged.”
24 So they were esteeming Elohim in me.
13

2 Then after fourteen years I again went up to
Yerushalayim, with Barnaḇah, taking Titos along too.
2 And I went up by revelation, and laid before them
that Good News which I proclaim among the gentiles,
but separately to those who were esteemed, lest
somehow I run, or had run, in vain.
2558

GALATIANS

But not even Titus who was with me, though a
Yawanite, was compelled to be circumcised.
4 But as for the false brothers, sneakingly brought
in, who sneaked in to spy out our freedom which we
have in Mashiaḥ {fWHY in order to enslave us,
5 to these we did not yield in subjection, not even for
an hour, so that the truth of the Good News remains
with you.
6 But from those who were esteemed to be
whatever - what they were, it makes no difference to
me, Elohim shows no partiality - for those who were
esteemed contributed naught to me.
7 But on the contrary, when they saw that the Good
News to the uncircumcised had been entrusted to me,
even as Kĕpha to the circumcised 8 for He who worked in Kĕpha to make him an
emissary to the circumcised also worked in me for the
gentiles.
9 So when Ya’aqoḇ, Kĕpha, and Yoḥanan, who
seemed to be supports, came to know the favour that
had been given to me, they gave me and Barnaḇah
the right hand of fellowship, with purpose of we unto
the gentiles and they to the circumcised,
10 only that we might remember the poor, which I
myself was eager to do.
11 And when Kĕpha had come to Antioḵeia, I
withstood him to his face, because he was at fault.
12 For before some came from Ya’aqoḇ, he was
eating with the gentiles, but when they came, he
began to withdraw and separate himself, in fear of
those of the circumcision.
13 And the rest of the Yahuḏim joined him in
hypocrisy, so that even Barnaḇah was led away by
their hypocrisy.
3

2559

GALATIYIM

But when I saw that they are not walking straight
according to the truth of the Good News, I said to
Kĕpha before them all, “If you, being a Yahuḏi, live as
a gentile and not as the Yahuḏim, why do you compel
gentiles to live as Yahuḏim?
15 “We, Yahuḏim by nature, and not of the gentiles,
sinners,
16 knowing that a man is not declared right by works
of Torah, but through belief in {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
even we have believed in Mashiaḥ {fWHY, in order to
be declared right by belief in Mashiaḥ and not by
works of Torah, because by works of Torah no flesh
shall be declared right.
17 “And if, while seeking to be declared right by
Mashiaḥ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is
Mashiaḥ then a servant of sin? Let it not be!
18 “For if I rebuild what I overthrew, I establish myself
a transgressor.
19 “For through Torah I died to Torah, in order to live
to Elohim.
20 “I have been impaled with Mashiaḥ, and I no
longer live, but Mashiaḥ lives in me. And that which I
now live in the flesh I live by belief in the Bĕn of HWHY,
who loved me and gave Himself for me.
21 “I do not put aside the favour of Elohim, for if
righteousness is through Torah, then Mashiaḥ died
for naught.”
14

3 O senseless Galatiyim! Who has put you under a
spell, not to obey the truth - before whose eyes {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ was clearly portrayed among you as
impaled?
2 This only I want to learn from you: Did you receive
the Ruaḥ by works of Torah, or by the hearing of
belief?
2560

GALATIANS

Are you so senseless? Having begun in the Ruaḥ,
do you now end in the flesh?
4 Have you suffered so much in vain - if indeed in
vain?
5 Is He, then, who is supplying the Ruaḥ to you and
working miracles among you, doing it by works of
Torah, or by hearing of belief?
6 Even so Aḇraham “believed Elohim, and it was
reckoned unto him as righteousness.”
7 Know, then, that those who are of belief are sons
of Aḇraham.
8 And the Scripture, having foreseen that Elohim
would declare right the nations by belief, announced
the Good News to Aḇraham beforehand, saying, “All
the nations shall be baruḵ in you,”
9 so that those who are of belief are baruḵ with
Aḇraham, the believer.
10 For as many as are of works of Torah are under
the curse, for it has been written, “Cursed is everyone
who does not continue in all that has been written in
the Book of the Torah, to do them.”
11 And that no one is declared right by Torah before
Elohim is clear, for “The righteous shall live by belief.”
12 And the Torah is not of belief, but “The man who
does them shall live by them.”
13 Mashiaḥ redeemed us from the curse of the Torah,
having become a curse for us - for it has been written,
“Cursed is everyone who hangs upon a tree.”
14 in order that the beraḵah of Aḇraham might come
upon the nations in Mashiaḥ {fWHY, to receive the
promise of the Ruaḥ through belief.
15 Brothers, as a man I say it: a Covenant, even
though it is man’s, yet if it is confirmed, no one puts it
aside, or adds to it.
3

2561

GALATIYIM

But the promises were spoken to Aḇraham, and to
his Seed. He does not say, “And to seeds,” as of
many, but as of One, “And to your Seed,” who is
Mashiaḥ.
17 Now this I say, Torah, that came four hundred and
thirty years later, does not annul a Covenant
previously confirmed by HWHY in Mashiaḥ, so as to do
away with the promise.
18 For if the inheritance is by Torah, it is no longer by
promise, but Elohim gave it to Aḇraham through a
promise.
19 Why, then, the Torah? It was added because of
transgressions, until the Seed should come to whom
the promise was made. And it was ordained through
messengers in the hand of a mediator.
20 The Mediator, however, is not of one, but Elohim
is One.
21 Is the Torah then against the promises of Elohim?
Let it not be! For if a law had been given that was able
to make alive, truly righteousness would have been
by Torah.
22 But the Scripture has shut up all under sin, that the
promise by belief in {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ might be
given to those who believe.
23 But before belief came, we were being guarded
under Torah, having been shut up for the belief being
about to be revealed.
24 Therefore the Torah became our trainer unto
Mashiaḥ, in order to be declared right by belief.
25 And after belief has come, we are no longer under
a trainer.
26 For you are all sons of Elohim through belief in
Mashiaḥ {fWHY.
27 For as many of you as were immersed into
Mashiaḥ have put on Mashiaḥ.
16

2562

GALATIANS

There is not Yahuḏi nor Yawanite, there is not
slave nor free, there is not male and female, for you
are all one in Mashiaḥ {fWHY.
29 And if you are of Mashiaḥ, then you are seed of
Aḇraham, and heirs according to promise.
28

4 And I say, for as long as the heir is a child, he is no
different from a slave, though he is master of all,
2 but is under guardians and trustees till the time
prearranged by the father.
3 So we also, when we were children, were under
the elementary matters of the world, being enslaved.
4 But when the completion of the time came, HWHY
sent forth His Bĕn, born of a woman, born under
Torah,
5 to redeem those who were under Torah, in order
to receive the adoption as sons.
6 And because you are sons, HWHY has sent forth
the Ruaḥ of His Bĕn into your hearts, crying, “Abba,
Father!”
7 So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a
son, also an heir of Elohim through Mashiaḥ.
8 But then, indeed, not knowing Elohim, you served
those which by nature are not mighty ones.
9 But now after you have known Elohim, or rather
are known by Elohim, how do you turn again to the
weak and poor elementary matters, to which you want
to be enslaved again?
10 You closely observe days and months and
seasons and years.
11 I fear for you, lest by any means I have laboured
for you in vain.
12 Brothers, I beg you to become as I am, because I
am as you are. You did not wrong me at all.
2563

GALATIYIM

But you know that through weakness of the flesh I
brought the Good News to you before.
14 And my trial which was in my flesh you did not
despise or reject, but you received me as a
messenger of Elohim, as Mashiaḥ {fWHY.
15 What then was your beraḵah? For I bear you
witness, that if possible, you would have plucked out
your own eyes and given them to me.
16 So then, have I become your enemy, speaking
truth to you?
17 They are ardent towards you, for no good, but they
want to shut you out, that you might be ardent
towards them.
18 And it is good always to be ardent in what is good,
and not only when I am present with you.
19 My little children, for whom I am again in birth
pains until Mashiaḥ is formed in you,
20 even now I want to be present with you now and
to change my voice, for I have doubts about you.
21 Say to me, you who want to be under Torah, do
you not hear the Torah?
22 For it has been written that Aḇraham had two
sons, one by a female servant, the other by a free
woman.
23 But he who was of the female servant was born
according to the flesh, and he of the free woman
through promise.
24 This is allegorical, for these are the two covenants:
one indeed from Mount Sinai which brings forth
slavery, which is Haḡar,
25 for this Haḡar is Mount Sinai in Araḇia, and
corresponds to Yerushalayim which now is, and is in
slavery with her children.
26 But the Yerushalayim above is free, which is the
mother of us all.
13

2564

GALATIANS

For it has been written, “Rejoice, O barren, you
who do not bear! Break forth and shout, you who do
not have birth pains! For the deserted one has many
more children than she who has a husband.”
28 And we, brothers, as Yitsḥaq was, are children of
promise.
29 But, as he who was born according to the flesh
then persecuted him who is according to the Ruaḥ, so
also now.
30 But what does the Scripture say? “Cast out the
female servant and her son, for the son of the female
servant shall by no means be heir with the son of the
free woman.”
31 Therefore, brothers, we are not children of the
female servant but of the free woman.
27

5 In the freedom with which Mashiaḥ has made us
free, stand firm, then, and do not again be held with a
yoke of slavery.
2 See, I, Sha’ul, say to you that if you become
circumcised, Mashiaḥ shall be of no use to you.
3 And I witness again to every man being
circumcised that he is a debtor to do the entire Torah.
4 You who are declared right by Torah have severed
yourselves from Mashiaḥ, you have fallen from
favour.
5 For we, in Ruaḥ, by belief, eagerly wait for the
expectation of righteousness.
6 For in Mashiaḥ {fWHY neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision has any strength, but belief working
through love.
7 You were running well, who held you back from
obeying the truth?
8 That persuasion does not come from Him who
calls you.
2565

GALATIYIM

A little leaven leavens all the lump.
10 I trust in you, in the Aḏon, that you shall have no
other mind. And he who is troubling you shall bear his
judgment, whoever he is.
11 And I, brothers, if I still proclaim circumcision, why
am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling-block of the
stake has been put aside.
12 O that those who disturb you would even cut
themselves off!
13 For you, brothers, have been called to freedom,
only do not use freedom as an occasion for the flesh,
but through love serve one another.
14 For the entire Torah is completed in one word, in
this, “You shall love your neighbour as yourself.”
15 And if you bite and devour one another, beware
lest you be consumed by one another!
16 And I say: Walk in the Ruaḥ, and you shall not
accomplish the lust of the flesh.
17 For the flesh lusts against the Ruaḥ, and the Ruaḥ
against the flesh. And these are opposed to each
other, so that you do not do what you desire to do.
18 But if you are led by the Ruaḥ, you are not under
Torah.
19 And the works of the flesh are well-known, which
are: adultery, whoring, uncleanness, indecency,
20 idolatry, drug sorcery, hatred, quarrels, jealousies,
fits of rage, selfish ambitions, dissensions, factions,
21 envy, murders, drunkenness, wild parties, and the
like - of which I forewarn you, even as I also said
before, that those who practise such as these shall
not inherit the reign of Elohim.
22 But the fruit of the Ruaḥ is love, joy, peace,
patience, kindness, goodness, trustworthiness,
23 gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no
Torah.
9

2566

GALATIANS

And those who are of Mashiaḥ have impaled the
flesh with its passions and the desires.
25 If we live in the Ruaḥ, let us also walk in the Ruaḥ.
26 Let us not become conceited, provoking one
another, envying one another.
24

6 Brothers, if a man is overtaken in some trespass,
you the spiritual ones, put such a one straight in a spirit
of meekness, looking at yourself lest you be tried too.
2 Bear one another’s burdens, and so complete the
Torah of Mashiaḥ.
3 For if anyone thinks himself to be somebody, when
he is not, he deceives himself.
4 But let each one examine his own work, and then
he shall have boasting in himself alone, and not in
another.
5 For each one shall bear his own burden.
6 And let him who is instructed in the Word share in
all that is good, with him who is instructing.
7 Do not be led astray: Elohim is not mocked, for
whatever a man sows, that he shall also reap.
8 Because he who sows to his own flesh shall reap
corruption from the flesh, but he who sows to the
Ruaḥ shall reap everlasting ḥai from the Ruaḥ.
9 And let us not lose heart in doing good, for in due
season we shall reap if we do not grow weary.
10 So then, as we have occasion, let us do good to
all, especially to those who are of the household of
the belief.
11 See with what big letters I have written to you with
my own hand!
12 As many as want to make a good show in the
flesh, these compel you to be circumcised, only so
that they should not be persecuted for the stake of
Mashiaḥ.
2567

GALATIYIM

For those who are circumcised do not even watch
over the Torah, but they want to have you
circumcised so that they might boast in your flesh.
14 And for me, let it not be that I should boast except
in the stake of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, through
whom the world has been impaled to me, and I to the
world.
15 For in Mashiaḥ {fWHY neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision has any strength, but a renewed
creature.
16 And as many as walk according to this rule, peace
and compassion be upon them, and upon the Yisra’ĕl
of Elohim.
17 From now on let no one trouble me, for I bear in
my body the scars of the Aḏon {fWHY.
18 The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
your spirit, brothers. Amĕn
13

2568

1 THESSALONIANS

TAS’LONIQIM 1
‫ תסלוניקים א‬A mYqY!WLst

1 Sha’ul, and Sila, and Timotiyos, to the assembly of
the Tas’loniqim in HWHY the Father and the Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ: Favour to you and peace from
HWHY our Father and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
2 We give thanks to Elohim always for you all,
making mention of you in our prayers,
3 remembering without ceasing your work of the
belief, and the labour of love, and the endurance of
the expectation in our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ in the
presence of our Elohim and the Father,
4 knowing, brothers beloved by Elohim, that you
were chosen.
5 Because our Good News did not come to you in
word only, but also in power, and in the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh and in entire confirmation, as you know
what kind of men we were among you for your sake.
6 And you became imitators of us and of the Aḏon,
having received the Word in much pressure, with joy
of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
7 so that you became an example to all who believe
in Makedonia and Aḵaia.
8 For from you the Word of the Aḏon has sounded
forth, not only in Makedonia and Aḵaia, but also in
every place your belief toward Elohim has gone out,
so that it is unnecessary for us to say whatever.
9 For they themselves report what kind of reception
we had with you, and how you turned to Elohim from
idols, to serve the living and true Elohim,
10 and to wait for His Bĕn from the shamayim, whom
He raised from the dead, {fWHY, who is delivering us
from the wrath to come.
2569

TAS’LONIQIM 1

2 For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming
to you was not in vain.
2 But having suffered before and having been
mistreated at Philippos, as you know, we were bold in
our Elohim to speak to you the Good News of Elohim
in much struggle.
3 For the appeal we make does not come from
delusion, nor from uncleanness, nor from deceit.
4 But as we have been approved by Elohim to be
entrusted with the Good News, so we speak, not as
pleasing men, but Elohim who proves our hearts.
5 For we never came with a word of flattery, as you
know, nor with a cloak for greed - Elohim is witness 6 nor were we looking for praise from men, not from
you nor from others, though we could have been a
burden to you, as emissaries of Mashiaḥ.
7 But we were gentle in your midst, like a nursing
mother warmly loving her own children.
8 So, having a tender affection for you, we were well
pleased to share with you not only the Good News of
Elohim, but also our own lives, because you have
become beloved to us.
9 For you remember, brothers, our toil and hardship,
for labouring night and day, in order not to burden any
of you, we proclaimed to you the Good News of
Elohim.
10 You are witnesses, Elohim also, how qodesh and
righteously and blamelessly we behaved ourselves
among you who believe,
11 even as you know how each one of you, as a
father to his children, encouraging and comforting
and bearing witness to you,
12 that you would walk worthily of Elohim who is
calling you into His own reign and esteem.
2570

1 THESSALONIANS

And because of this we thank Elohim without
ceasing, that when you received the Word of HWHY
which you heard from us, you welcomed it not as the
word of men, but as it is truly, the Word of HWHY,
which also works in you who believe.
14 For you, brothers, became imitators of the
assemblies of Elohim which are in Yahuḏah in
Mashiaḥ {fWHY, because you also suffered the same
from your own countrymen as they also from the
Yahuḏim,
15 who killed both the Aḏon {fWHY and their own
neḇi’im, and have persecuted us, and who displease
Elohim and are hostile to all men,
16 forbidding us to speak to the gentiles that they
might be saved, so as to fill up their sins always. But
the wrath has come upon them to the utmost.
17 But we, brothers, having been taken away from
you for a short while - in presence, not in heart - were
much more eagerly trying to see your face, with much
longing.
18 We would therefore have come to you, I indeed,
Sha’ul, more than once, but Satan hindered us.
19 For what is our expectation, or joy, or crown of
boasting? Is it not even you, before our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ at His coming?
20 For you are our esteem and joy.
13

3 So, when we could no longer stand it, we thought it
good to be left in Athĕnai alone,
2 and sent Timotiyos, our brother and servant of
Elohim, and our fellow worker in the Good News of
Mashiaḥ, to establish you and encourage you
concerning your belief,

2571

TAS’LONIQIM 1

that no one should be unsettled by these
pressures, for you yourselves know that we are
appointed to this.
4 For indeed, we informed you beforehand, when
we were with you, that we would suffer pressure, and
so it came to be, as you know.
5 Because of this, when I could no longer stand it, I
sent to find out about your belief, lest the trying one
might have tried you, and our labour should be in
vain.
6 But now that Timotiyos has come to us from you,
and having brought us good news of your belief and
love, and that you always have good remembrance of
us, longing to see us, as we also you,
7 therefore, brothers, in all our pressure and distress
we were encouraged concerning you by your belief.
8 Because we now live, if you stand fast in the Aḏon.
9 For what thanks are we able to return to Elohim for
you, for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sake
in the presence of our Elohim,
10 night and day praying exceedingly, to see your
face and make complete what is lacking in your
belief?
11 And our Elohim and Father Himself, and our Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, direct our way to you!
12 And the Aḏon make you increase and overflow in
love to each other and to all, as we also do to you,
13 to establish your hearts blameless in qodeshah
before our Elohim and Father at the coming of our
Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ with all His qodeshim!
3

4 For the rest then, brothers, we beg you and call
upon you in the Aḏon {fWHY, that as you received from
us how you should walk and to please Elohim, you
should excel still more,
2572

1 THESSALONIANS

for you know what commands we gave you
through the Aḏon {fWHY.
3 For this is the desire of Elohim: your qodeshah! that you should abstain from whoring,
4 that each one of you should know how to possess
his own vessel in qodeshah and respect,
5 not in passion of lust, like the gentiles who do not
know Elohim,
6 not to overstep and take advantage of his brother
in this matter, because the Aḏon is the revenger of all
such, as we indeed said to you before and earnestly
warned.
7 For Elohim did not call us to uncleanness, but in
qodeshah.
8 Therefore he who rejects this does not reject man,
but Elohim, who also gives us His Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
9 And it is not necessary to write to you about
brotherly love, for you yourselves are taught by
Elohim to love one another,
10 for, in fact, you do so toward all the brothers who
are in all Makedonia. But we call upon you, brothers,
that you do so more and more,
11 and to make it your ambition to live peaceably, and
to attend to your own, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you,
12 so that you behave decently toward those who are
outside, and not be in any need.
13 Now, brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant
concerning those who have fallen asleep, lest you be
sad as others who have no expectation.
14 For if we believe that {fWHY died and rose again,
so also Elohim shall bring with Him those who sleep
in {fWHY.
15 For this we say to you by the word of the Aḏon,
that we, the living who are left over at the coming of
2

2573

TAS’LONIQIM 1

the Aḏon shall in no way go before those who are
asleep.
16 Because the Aḏon Himself shall come down from
the shamayim with a shout, with the voice of a chief
messenger, and with the trumpet of Elohim, and the
dead in Mashiaḥ shall rise first.
17 Then we, the living who are left over, shall be
caught away together with them in the clouds to meet
the Aḏon in the air - and so we shall always be with
the Aḏon.
18 So, then, encourage one another with these
words.

5 Now, brothers, as to the times and the seasons,
you do not need to be written to.
2 For you yourselves know very well that the day of
HWHY comes as a thief in the night.
3 For when they say, “Peace and safety!” then
suddenly destruction comes upon them, as labour
pains upon a pregnant woman, and they shall not
escape.
4 But you, brothers, are not in darkness, so that this
Day should overtake you as a thief.
5 For you are all sons of light and sons of the day.
We are not of the night nor of darkness.
6 So, then, we should not sleep, as others do, but
we should watch and be sober.
7 For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who
get drunk are drunk at night.
8 But we who are of the day should be sober, putting
on the breastplate of belief and love, and as a helmet
the expectation of deliverance.
9 Because Elohim did not appoint us to wrath, but to
obtain deliverance through our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
2574

1 THESSALONIANS

who died for us, so that we, whether awake or
asleep, should live together with Him.
11 Therefore encourage one another, and build up
one another, as indeed you do.
12 But brothers, we beg you to know those who
labour among you, and are over you in the Aḏon and
admonish you,
13 and to hold them in the highest regard in love
because of their work. Be at peace among
yourselves.
14 And we appeal to you, brothers, warn those who
are disorderly, encourage the faint-hearted, uphold
the weak, be patient with all.
15 See that no one renders evil for evil to anyone, but
always pursue what is good both for yourselves and
for all.
16 Rejoice always,
17 pray without ceasing,
18 in all give thanks, for this is the desire of Elohim in
Mashiaḥ {fWHY for you.
19 Do not quench the Ruaḥ.
20 Do not despise neḇuoth,
21 prove them all. Hold fast what is good.
22 Keep back from every form of wickedness.
23 And the Elohim of peace Himself make you
completely qodesh, and your entire spirit, and being,
and body - be preserved blameless at the coming of
our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ!
24 He who calls you is trustworthy, who also shall do
it.
25 Brothers, pray for us.
26 Greet all the brothers with a qodesh kiss.
27 I charge you by the Aḏon that this letter be read to
all the qodesh brothers.
10

2575

TAS’LONIQIM 1

The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
you. Amĕn.

28

2576

2 THESSALONAINS

TAS’LONIQIM 2
‫ תסלוניקים ב‬B mYqY!WLst

1 Sha’ul, and Sila, and Timotiyos, to the assembly of
the Tas’loniqim in HWHY our Father and the Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ:
2 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
3 We ought to give thanks to Elohim always for you,
brothers, as it is proper, because your belief grows
exceedingly, and the love every one of you has for
each other is increasing,
4 so that we ourselves boast of you among the
assemblies of Elohim for your endurance and belief
in all your persecutions and afflictions which you are
bearing,
5 clear evidence of the righteous judgment of
Elohim, in order for you to be counted worthy of the
reign of Elohim, for which you also suffer,
6 since Elohim shall rightly repay with affliction
those who afflict you,
7 and to give you who are afflicted rest with us when
the Aḏon {fWHY is revealed from the shamayim with
His mighty messengers,
8 in flaming fire taking vengeance on those who do
not know Elohim, and on those who do not obey the
Good News of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
9 who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Aḏon and from the esteem
of His strength,
10 when He comes to be esteemed in His qodeshim
and to be admired among all those who believe in that
Day, because our witness to you was believed.
2577

TAS’LONIQIM 2

To this end we always pray for you that our Elohim
would count you worthy of this calling, and complete
all the good pleasure of goodness, and the work of
belief with power,
12 so that the Name of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ
is esteemed in you, and you in Him, according to the
favour of our Elohim and the Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
11

2 As to the coming of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ
and our gathering together to Him, we ask you,
brothers,
2 not to become easily unsettled in mind or troubled,
either by spirit or by word or by letter, as if from us, as
if the day of HWHY has come.
3 Let no one deceive you in any way, because the
falling away is to come first, and the man of
lawlessness is to be revealed, the son of destruction,
4 who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called Elohim or that is worshipped, so that he sits as
Elohim in the Mishkan of Elohim, showing himself that
he is Elohim.
5 Do you not remember that I told you this while I
was still with you?
6 And now you know what restrains, for him to be
revealed in his time.
7 For the secret of lawlessness is already at work only until he who now restrains comes out of the
midst.
8 And then the lawless one shall be revealed, whom
the Aḏon shall consume with the Ruaḥ of His mouth
and bring to naught with the manifestation of His
coming.
9 The coming is against the working of Satan, with
all his power and signs and wonders of falsehood,
2578

2 THESSALONAINS

and with all deceit of unrighteousness in those
perishing, because they did not receive the love of the
truth, in order for them to be saved.
11 And for this reason Elohim sends them a working
of delusion, for them to believe the falsehood,
12 in order that all should be judged who did not
believe the truth, but have delighted in the
unrighteousness.
13 But we ought to give thanks to Elohim always for
you, brothers, beloved by the Aḏon, because Elohim
from the beginning chose you to be saved - in
qodeshah of Ruaḥ, and belief in the truth,
14 unto which He called you by our Good News, for
the obtaining of the esteem of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
15 So, then, brothers, stand fast and hold the
traditions which you were taught, whether by word or
by our letter.
16 And our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ Himself, and our
Elohim and Father, who has loved us and given us
everlasting encouragement and good expectation,
through favour,
17 encourage your hearts and establish you in every
good word and work.
10

3 For the rest, brothers, pray for us, so that the Word
of HWHY spreads rapidly and be praised, as also with
you,
2 and that we might be delivered from unreasonable
and wicked men, for not all have belief.
3 But the Aḏon is trustworthy, who shall establish
you and guard you from the wicked one.
4 And we trust in the Aḏon as to you, both that you
do and shall do what we command you.
2579

TAS’LONIQIM 2

And the Aḏon direct your hearts into the love of
HWHY and into the endurance for Mashiaḥ.
6 But we command you, brothers, in the Name of
our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, that you withdraw from
every brother who walks disorderly and not according
to the tradition which you received from us.
7 For you yourselves know how you ought to imitate
us, for we were not disorderly among you,
8 nor did we eat anyone’s bread without paying for
it, but worked with labour and toil night and day, in
order not to burden any of you,
9 not because we do not have authority, but to make
ourselves an example, for you to imitate us.
10 For even when we were with you, we commanded
you this: If anyone does not want to work, neither let
him eat.
11 For we hear of some among you walking
disorderly, not working at all, but are busybodies.
12 But we command and urge such, through our
Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, to settle down, work and
eat their own bread.
13 And you, brothers, do not grow weary in doing
good.
14 And if anyone does not obey our word in this letter,
note that one, and do not keep company with him, so
that he is put to shame.
15 However, do not regard him as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother.
16 And the Aḏon of peace Himself give you peace
always in every way. The Aḏon be with you all.
17 The greeting of Sha’ul with my own hand, which is
a sign in every letter, thus I write.
18 The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
you all. Amĕn.
5

2580

1 CORINTHIANS

QORIN’TIYIM 1
‫קורינתים א‬A mYt!YRWq

1 Sha’ul, a called emissary of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ by
the desire of Elohim, and brother Sosthenĕs,
2 to the assembly of Elohim which is at Qorinth, to
those who are qodesh in Mashiaḥ {fWHY, called
qodeshim, with all those calling on the Name of
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our Aḏon in every place, theirs
and ours:
3 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
4 I thank my Elohim always concerning you for the
favour of Elohim which was given to you by Mashiaḥ
{fWHY,
5 that in Him you were enriched in all - in every word
and all knowledge 6 as the witness of Mashiaḥ was confirmed in you,
7 so that you are not lacking in any gift, eagerly
waiting for the revelation of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
8 who shall also confirm you to the end,
unreprovable in the Day of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
9 HWHY is trustworthy, by whom you were called into
the fellowship of His Bĕn, {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our
Aḏon.
10 And I appeal to you, brothers, by the Name of our
Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, that you all agree, and that
there be no divisions among you, but that you be knit
together in the same mind and in the same opinion.
11 For I have been informed concerning you, my
brothers, by those of Ḵloĕ, that there are strifes
among you.
2581

QORIN’TIYIM 1

What I mean is this, that each one of you says, “I
am of Sha’ul,” or “I am of Apollos,” or “I am of Kĕpha,”
or “I am of Mashiaḥ.”
13 Has ha’Mashiaḥ been divided? Was Sha’ul
impaled for you? Or were you immersed in the name
of Sha’ul?
14 I thank Elohim that I immersed not one of you
except Krispus and Gaios,
15 that no one should say that I immersed into my
own name.
16 Now I also immersed the household of Stephanas.
For the rest, I do not know whether I immersed
anyone else.
17 For Mashiaḥ did not send me to immerse, but to
bring the Good News, not with wisdom of words, that
the stake of Mashiaḥ should not be nullified.
18 For the word of the stake is indeed foolishness to
those who are perishing, but to us who are being
saved it is the power of Elohim.
19 For it has been written, “I shall destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and put aside the learning of the learned
ones.”
20 Where is the wise? Where is the scholar? Where
is the debater of this age? Has not Elohim made
foolish the wisdom of this world?
21 For since, in the wisdom of Elohim, the world
through wisdom did not know Elohim, it pleased
Elohim through the foolishness of preaching to save
those who believe.
22 And since Yahuḏim ask a sign, and Yawanites
seek wisdom,
23 yet we proclaim Mashiaḥ impaled, to the Yahuḏim
a stumbling-block and to the Yawanites foolishness,
12

2582

1 CORINTHIANS

but to those who are called - both Yahuḏim and
Yawanites - Mashiaḥ the power of Elohim and the
wisdom of Elohim.
25 For the foolishness of Elohim is wiser than men,
and the weakness of Elohim is stronger than men.
26 For look at your calling, brothers, that there were
not many wise according to the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble.
27 But Elohim has chosen the foolish of the world to
put to shame the wise, and Elohim has chosen the
weak of the world to put to shame the strong.
28 And Elohim has chosen the low-born of the world
and the despised, and the ones that are not, that He
might bring to naught the ones that are,
29 so that no flesh should boast in His presence.
30 And of Him you are in Mashiaḥ {fWHY, who
became for us wisdom from Elohim, righteousness
also, and qodeshah and redemption,
31 that, as it has been written, “He who boasts, let
him boast in HWHY.”
24

2 And, when I came to you, brothers, I did not come
with excellence of speech or wisdom, proclaiming to
you the witness of Elohim.
2 For I resolved not to know any among you except
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ and Him impaled.
3 And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and
in much trembling.
4 And my word and my preaching were not with
persuasive words of man’s wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Ruaḥ and of power,
5 in order that your belief should not be in the
wisdom of men but in the power of Elohim.

2583

QORIN’TIYIM 1

Yet we speak wisdom among those who are
perfect, and not the wisdom of this age, nor of the
rulers of this age that are being brought to naught.
7 But we speak the wisdom of Elohim, which was
hidden in a secret, and which Elohim ordained before
the ages for our esteem,
8 which no one of the rulers of this age knew, for if
they had known, they would not have impaled the
Aḏon of esteem.
9 But as it has been written, “Eye has not seen, and
ear has not heard, nor have entered into the heart of
man what Elohim has prepared for those who love
Him.”
10 But Elohim has revealed them to us through His
Ruaḥ. For the Ruaḥ searches all, even the depths of
Elohim.
11 For who among men knows that of a man except
the spirit of the man that is in him? So also, that of
Elohim no one has known, except the Ruaḥ of
Elohim.
12 And we have received, not the spirit of the world,
but the Ruaḥ that is from Elohim, in order to know
what Elohim has favourably given us,
13 which we also speak, not in words which man’s
wisdom teaches but which the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh
teaches, comparing spiritual with spiritual.
14 But the natural man does not receive that of the
Ruaḥ of Elohim, for they are foolishness to him, and
he is unable to know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.
15 But he who is spiritual discerns indeed all, but he
himself is discerned by no one.
16 For “Who has known the mind of HWHY? Who shall
instruct Him?” But we have the mind of Mashiaḥ.
6

2584

1 CORINTHIANS

3 And I, brothers, was not able to speak to you as to
spiritual ones but as to fleshly, as to children in
Mashiaḥ.
2 I fed you with milk and not with solid food, for until
now you were not able to receive it, and even now
you are still not able,
3 for you are still fleshly. For since there is envy, and
strife, and divisions among you, are you not fleshly
and walking according to man?
4 For when one says, “I am of Sha’ul,” and another,
“I am of Apollos,” are you not fleshly?
5 What then is Apollos, and what is Sha’ul, but
servants through whom you believed, as the Aḏon
assigned to each?
6 I planted, Apollos watered, but Elohim was giving
growth.
7 So neither he who plants nor he who waters is any
at all, but Elohim who gives the increase.
8 And he who plants and he who waters are one,
and each one shall receive his own reward according
to his own labour.
9 For we are fellow workers of Elohim, you are the
field of Elohim, the building of Elohim.
10 According to the favour of Elohim which was given
to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the
foundation, and another builds on it. But each one
should look how he builds on it.
11 For no one is able to lay any other foundation
except that which is laid, which is {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
12 And if anyone builds on this foundation with gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw,
13 each one’s work shall be revealed, for the day
shall show it up, because it is revealed by fire. And
2585

QORIN’TIYIM 1

the fire shall prove the work of each one, what sort it
is.
14 If anyone’s work remains, which he has built on,
he shall receive a reward.
15 If anyone’s work is burned, he shall suffer loss, but
he himself shall be saved, but so as through fire.
16 Do you not know that you are a Mishkan of Elohim
and that the Ruaḥ of Elohim dwells in you?
17 If anyone destroys the Mishkan of Elohim, Elohim
shall destroy him. For the Mishkan of Elohim is
qodesh, which you are.
18 Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you
seems to be wise in this age, let him become foolish,
so that he might become wise.
19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
Elohim. For it has been written, “He catches the wise
in their craftiness,”
20 and again, “HWHY knows the thoughts of the wise,
that they are worthless.”
21 So then, let no one boast in men, for all belongs to
you,
22 whether Sha’ul or Apollos or Kĕpha, or the world,
or life, or death, or the present or the future - all
belongs to you.
23 And you belong to Mashiaḥ, and Mashiaḥ belongs
to HWHY.

4 Let a man regard us as servants of Mashiaḥ and
trustees of the secrets of Elohim.
2 For the rest, it is sought in trustees, that those
should be found trustworthy.
3 But with me it is a small matter that I should be
judged by you or by a man’s court. But not even
myself I judge.
2586

1 CORINTHIANS

For I am not conscious of anything against myself,
yet I am not declared right by this, but He who judges
me is HWHY.
5 So do not judge any at all before the time, until the
Aḏon comes, who shall bring to light what is hidden in
darkness and reveal the thoughts of the hearts. And
then each one’s praise shall come from Elohim.
6 And these, brothers, I have applied in a figure to
myself and Apollos for your sakes, so that in us you
might learn not to think beyond what is written, so that
none of you be puffed up on behalf of one against the
other.
7 For who makes you to differ? And what do you
have that you did not receive? And if you indeed
received it, why do you boast as if you had not
received it?
8 You are already satisfied! You are already
enriched! You have reigned as sovereigns, apart from
us! And I prefer, indeed, you did reign, that we also
might reign with you!
9 For I think that Elohim has exhibited us, the
emissaries, last, as appointed to death, because we
became a spectacle to the world, both to messengers
and to men.
10 We are fools for the sake of Mashiaḥ, but you are
wise in Mashiaḥ! We are weak, but you are strong!
You are in esteem, but we are not appreciated!
11 Until the present hour we both hunger and thirst,
and we are scantily clad, and beaten, and homeless,
12 and labour, working with our own hands. Being
cursed, we baraḵ; being persecuted, we suffer;
13 being insulted, we help. We have been made as
the filth of the world - dirt wiped off by all until now.
14 I do not write this to shame you, but to warn you
as my beloved children.
4

2587

QORIN’TIYIM 1

For if you should have ten thousand instructors in
Mashiaḥ, yet not many fathers, for in Mashiaḥ {fWHY
I have brought you forth through the Good News.
16 Therefore I appeal to you, to become imitators of
me.
17 For this reason I have sent Timotiyos to you, who
is my beloved and trustworthy son in the Aḏon, who
shall remind you of my ways in Mashiaḥ, as I teach
everywhere in every assembly.
18 Now some are puffed up, as though I were not
coming to you.
19 But I shall come to you shortly, if the Aḏon desires,
and I shall know, not the word of those who are puffed
up, but the power.
20 For the reign of Elohim is not in speech, but in
power.
21 What do you want? Shall I come to you with a rod,
or in love and a spirit of meekness?
15

5 It is commonly reported that there is whoring among
you, and such whoring as is not even named among
the gentiles, so as one to have his father’s wife!
2 And you have been puffed up, and did not rather
mourn, so that he who has done this deed, be
removed from among you!
3 For I indeed, as absent in body but present in
spirit, have already judged the one who did this, as
though I were present.
4 In the Name of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, when
you are gathered together, and my spirit, with the
power of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
5 deliver such a one to Satan for destruction of the
flesh, in order that the spirit be saved in the day of the
Aḏon {fWHY.
2588

1 CORINTHIANS

Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a
little leaven leavens the entire lump?
7 Therefore cleanse out the old leaven, so that you
are a new lump, as you are unleavened. For also
Mashiaḥ our Pesaḥ was offered for us.
8 So then let us observe the Festival, not with old
leaven, nor with the leaven of evil and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
9 I wrote to you in my letter not to keep company
with those who whore.
10 And I certainly did not mean with those of this
world who whore, or with the greedy of gain, or
swindlers, or idolaters, since then you would need to
go out of the world.
11 But now I have written to you not to keep company
with anyone called ‘a brother,’ if he is one who
whores, or greedy of gain, or an idolater, or a reviler,
or a drunkard, or a swindler - not even to eat with such
a one.
12 For what have I to do with judging outsiders? Do
you not judge those who are inside?
13 But Elohim judges those who are outside. And put
away the wicked one from among you!
6

6 Should any of you, holding a matter against
another, go to be judged before the unrighteous, and
not before the qodeshim?
2 Do you not know that the qodeshim shall judge the
world? And if the world is judged by you, are you
unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
3 Do you not know that we shall judge messengers?
How much more, matters of this life?
4 If then you truly have judgments of this life, do you
appoint them as judges who are least esteemed by
the assembly?
2589

QORIN’TIYIM 1

I say this to your shame. Is it so, that there is not
a wise one among you, not even one, who shall be
able to judge between his brothers?
6 But brother against brother goes to be judged and
that before unbelievers!
7 Already, then, there is a failure with you, that you
have lawsuits among you. Why not rather be
wronged? Why not rather be cheated?
8 But you yourselves do wrong and cheat, and that
to your brothers!
9 Do you not know that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the reign of Elohim? Do not be deceived.
Neither those who whore, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor homosexuals,
10 nor thieves, nor greedy of gain, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor swindlers shall inherit the reign of Elohim.
11 And such were some of you. But you were
washed, but you were made qadosh, but you were
declared right in the Name of the Aḏon {fWHY and by
the Ruaḥ of our Elohim.
12 All is permitted me, but not all do profit. All is
permitted me, but I shall not be under authority of any.
13 Foods for the stomach and the stomach for foods
- but Elohim shall destroy both it and them. And the
body is not for whoring but for the Aḏon, and the Aḏon
for the body.
14 And HWHY, who raised up the Aḏon, shall also
raise us up through His power.
15 Do you not know that your bodies are members of
Mashiaḥ? Shall I then take the members of Mashiaḥ
and make them members of a whore? Let it not be!
16 Or do you not know that he who is joined to a
whore is one body? For He says, “The two shall
become one flesh.”
17 And he who is joined to the Aḏon is one spirit.
5

2590

1 CORINTHIANS

Flee whoring. Every sin that a man does is outside
the body, but he who commits whoring sins against
his own body.
19 Or do you not know that your body is the Mishkan
of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh who is in you, which you have
from Elohim, and you are not your own?
20 For you were bought with a price, therefore
esteem Elohim in your body and in your spirit, which
are of Elohim.
18

7 And concerning that which you wrote to me: It is
good for a man not to touch a woman.
2 But because of whoring, let each one have his own
wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
3 Let the husband render to his wife what is her due,
and likewise also the wife to her husband.
4 The wife does not have authority over her own
body, but the husband does. And likewise the
husband does not have authority over his own body,
but the wife does.
5 Do not deprive one another except with
agreement for a time, to give yourselves to fasting
and prayer. And come together again so that Satan
does not try you because of your lack of self-control.
6 And I say this as a concession, not as a command.
7 For I prefer that all men were even as I myself. But
each one has his own gift from Elohim, one in this way
and another in that.
8 And I say to the unmarried and to the widows: It is
good for them if they remain even as I am,
9 but if they do not have self-control, let them marry,
for it is better to marry than to burn.
10 And to the married I command, not I, but the Aḏon:
A wife should not separate from a husband.
2591

QORIN’TIYIM 1

But if she is indeed separated, let her remain
unmarried or be restored to favour with her husband,
and let a husband not send away a wife.
12 And to the rest I say, not the Aḏon: If any brother
has an unbelieving wife, and she thinks well to live
with him, let him not send her away.
13 And a woman who has an unbelieving husband,
and he thinks well to live with her, let her not send him
away.
14 For the unbelieving husband has been qadosh in
the wife, and the unbelieving wife has been qadosh in
the husband. Otherwise your children would be
unclean, but now they are qodesh.
15 And, if the unbelieving one separates, let him
separate himself. A brother or a sister has not been
enslaved in such matters. But Elohim has called us to
peace.
16 For how do you know, O wife, whether you shall
save your husband? Or how do you know, O
husband, whether you shall save your wife?
17 Only, as Elohim has distributed to each one, as
the Aḏon has called each one, so let him walk. And
so I order in all the assemblies.
18 Was anyone called while circumcised? Let him not
become uncircumcised. Was anyone called while
uncircumcised? Let him not be circumcised.
19 The
circumcision
is
naught,
and
the
uncircumcision is naught, but guarding the
Commands of HWHY!
20 Let each one remain in the same calling in which
he was called.
21 Were you called while a slave? It matters not to
you, but if you are able to become free too, rather use
it.
11

2592

1 CORINTHIANS

For he who is called in the Aḏon while a slave is
the Aḏon’s freed man. Likewise he who is called while
free is a slave of Mashiaḥ.
23 You were bought with a price, do not become
slaves of men.
24 Brothers, let each one remain with Elohim in that
calling in which he was called.
25 And concerning maidens: I have no command
from the Aḏon, but I give judgment as one whom the
Aḏon in His compassion has made trustworthy.
26 I think then that this is good because of the present
necessity, that it is good for a man to remain as he is.
27 Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to be loosed.
Are you loosed from a wife? Do not seek a wife.
28 But even if you should marry, you have not sinned.
And if a maiden should marry, she has not sinned.
But such shall have pressure in the flesh, but I would
spare you.
29 And this I say, brothers, the time is short, so that
from now on even those who have wives should be
as though they had none,
30 and those who weep as though they did not weep,
and those who rejoice as though they did not rejoice,
and those who buy as though they did not possess,
31 and those who use this world as not misusing it.
For the scene of this world is passing away.
32 And I want you to be without concern. He who is
unmarried is concerned about that of the Aḏon - how
to please the Aḏon.
33 But he who is married is concerned about that of
the world - how to please his wife.
34 There is a difference between a wife and a
maiden. The unmarried woman is concerned about
that of the Aḏon, that she might be qodesh both in
body and in spirit. But she who is married is
22

2593

QORIN’TIYIM 1

concerned about that of the world - how to please her
husband.
35 And this I say for your own good, not to put a
restraint on you, but for what is proper, and to attend
to the Aḏon without distraction.
36 And if anyone thinks he is behaving improperly
toward his maiden, if she is past the flower of her
youth, and so it should be, let him do what he desires,
he does not sin - let them marry.
37 But he who stands steadfast in his heart, having
no necessity, and has authority over his own desire,
and has so decided in his heart to guard his own
maiden, does well.
38 So then he who gives her in marriage does well,
but he who does not give her in marriage does better.
39 A wife is bound by Torah as long as her husband
lives, and if her husband dies, she is free to be
married to whom she desires, only in the Aḏon.
40 But she is better off if she remains as she is,
according to my opinion. And I think I also have the
Ruaḥ of Elohim.

8 And concerning offerings to idols: We know that we
all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love
builds up.
2 If anyone thinks that he knows somewhat, he does
not yet know as he should know.
3 But if anyone loves Elohim, this one is known by
Him.
4 So then, concerning the eating of offerings to
idols, we know that an idol is naught in the world, and
that there is no other Elohim but one.
5 For even if there are so-called mighty ones,
whether in the shamayim or on earth - as there are
many mighty ones and many masters 2594

1 CORINTHIANS

for us there is one Elohim, the Father, from whom
all came and in whom we are, and one Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, through whom all came and we through
him.
7 However, not all have this knowledge. But some,
being aware of the idol, until now eat it as having been
offered to an idol, so their conscience, being weak, is
defiled.
8 But food does not commend us to Elohim, for we
are none the better if we eat, nor any worse for not
eating.
9 But look to it, lest somehow this right of yours
become a stumbling-block to those who are weak.
10 For if anyone sees you who have knowledge
eating in an idol’s place, shall not his conscience, if
he is weak, be built up to eat offerings to idols?
11 So this weak brother, for whom Mashiaḥ died,
shall perish through your knowledge!
12 Now sinning in this way against the brothers, and
wounding their weak conscience, you sin against
Mashiaḥ.
13 Therefore, if food makes my brother stumble, I am
never again going to eat meat, lest I make my brother
stumble.
6

9 Am I not an emissary? Am I not free? Have I not
seen {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our Aḏon? Are you not my
work in the Aḏon?
2 If to others I am not an emissary, I certainly am to
you. For you are the seal of my office of the emissary
in the Aḏon.
3 My defence to those who examine me is this:
4 Do we not have a right to eat and drink?

2595

QORIN’TIYIM 1

Do we not have a right to take along a sister - a
wife - as do also the other emissaries, and the
brothers of the Aḏon, and Kĕpha?
6 Or do only Barnaḇah and I have no right to refrain
from working?
7 Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who
plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who
shepherds a flock and does not feed on the milk of
the flock?
8 Do I say this as a man? Or does not the Torah say
the same too?
9 For it has been written in the Torah of Mosheh,
“You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the
grain.” Is it about oxen Elohim is concerned?
10 Or does He say it because of us all? For this was
written because of us, that he who ploughs should
plough in expectation, and the thresher in expectation
of sharing.
11 If we have sown spiritually among you, is it too
much if we reap materially from you?
12 If others share authority over you, should not
rather we? But we have not used this authority, but
we put up with all, lest we hinder the Good News of
Mashiaḥ.
13 Do you not know that those serving the Miqdash
eat from the Miqdash, and those attending at the altar
have their share of the offerings of the altar?
14 So also the Aḏon instituted that those announcing
the Good News should live from the Good News.
15 But I have used none of these, nor have I written
this that it should be done so to me. For it would be
better for me to die than that anyone should make my
boasting empty.
5

2596

1 CORINTHIANS

For if I bring the Good News, it is no boasting for
me, for necessity is laid on me, and it is woe to me if
I do not bring the Good News!
17 For if I do this voluntarily I have a reward, but if not
voluntarily, I am entrusted with a management.
18 What then is my reward? That in bringing the
Good News, I should offer the Good News of Mashiaḥ
without cost, so as not to abuse my authority in the
Good News.
19 For though I am free from all, I made myself a
servant to all, in order to win more,
20 and to the Yahuḏim I became as a Yahuḏi, that I
might win Yahuḏim; to those who are under Torah, as
under Torah, so as to win those who are under Torah;
21 to those without Torah, as without Torah - not
being without Torah toward Elohim, but under Torah
of Mashiaḥ - so as to win those who are without
Torah.
22 To the weak I became as weak, so as to win the
weak. To all I have become all, so as to save some,
by all means.
23 And I do this because of the Good News, so as to
become a fellow-partaker with it.
24 Do you not know that those who run in a race
indeed all run, but one receives the prize? Run in
such a way as to obtain it.
25 And everyone who competes controls himself in
every way. Now they do it to receive a corruptible
crown, but we for an incorruptible crown.
26 Therefore I run accordingly, not with uncertainty.
Thus I fight, not as one who beats the air.
27 But I treat my body severely and make it my slave,
lest having proclaimed to others, I myself might be
rejected.
16

2597

QORIN’TIYIM 1

10 For I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers,
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea,
2 and all were immersed into Mosheh in the cloud
and in the sea,
3 and all ate the same spiritual food,
4 and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed, and the
Rock was Mashiaḥ.
5 However, with most of them Elohim was not well
pleased, for they were laid low in the wilderness.
6 And these became examples for us, so that we
should not lust after evil, as those indeed lusted.
7 And do not become idolaters as some of them, as
it has been written, “The people sat down to eat and
to drink, and stood up to play.”
8 Neither should we commit whoring, as some of
them did, and in one day twenty-three thousand fell,
9 neither let us try Mashiaḥ, as some of them also
tried, and were destroyed by serpents,
10 neither grumble, as some of them also grumbled,
and were destroyed by the destroyer.
11 And all these came upon them as examples, and
they were written as a warning to us, on whom the
ends of the ages have come,
12 so that he who thinks he stands, let him take heed
lest he fall.
13 No trial has overtaken you except such as is
common to man, and Elohim is trustworthy, who shall
not allow you to be tried beyond what you are able,
but with the trial shall also make the way of escape,
enabling you to bear it.
14 Therefore, my beloved ones, flee from idolatry.
2598

1 CORINTHIANS

I speak as to wise men, judge for yourselves what
I say.
16 The cup of beraḵah which we baraḵ, is it not a
sharing in the blood of Mashiaḥ? The bread that we
break, is it not a sharing in the body of Mashiaḥ?
17 Because there is one Bread, we, who are many,
are one Body, for we all partake of the one Bread.
18 Look at Yisra’ĕl after the flesh: Are not those who
eat of the offerings sharers in the altar?
19 What then do I say? That an idol is anything? Or
that which is offered to idols is anything?
20 No, but what the gentiles offer they offer to
demons and not to Elohim, and I do not want you to
become sharers with demons.
21 You are not able to drink the cup of the Aḏon and
the cup of demons, you are not able to partake of the
table of the Aḏon and of the table of demons.
22 Do we provoke the Aḏon to jealousy? Are we
stronger than He?
23 All is permitted me, but not all do profit. All is
permitted me, but not all build up.
24 Let no one seek his own, but each one that of the
other.
25 You eat whatever is sold in the meat market,
asking no questions because of conscience,
26 for “The earth belongs to HWHY, and all that fills it.”
27 And if any of the unbelievers invite you, and you
want to go, you eat whatever is put before you, asking
no question on account of the conscience.
28 And if anyone says to you, “This was offered to
idols,” do not eat it because of the one pointing it out
to you, and on account of the conscience, for “The
earth belongs to HWHY, and all that fills it.”
15

2599

QORIN’TIYIM 1

Now I say conscience, not your own, but that of
the other. For why is my freedom judged by another’s
conscience?
30 But if I partake with thanks, why am I evil spoken
of for what I give thanks?
31 Therefore, whether you eat or drink, or whatever
you do, do all to the esteem of Elohim.
32 Cause no stumbling, either to the Yahuḏim or to
the Yawanites or to the assembly of Elohim,
33 as I also please all in all, not seeking my own
advantage, but that of the many, that they might be
saved.
29

11 Become imitators of me, as I also am of Mashiaḥ.
And I praise you, brothers, that you remember me
in every way and keep the traditions as I delivered
them to you.
3 And I want you to know that the head of every man
is Mashiaḥ, and the head of woman is the man, and
the head of Mashiaḥ is HWHY.
4 Every man praying or naḇa, having his head
covered, brings shame to his Head.
5 And every woman praying or naḇa with her head
uncovered brings shame to her head, for that is one
and the same as if her head were shaved.
6 For if a woman is not covered, let her also be
shorn. But if it is a shame for a woman to be shorn or
shaved, let her be covered.
7 For a man indeed should not cover his head, since
he is the likeness and esteem of Elohim, but woman
is the esteem of man.
8 For man is not from woman, but woman from man.
9 For man also was not created for the woman, but
woman for the man.
2

2600

1 CORINTHIANS

Because of this the woman ought to have authority
over her head, because of the messengers.
11 However, man is not independent of woman, nor
woman independent of man, in the Aḏon.
12 For as the woman was from the man, even so the
man also is through the woman. But all are from
Elohim.
13 Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a woman to
pray to Elohim with her head uncovered?
14 Does not nature itself teach you that if a man
indeed has long hair, it is a disrespect to him?
15 And if a woman has long hair, it is an esteem to
her, because the long hair has been given to her over
against a veil.
16 If, however, anyone seems to be contentious, we
do not have such a custom, nor do the assemblies of
Elohim.
17 And in declaring this I do not praise you, since you
come together not for the better but for the worse.
18 For in the first place, I hear that when you come
together as an assembly, there are divisions among
you, and to some extent I believe it.
19 For there have to be factions even among you, so
that the approved ones might be revealed among
you.
20 So when you come together in one place, is it not
to eat the Aḏon’s supper?
21 For, when you eat, each one takes his own supper
first, and one is hungry and another is drunk.
22 Have you not houses to eat and drink in? Or do
you despise the assembly of Elohim and shame those
who have not? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise
you in this? I do not praise!
10

2601

QORIN’TIYIM 1

For I received from the Aḏon that which I also
delivered to you: that the Aḏon {fWHY in the night in
which He was delivered up took bread,
24 and having given thanks, He broke it and said,
“Take, eat, this is My body which is broken for you; do
this in remembrance of Me.”
25 In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying,
“This cup is the Renewed Covenant in My blood. As
often as you drink it, do this in remembrance of Me.”
26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink this
cup, you proclaim the death of the Aḏon until He
comes.
27 So that whoever should eat this bread or drink this
cup of the Aḏon unworthily shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Aḏon.
28 But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread and drink of that cup.
29 For the one who is eating and drinking unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning
the body of the Aḏon.
30 Because of this many are weak and sick among
you, and many sleep.
31 For if we were to examine ourselves, we would not
be judged.
32 But when we are judged, we are disciplined by the
Aḏon, that we should not be condemned with the
world.
33 So then, my brothers, when you come together to
eat, wait for one another.
34 And if anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, lest
you come together for judgment. And the rest I shall
put in order when I come.
23

12 And concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not
want you to be ignorant.
2602

1 CORINTHIANS

You know that you were gentiles, led away to the
dumb idols, even as you might be led.
3 Therefore I make known to you that no one
speaking by the Ruaḥ of Elohim says {fWHY is a
curse, and no one is able to say that {fWHY is Aḏon
except by the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
4 And there are different kinds of gifts, but the same
Ruaḥ.
5 There are different kinds of services, but the same
Aḏon.
6 And there are different kinds of workings, but it is
the same Elohim who is working all in all.
7 And to each one is given the manifestation of the
Ruaḥ for profiting,
8 for to one is given a word of wisdom through the
Ruaḥ, and to another a word of knowledge according
to the same Ruaḥ,
9 and to another belief by the same Ruaḥ, and to
another gifts of healing by the same Ruaḥ,
10 and to another operations of powers, and to
another neḇuah, and to another discerning of spirits,
and to another kinds of tongues, and to another
interpretation of tongues.
11 But one and the same Ruaḥ works all these,
distributing to each one individually as He intends.
12 For as the body is one and has many members,
but all the members of that one body, being many, are
one body, so also is ha’Mashiaḥ.
13 For indeed by one Ruaḥ we were all immersed into
one Body, whether Yahuḏim or Yawanites, whether
slaves or free, and we were all made to drink into one
Ruaḥ.
14 For indeed the body is not one member but many.
2

2603

QORIN’TIYIM 1

If the foot says, “Because I am not a hand, I do not
belong to the body,” does it therefore not belong to
the body?
16 And if the ear says, “Because I am not an eye, I
do not belong to the body,” does it therefore not
belong to the body?
17 If all the body was an eye, where would be the
hearing? If all hearing, where would be the smelling?
18 But now Elohim has put the members, each one
of them, in the body, even as He pleased.
19 And if they all had been one member, where would
the body be?
20 And now, there are indeed many members, but
one body.
21 And an eye is unable to say to the hand, “I have
no need of you,” or again the head to the feet, “I have
no need of you.”
22 But much rather, those members of the body
which are thought to be weaker are necessary.
23 And to those of the body which we think to be less
respected, these we present greater respect. And our
inelegant have greater comeliness,
24 whereas our comely have no need. But Elohim
blended together the body, having given greater
respect to that which lacks it,
25 that there should be no division in the body, but
that the members should have the same concern one
for another.
26 And if one member suffers, all the members suffer
with it; or if one member is esteemed, all the members
rejoice with it.
27 And you are a Body of Mashiaḥ, and members
individually.
28 And Elohim has appointed these in the assembly:
firstly emissaries, secondly neḇi’im, thirdly teachers,
15

2604

1 CORINTHIANS

after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps,
ministrations, kinds of tongues.
29 Are all emissaries? Are all neḇi’im? Are all
teachers? Are all workers of miracles?
30 Do all have gifts of healings? Do all speak with
tongues? Do all interpret?
31 But earnestly seek the better gifts. And yet I show
you a more excellent way.

13 If I speak with the tongues of men and of
messengers, but do not have love, I have become as
sounding brass or a clanging cymbal.
2 And if I have neḇuah, and know all secrets and all
knowledge, and if I have all belief, so as to remove
mountains, but do not have love, I am naught.
3 And if I give out all my possessions to feed the
poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but do not
have love, It does not profit me at all.
4 Love is patient, is kind, love does not envy, love
does not boast, is not puffed up,
5 does not behave indecently, does not seek its
own, is not provoked, reckons not the evil,
6 does not rejoice over the unrighteousness, but
rejoices in the truth,
7 it covers all, believes all, expects all, endures all.
8 Love never fails. And whether neḇuoth, they shall
be inactive; or tongues, they shall cease; or
knowledge, it shall be inactive.
9 For we know in part and we naḇa in part.
10 But when that which is perfect has come, then that
which is in part shall be inactive.
11 When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I thought
as a child, I reasoned as a child. But when I became
a man, I did away with childish matters.
2605

QORIN’TIYIM 1

For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but then face to
face. Now I know in part, but then I shall know, as I
also have been known.
13 And now belief, expectation, and love remain these three. But the greatest of these is love.
12

14 Pursue love, and earnestly seek the spiritual
gifts, but rather that you naḇa.
2 For he who is speaking in a tongue does not speak
to men but to Elohim, for no one understands, but in
the Ruaḥ he speaks secrets.
3 But he who naḇa speaks upbuilding and
encouragement and comfort to men.
4 He who is speaking in a tongue builds up himself,
but he who naḇa builds up the assembly.
5 Now I prefer you all spoke with tongues, but rather
that you might naḇa, for he who is naḇa is greater
than he who is speaking with tongues, unless he
interprets, so that the assembly might receive
upbuilding.
6 But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking with
tongues, what shall I profit you unless I speak to you,
either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by neḇuah,
or by teaching?
7 Nevertheless, lifeless ones making a sound,
whether flute or harp, if they do not make a distinction
in the sound, how shall it be known what is played on
the flute or on the harp?
8 For indeed, if the trumpet makes an indistinct
sound, who shall prepare himself for battle?
9 So also you, if you do not give speech by the
tongue that is clear, how shall it be known what is
spoken? For you shall be speaking into the air.
10 There are, undoubtedly, so many kinds of sounds
in the world, and none of them is without significance.
2606

1 CORINTHIANS

If then I do not know the power of the voice, I shall
be a foreigner to him who speaks, and he who speaks
be a foreigner to me.
12 So also you, since you are ardent for spiritual gifts,
seek to excel in the upbuilding of the assembly.
13 Therefore, he who is speaking in a tongue, let him
pray that he might interpret.
14 For if I am praying in a tongue, my spirit is praying,
but my understanding is without fruit.
15 What then is it? I shall pray with the spirit, and I
shall also pray with the understanding. I shall sing
with the spirit, and I shall also sing with the
understanding.
16 Otherwise, if you baraḵ with the spirit, how shall he
who fills up the place of the unlearned say “Amĕn” at
your giving of thanks, since he does not know what
you say?
17 For you truly give thanks well, but the other is not
built up.
18 I thank my Elohim I speak with tongues more than
you all,
19 but in an assembly I prefer to speak five words
with my understanding that I might instruct others
also, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
20 Brothers, do not be children in understanding, but
in evil be children, and in understanding be perfect.
21 In the Torah it has been written, “With men of other
tongues and other lips I shall speak to this people.
And even so, they shall not hear Me, says HWHY.”
22 So then tongues are for a sign, not to those who
believe but to unbelievers, and naḇa is not for
unbelievers but for those who believe.
23 If then all the assembly comes together in one
place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in
11

2607

QORIN’TIYIM 1

those who are unlearned or unbelievers, shall they
not say that you are mad?
24 But if all naḇa, and an unbeliever or an unlearned
one comes in, he is reproved by all, he is discerned
by all.
25 And so the secrets of his heart are revealed. And
so, falling down on his face, he shall worship Elohim,
declaring that Elohim is truly among you.
26 What then is it, brothers? Whenever you come
together, each one has a tehillah, has a teaching, has
a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let
all be done for upbuilding.
27 If anyone speaks in a tongue, let there be two or
at the most three, each in turn, and let one interpret.
28 And if there is no interpreter, let him be silent in an
assembly, and let him speak to himself and to Elohim.
29 And let two or three neḇi’im speak, and let the
others discern.
30 And if there should be a revelation to another who
sits by, let the first be silent.
31 For you are all able to naḇa one by one, so that all
learn and all be encouraged.
32 And the spirits of the neḇi’im are subject to the
neḇi’im.
33 For Elohim is not of disorder but of peace, as in all
the assemblies of the qodeshim.
34 Let your women be silent in the assemblies, for
they are not allowed to speak, but let them subject
themselves, as the Torah also says.
35 And if they want to learn whatever, let them ask
their own husbands at home, for it is improper for
women to speak in an assembly.
36 Or did the Word of HWHY go out from you? Or did
it reach only to you?
2608

1 CORINTHIANS

If anyone thinks himself to be a naḇi or spiritual,
let him acknowledge what I write to you, that they are
a command of the Aḏon.
38 And if anyone is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
39 So, then, brothers, earnestly seek to naḇa, and do
not forbid speaking in tongues.
40 Let all be done decently and in order.
37

15 But brothers, I make known to you the Good
News, which I brought as Good News to you, which
you also received, and in which you stand,
2 through which also you are being saved, if you
hold fast that Word I brought as Good News to you.
Otherwise, you have believed in vain.
3 For I delivered to you at the first that which I also
received: that Mashiaḥ died for our sins according to
the Scriptures,
4 and that He was buried, and that He was raised
the third day, according to the Scriptures,
5 and that He was seen by Kĕpha, then by the
twelve.
6 After that He was seen by over five hundred
brothers at one time, of whom the greater part remain
till now, but some have fallen asleep.
7 After that He was seen by Ya’aqoḇ, then by all the
emissaries.
8 And last of all He was seen by me also, as if to one
born prematurely.
9 For I am the least of the emissaries, who am not
worthy to be called an emissary, because I
persecuted the assembly of Elohim.
10 But by the favour of Elohim I am what I am, and
His favour toward me was not in vain, but I laboured
much more than they all, yet not I, but the favour of
Elohim with me.
2609

QORIN’TIYIM 1

Whether, then, it was I or they, so we proclaimed
and so you believed.
12 And if Mashiaḥ is proclaimed that He has been
raised from the dead, how do some among you say
that there is no resurrection of the dead?
13 And if there is no resurrection of the dead, then
Mashiaḥ has not been raised.
14 And if Mashiaḥ has not been raised, then our
proclaiming is empty, and your belief also empty,
15 and we are also found false witnesses of Elohim,
because we have witnessed of HWHY that He raised
up Mashiaḥ, whom He did not raise up, if then the
dead are not raised.
16 For if the dead are not raised, then neither
Mashiaḥ has been raised.
17 And if Mashiaḥ has not been raised, your belief is
to no purpose, you are still in your sins!
18 Then also those who have fallen asleep in
Mashiaḥ have perished.
19 If in this life only we have expectation in Mashiaḥ,
we are of all men the most wretched.
20 But now Mashiaḥ has been raised from the dead,
and has become the first-fruit of those having fallen
asleep.
21 For since death is through a man, resurrection of
the dead is also through a Man.
22 For as all die in Aḏam, so also all shall be made
alive in Mashiaḥ.
23 And each in his own order: Mashiaḥ the first-fruits,
then those who are of Mashiaḥ at His coming,
24 then the end, when He delivers up the reign to
HWHY the Father, when He has brought to naught all
rule and all authority and power.
25 For He has to reign until He has put all enemies
under His feet.
11

2610

1 CORINTHIANS

The last enemy to be brought to naught is death.
27 For “He has put all under His feet.” But when He
says “all are put under Him,” it is clear that He who
put all under Him is excepted.
28 And when all are made subject to Him, then the
Bĕn Himself shall also be subject to Him who put all
under Him, in order that Elohim be all in all.
29 Otherwise, what shall they do who are immersed
for the dead, if the dead are not raised at all? Why
indeed are they immersed for the dead?
30 And why do we stand in danger every hour?
31 I affirm, by the boasting in you which I have in
Mashiaḥ {fWHY our Aḏon, I die day by day.
32 If, as men do, I have fought with beasts at
Ephesos, of what good is it to me? If the dead are not
raised, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
33 Do not be led astray, “Evil company corrupts good
habits.”
34 Wake up to soberness, righteously, and do not sin,
for some do not have the knowledge of Elohim. I
speak this to your shame.
35 But someone might say, “How are the dead raised
up? And with what body do they come?”
36 Senseless one! What you sow is not made alive
unless it dies.
37 And as to what you sow: you do not sow the body
which is to be, but a bare grain, it might be wheat or
some other grain.
38 But Elohim gives it a body as He wants, and to
each seed a body of its own.
39 All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one
flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another
of fish, and another of birds.
26

2611

QORIN’TIYIM 1

Also bodies of the shamayim and earthly bodies,
but the esteem of the shamayim is truly one, and the
esteem of the earthly is another,
41 one esteem of the sun, and another esteem of the
moon, and another esteem of the stars - for star
differs from star in esteem.
42 So also is the resurrection of the dead: it is sown
in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;
43 it is sown in disrespect, it is raised in esteem; it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
44 it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body; there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body.
45 And so it has been written, “The first man Aḏam
became a living being,” the last Aḏam a ḥai-giving
Ruaḥ.
46 The spiritual, however, was not first, but the
natural, and afterward the spiritual.
47 The first man was of the earth, earthy; the second
Man is the Aḏon from the shamayim.
48 As is the earthy, so also are those who are earthy;
and as is the shamayim, so also are those who are of
the shamayim.
49 And as we have borne the likeness of the earthy,
we shall also bear the likeness of the shamayim.
50 And this I say, brothers, that flesh and blood is
unable to inherit the reign of Elohim, neither does
corruption inherit incorruption.
51 See, I speak a secret to you: We shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed,
52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trumpet. For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed.
40

2612

1 CORINTHIANS

For this corruptible has to put on incorruption, and
this mortal to put on immortality.
54 And when this corruptible has put on incorruption,
and this mortal has put on immortality, then shall
come to be the word that has been written, “Death is
swallowed up in overcoming.”
55 “O Death, where is your sting? O grave, where is
your overcoming?”
56 And the sting of death is the sin, and the power of
the sin is the Torah.
57 But thanks to HWHY who gives us the overcoming
through our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
58 Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast,
immovable, always excelling in the work of the Aḏon,
knowing that your labour is not in vain in the Aḏon.
53

16 And concerning the collections for the qodeshim,
you are to do as I gave orders to the assemblies of
Galatia:
2 Concerning one of the shabbathoth, let each of
you put aside, storing any bireḵoth, so that there are
no collections when I come.
3 And when I come, whomever you approve by your
letters, I shall send to bear your gift to Yerushalayim.
4 And if it is fitting for me to go, they shall go with
me.
5 And I shall come to you when I pass through
Makedonia, for I am passing through Makedonia.
6 And possibly I shall stay with you, or even spend
the winter, so that you send me forward, wherever I
go.
7 For I do not want to see you now on the way, but I
expect to stay a while with you, if the Aḏon permits.
8 And I shall remain in Ephesos until the Festival of
Shaḇuoth.
2613

QORIN’TIYIM 1

For a great and effective door has opened to me,
and many are opposing.
10 And if Timotiyos comes, see that he is with you
without fear, for he does the work of the Aḏon, even
as I.
11 Therefore let no one despise him. And send him
forward in peace, so that he comes to me, for I am
waiting for him with the brothers.
12 And concerning our brother Apollos, I strongly
urged him to come to you with the brothers, but he
had no desire at all to come at this time; however, he
shall come when it is convenient.
13 Watch, stand fast in the belief, be men, be strong.
14 Let all that you do be done in love.
15 And I urge you, brothers, you know the household
of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruit of Aḵaia, and that
they have assigned themselves for service to the
qodeshim,
16 that you also be subject to such, and to everyone
who works and labours with us.
17 And I rejoice about the coming of Stephanas, and
Phortunatos, and Aḵaikos, for what was lacking on
your part they supplied.
18 For they refreshed my spirit and yours, therefore
give recognition to such ones.
19 The assemblies of Asia greet you Aqulas and
Priskilla greet you heartily in the Aḏon, with the
assembly that is in their house.
20 All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with
a qodesh kiss.
21 The greeting with my own hand - Sha’ul.
22 If anyone does not love the Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, let him be a curse. Maranatha!
23 The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
you.
9

2614

1 CORINTHIANS
24

My love be with you all in Mashiaḥ {fWHY. Amĕn.

2615

2 CORINTHIANS

QORIN’TIYIM 2
‫ קורינתים ב‬B mYt!YRWq

1 Sha’ul, an emissary of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, by the
desire of Elohim, and Timotiyos the brother, to the
assembly of Elohim that is at Qorinth, with all the
qodeshim who are in all Aḵaia:
2 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
3 Baruḵ be the Elohim and Father of our Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, the Father of compassion and
Elohim of all comfort,
4 who is comforting us in all our pressure, enabling
us to comfort those who are in every pressure,
through the comfort with which we ourselves are
comforted by Elohim.
5 Because, as the sufferings of Mashiaḥ overflow in
us, so our comfort also overflows through Mashiaḥ.
6 And if we suffer pressure, it is for your comfort and
deliverance, being worked out in enduring the same
sufferings which we also suffer. If we are comforted,
it is for your comfort and deliverance.
7 And our expectation for you is steadfast, because
we know that as you are sharing in the sufferings - so
also in the comfort.
8 For we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers,
of our pressure which came to us in Asia, that we
were weighed down, exceedingly, beyond ability, so
that we despaired even of life.
9 Indeed, we had the sentence of death in
ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves but in
Elohim who raises the dead,
10 who rescued us from so great a death, and does
rescue, in whom we trust that He shall still rescue us,
2616

QORIN’TIYIM 2

you also helping together in prayer for us, that
thanks shall be given by many on our behalf for the
favour bestowed upon us through many.
12 For our boasting is this: the witness of our
conscience that we behaved ourselves in the world in
simplicity and sincerity of Elohim, not in fleshly
wisdom but in the favour of Elohim, and much more
toward you.
13 For we are writing none other to you than what you
read or understand. Now I trust you shall understand,
even to the end,
14 as also you have understood us in part, that we
are your boast as you also are ours, in the day of the
Aḏon {fWHY.
15 And relying on this I intended to come to you
before, that you might twice receive a favour,
16 and to pass your way into Makedonia, and again
from Makedonia come to you, and to be sent by you
on my way to Yahuḏah.
17 Since I intended this, did I do it lightly? Or what I
plan, do I plan according to the flesh, that with me
there should be Yes, Yes, and No, No?
18 But Elohim is trustworthy, that our word to you was
not Yes and No.
19 For the Bĕn of HWHY, {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, who was
proclaimed among you by us - by me, Sila, and
Timotiyos - was not Yes and No, but in Him was Yes.
20 For as many promises are of Elohim, in Him they
are Yes, and in Him Amĕn, to the esteem of Elohim
through us.
21 But He who establishes us with you in Mashiaḥ
and has anointed us is Elohim,
22 who also sealed us, and gave the Ruaḥ in our
hearts as a pledge.
11

2617

2 CORINTHIANS

And I call Elohim as witness against my being, that
to spare you I came no more to Qorinth.
24 Not that we rule over your belief, but we are fellow
workers for your joy, for you stand by belief.
23

2 And I decided this within myself, not to come to you
again in sadness.
2 For if I make you sad, then who is he who makes
me glad but the one who is made sad by me?
3 And I wrote to you as I did, so that having come, I
might not have sadness over those from whom I
should have joy, trusting in you all that my joy is that
of you all.
4 For out of much pressure and distress of heart I
wrote to you, with many tears, not that you should be
sad, but that you might know the love which I so richly
have for you.
5 But if anyone has caused sadness, he has not
made me sad, but in some degree you all - not to be
too harsh.
6 For such a one this punishment, by the many, is
sufficient,
7 so that, on the contrary, you should rather forgive
and comfort, lest somehow such a one be swallowed
up with too much sadness.
8 So I appeal to you to confirm your love to him.
9 Besides, I wrote for this purpose also, that I might
know the proof of you, if you are obedient in all.
10 And whom you forgive anything, I do also. For
indeed, if I have forgiven anything, I have forgiven
that one for your sakes in the sight of Mashiaḥ,
11 lest Satan should take advantage of us, for we are
not ignorant of his thoughts.
12 And when I came to Troas for the Good News of
Mashiaḥ, and a door was opened to me by the Aḏon,
2618

QORIN’TIYIM 2

I had no rest in my spirit, because I did not find
Titos my brother. But taking my leave of them, I went
on to Makedonia.
14 But thanks be to Elohim who always leads us on,
to overcome in Mashiaḥ, and manifests through us
the fragrance of His knowledge in every place.
15 Because we are to HWHY the fragrance of Mashiaḥ
among those who are being saved and among those
who are perishing.
16 To the one we are the smell of death to death, and
to the other the fragrance of ḥai to ḥai. And who is
competent for these?
17 For we are not, as so many, merchandising the
Word of HWHY - but as of sincerity, but as from Elohim,
in the sight of Elohim, we speak in Mashiaḥ.
13

3 Are we to begin to recommend ourselves again? Or
do we need, as some, letters of recommendation to
you, or from you?
2 You are our letter, having been written in our
hearts, known and read by all men,
3 making it obvious that you are a letter of Mashiaḥ,
served by us, written not with ink but by the Ruaḥ of
the living Elohim, not on tablets of stone but on fleshly
tablets of the heart.
4 And such trust we have toward HWHY, through
ha’Mashiaḥ.
5 Not that we are competent in ourselves to reckon
anything as from ourselves, but our competence is
from Elohim,
6 who also made us competent as servants of a
Renewed Covenant, not of the letter but of the Ruaḥ,
for the letter kills but the Ruaḥ gives ḥai.
7 But if the administering of death in letters,
engraved on stones, was esteemed, so that the
2619

2 CORINTHIANS

children of Yisra’ĕl were unable to look steadily at the
face of Mosheh because of the esteem of his face,
which was passing away,
8 how much more esteemed shall the administering
of the Ruaḥ not be?
9 For if the administering of condemnation had
esteem, the administering of righteousness exceeds
much more in esteem.
10 For indeed what was made esteemed had no
esteem in this respect, in view of the esteem that
excels.
11 For if that which is passing away was esteemed,
much more that which remains in esteem.
12 Having then such expectation, we use much
boldness of speech,
13 and not like Mosheh, who put a veil over his face
so that the children of Yisra’ĕl should not look steadily
at the end of what was passing away.
14 But their minds were hardened, for to this day,
when the old Covenant is being read, that same veil
remains, not lifted, because in Mashiaḥ it is taken
away.
15 But to this day, when Mosheh is being read, a veil
lies on their heart.
16 And when one turns to the Aḏon, the veil is taken
away.
17 Now HWHY is the Ruaḥ, and where the Ruaḥ of
HWHY is, there is freedom.
18 And we all, as with unveiled face we see as in a
mirror the esteem of HWHY, are being transformed into
the same likeness from esteem to esteem, as from
HWHY, the Ruaḥ.

4 Therefore, having this service, even as we received
compassion, we do not lose heart,
2620

QORIN’TIYIM 2

but have renounced the secrets of shame, not
walking in craftiness nor falsifying the Word of HWHY,
but by the manifestation of the truth recommending
ourselves to every human conscience, in the sight of
Elohim.
3 And indeed, if our Good News has been veiled, it
has been veiled in those who are perishing,
4 in whom the mighty one of this age has blinded the
minds of the unbelieving, so that the enlightening of
the Good News of the esteem of Mashiaḥ, who is the
likeness of Elohim, does not shine on them.
5 For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Mashiaḥ
{fWHY the Aḏon, and ourselves your servants for the
sake of {fWHY.
6 For Elohim, who said, “Let light shine out of
darkness,” is the One who has shone in our hearts for
the enlightening of the knowledge of the esteem of
Elohim in the face of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
7 And we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so
that the excellence of the power might be of Elohim,
and not of us 8 being hard pressed on every side, but not
crushed; being perplexed, but not in despair;
9 being persecuted, but not forsaken; being thrown
down, but not destroyed;
10 always bearing about in the body the dying of the
Aḏon {fWHY, that the ḥai of {fWHY might also be
manifested in our body.
11 For we, the living, are always delivered to death
for the sake of {fWHY, that the ḥai of {fWHY might
also be manifested in our mortal flesh,
12 so that death indeed is working in us, but the ḥai
in you.
2

2621

2 CORINTHIANS

But having the same spirit of belief, according to
what has been written, “I believed, therefore I spoke,”
we also believe, therefore we also speak,
14 knowing that He who raised up the Aḏon {fWHY
shall also raise us up through {fWHY, and shall stand
with you.
15 For all this is for your sake, so that favour, having
spread through the many, would cause thanksgiving
to overflow, unto the esteem of Elohim.
16 Therefore we do not lose heart, but even if our
outward man is perishing, yet that within is being
renewed day by day.
17 For this slight momentary pressure, is working for
us a far more exceeding and everlasting weight of
esteem.
18 We are not looking on what is seen, but on what is
not seen. For what is seen passes away, but what is
not seen is everlasting.
13

5 For we know that if the tent of our earthly house, is
destroyed, we have a building from Elohim, a house
not made with hands, everlasting in the shamayim.
2 For indeed in this we groan, longing to put on our
dwelling which is from shamayim,
3 so that, having put it on, we shall not be found
naked.
4 For indeed, we who are in this tent groan, being
burdened, not because we want to put it off, but to put
on, so that what is to die might be swallowed up by
ḥai.
5 Now He who has prepared us for this same
purpose is Elohim, who has given us the Ruaḥ as a
pledge of what is to come.

2622

QORIN’TIYIM 2

Therefore, being always of good courage, and
knowing that while we are at home in the body we are
absent from the Aḏon 7 for we walk by belief, not by sight 8 we are of good courage, and are well-pleased
rather to be absent from the body and to be present
with the Aḏon.
9 So we also make it our aim to be well-pleasing to
Him, whether being at home, or being away from
home.
10 For we all have to appear before the judgment
seat of Mashiaḥ, in order for each one to receive
according to what he has done in the body, whether
good or evil.
11 Knowing, therefore, the reverence of HWHY, we
persuade men, but we have been made manifest to
Elohim, and I also trust in your consciences to have
been manifested.
12 For we do not again commend ourselves to you,
but give you an occasion to boast on our behalf, in
order that you oppose those who take pride in
appearance and not in heart.
13 For whether we are beside ourselves, it was for
Elohim, or whether we are of sound mind, it is for you.
14 For the love of Mashiaḥ compels us, having
judged this: that if One died for all, then all died;
15 and He died for all, that those who live should no
longer live for themselves, but for Him who died for
them, and was raised.
16 So from now onwards we know no one according
to the flesh. And if we have known Mashiaḥ according
to the flesh, yet now we no longer know.
17 Therefore, if anyone is in Mashiaḥ, he is a
renewed creature - the old have passed away, see,
all have become renewed!
6

2623

2 CORINTHIANS

And all is from HWHY, who has restored us to
favour with Himself through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, and
has given us the service of restoration to favour,
19 that is, that Elohim was in Mashiaḥ restoring the
world to favour unto Himself, not reckoning their
trespasses to them, and has committed to us the
word of restoration to favour.
20 Therefore we are envoys on behalf of Mashiaḥ, as
though Elohim were pleading through us. We beg, on
behalf of Mashiaḥ: Be restored to favour with Elohim.
21 For He made Him who knew no sin to be sin for
us, so that in Him we might become the
righteousness of Elohim.
18

6 And working together, we also call upon you not to
receive the favour of Elohim in vain 2 For He says, “In an acceptable time I have heard
you, and in a day of deliverance I have helped you.”
See, now is the well-accepted time, see, now is a day
of deliverance 3 giving no cause of stumbling in whatever, so that
the service is not blamed.
4 Rather, we commend ourselves as servants of
Elohim in every way: in much endurance, in
pressures, in hardships, in distresses,
5 in stripes, in imprisonments, in disturbances, in
toils, in watchings, in fastings,
6 in cleanness, in knowledge, in patience, in
kindness, in the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, in love unfeigned,
7 in the Word of truth, in the power of Elohim,
through the weapons of righteousness, on the right
and on the left,
8 through esteem and disrespect, through evil report
and good report; as deceivers, and yet true;
2624

QORIN’TIYIM 2

as unknown, and yet well-known; as dying, and
see, we live; as disciplined, and yet not killed;
10 as sad, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet enriching
many; as having naught, and yet possessing all.
11 Our mouth has spoken openly to you, O
Qorin’tiyim, our heart is wide open.
12 You are not restrained by us, but you are
restrained by your own affections.
13 But for the same reward - I speak as to children open wide yourselves too.
14 Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.
For what partnership have righteousness and
lawlessness? And what fellowship has light with
darkness?
15 And what agreement has Mashiaḥ with Beliya’al?
Or what part does a believer have with an unbeliever?
16 And what union has the Mishkan of Elohim with
idols? For you are a Mishkan of the living Elohim, as
HWHY has said, “I shall dwell in them and walk among
them, and I shall be their Elohim, and they shall be
My people.”
17 Therefore, “Come out from among them and be
separate, says HWHY, and do not touch what is
unclean, and I shall receive you.
18 “And I shall be a Father to you, and you shall be
sons and daughters to Me, says HWHY Ĕl Shaddai.”
9

7 Having, then, these promises, beloved, let us
cleanse ourselves from all defilement of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting qodeshah in the reverence of Elohim.
2 Make room for us, we wronged no one, we
corrupted no one, we exploited no one.
3 I do not say this to condemn, for I previously said
that you are in our hearts, to die together and to live
together.
2625

2 CORINTHIANS

Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great
is my boasting on your behalf. I have been filled with
encouragement, I overflow with joy in all our pressure.
5 For, indeed, when we came into Makedonia, our
flesh had no rest, but we were hard pressed on every
side - conflicts without, fears within.
6 But Elohim, who encourages the downcast,
encouraged us by the coming of Titos,
7 and not only by his coming, but also by the
encouragement with which he was encouraged over
you, when he reported to us your longing, your
mourning, your ardour for me, so that I greatly
rejoiced.
8 For even if I made you sad with my letter, I do not
regret it, though I did regret it. For I perceive that the
same letter made you sad, even if for an hour.
9 I now rejoice, not that you were made sad, but that
you were saddened into repenting. For you were
made sad according to Elohim, so that you suffered
no loss from us.
10 For
sadness according to Elohim works
repentance to deliverance, not to be regretted, but the
sadness of the world works death.
11 For see how you have been saddened according
to Elohim - how much eagerness it worked in you;
indeed, clearing of yourselves; indeed, displeasure;
indeed, reverence; indeed, longing; indeed, ardour;
indeed, righting of wrong! In every way you proved
yourselves to be clear in the matter.
12 So although I wrote to you, it was not for the sake
of him who had done the wrong, nor for the sake of
him who suffered wrong, but for the sake of revealing
our diligence for you, before Elohim.
13 For this reason we have been encouraged in your
encouragement. And we rejoiced exceedingly more
4

2626

QORIN’TIYIM 2

for the joy of Titos, because his spirit has been
refreshed by all of you.
14 Because if I have boasted somewhat about you to
him, I am not ashamed. But as we spoke to you in all
truth, even so our boasting to Titos was found true.
15 And his tender feelings are greater for you as he
remembers the obedience of all of you, as you
received him with fear and trembling.
16 I rejoice that in every way I am of good courage by
reason of you.

8 Now brothers, we make known to you the favour of
Elohim which has been given in the assemblies of
Makedonia:
2 that in much trial of pressure the overflowing of
their joy and their deep poverty overflowed into the
riches of their generosity.
3 Because I bear witness that according to their
ability, and beyond their ability, they gave voluntarily,
4 begging us with much urgency for the favour of
taking part in this service to the qodeshim.
5 And, not as we had expected, they gave
themselves first to the Aḏon, and then to us by the
desire of Elohim,
6 that we should urge Titos, that as he had begun,
so he would also complete this kind gift in you as well.
7 But as you excel in every way - in belief, and
speech, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your
love for us - that you should excel in this kind gift as
well.
8 I speak not by command, but I am proving the
genuineness of your love by the eagerness of others.
9 For you know the favour of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, that being rich, He became poor for your
2627

2 CORINTHIANS

sake, so that you might become rich through His
poverty.
10 And in this I give an opinion: It is to your
advantage not only to be doing what you began and
were desiring to do a year ago,
11 and now also complete the work, that as with
readiness in desiring it, so there also should be a
completion out of what you have.
12 For if the readiness is present, it is well received
according to what one has, not according to what he
does not have 13 not, however, that others should be eased and you
hard pressed,
14 but by fair sharing, that now at this time your plenty
for their need, so that their plenty might also be for
your need - that there might be fair sharing.
15 As it has been written, “He who gathered much did
not have too much, and he who gathered little had not
less.”
16 But thanks be to Elohim who puts the same
eagerness for you into the heart of Titos.
17 Because he received the appeal, indeed, but
being more eager, he went to you of his own accord.
18 And we sent with him the brother whose praise is
in the Good News through all the assemblies,
19 and not only so, but who was also chosen by the
assemblies to travel with us with this gift that is
administered by us to the esteem of the Aḏon
Himself, and your ready mind,
20 avoiding this: that anyone should blame us in this
generous gift which is administered by us.
21 For we provide what is right, not only in the sight
of HWHY, but also in the sight of men.
22 And we sent with them our brother whom we have
often proved eager in many ways, but now much
2628

QORIN’TIYIM 2

more eager, because of the great reliance which we
have in you.
23 As for Titos, he is my partner and fellow worker for
you. As for our brothers, messengers of the
assemblies, the esteem of Mashiaḥ.
24 Therefore show to them the proof of your love and
of our boasting on your behalf, and in the presence of
the assemblies.

9 Indeed, concerning the service to the qodeshim, it
is unnecessary for me to write to you;
2 for I know your eagerness, about which I boast of
you to the Makedonians, that Aḵaia was ready a year
ago. And your ardour has stirred up most of them.
3 But I sent the brothers, lest our boasting on behalf
of you should be made empty in this part, in order
that, as I said, you were ready,
4 lest if some Makedonians come with me and find
you not ready, we - not to speak of you - should be
put to shame because of our belief.
5 So I thought it necessary to appeal to the brothers
to come to you in advance, and arrange your
promised beraḵah beforehand - this to be ready as a
beraḵah and not as greediness.
6 And this: He who sows sparingly shall also reap
sparingly, and he who sows on beraḵah shall also
reap on beraḵah.
7 Let each one give as he purposes in his heart, not
of grief or of necessity, for Elohim loves a joyous
giver.
8 And Elohim is able to make all favour overflow
toward you, that you, always having all you need in
every way, have plenty for every good work.
9 As it has been written, “He scattered abroad, He
gave to the poor, His righteousness remains forever.”
2629

2 CORINTHIANS

And He who supplies seed to the sower, and
bread for food, shall supply and increase the seed
you have sown and increase the fruit of your
righteousness,
11 being enriched in every way for all simplicity,
which works out thanksgiving to Elohim through us.
12 Because the rendering of this service not only
supplies the needs of the qodeshim, but also is
overflowing through many thanksgivings to Elohim.
13 Through the proof of this service, they esteem
Elohim on the submission of your confession to the
Good News of Mashiaḥ, and generosity in sharing
with them and all men,
14 and by their prayer for you, who long for you
because of the exceeding favour of Elohim in you.
15 Thanks also to Elohim for His unspeakable gift!
10

10 And I, Sha’ul, myself appeal to you, through the
meekness and gentleness of Mashiaḥ - I who am
indeed lowly when face to face with you, but bold
toward you when absent!
2 But I pray, that when I am present, I might not be
bold with that bravery by which I think to be bold
against some who reckon us as if we walked
according to the flesh.
3 For though we walk in the flesh, we do not fight
according to the flesh.
4 For the weapons we fight with are not fleshly but
mighty in Elohim for overthrowing strongholds,
5 overthrowing reasonings and every high matter
that exalts itself against the knowledge of Elohim,
taking captive every thought to make it obedient to
ha’Mashiaḥ,
6 and being ready to punish all disobedience, when
your obedience is complete.
2630

QORIN’TIYIM 2

Take a look at what you are facing. If anyone
seems to trust in himself that he is of Mashiaḥ, let him
reckon again for himself, that as he is of Mashiaḥ, so
also are we.
8 For even if I should boast somewhat more about
our authority, which the Aḏon gave us for building up,
and not for overthrowing you, I shall not be put to
shame,
9 lest I seem to frighten you away by letters.
10 Because they say, “His letters are truly weighty
and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his
speech amounts to naught.”
11 Let such a one take this into account, that what we
are in word by letters when absent, such also in deed
when we are present.
12 For we do not presume to count ourselves or
compare ourselves with those who commend
themselves. But they, measuring themselves by
themselves, and comparing themselves among
themselves, are not wise.
13 But we shall not boast beyond measure, but within
the measure of the limits Elohim assigned unto us, to
reach even to you.
14 For we are not overextending ourselves, as if we
did not reach to you, for we also came to you with the
Good News of ha’Mashiaḥ,
15 not boasting beyond measure in the labours of
others, but having an expectation, that as your belief
grows, we shall be greatly enlarged by you, according
to our limits,
16 to bring the Good News in the parts beyond you not to boast in another’s limits in what has been
accomplished.
17 But “He who boasts, let him boast in HWHY.”
7

2631

2 CORINTHIANS

For not he who commends himself is approved,
but he whom the Aḏon commends.

18

11 I would that you could bear with me in a little folly.
But indeed, you are bearing with me.
2 For I am jealous for you with a jealousy according
to Elohim. For I gave you in marriage to one husband,
to present you as an innocent maiden to Mashiaḥ.
3 But I am afraid, lest, as the serpent deceived
Ḥawwah by his trickery, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Mashiaḥ.
4 For, indeed, if he who is coming proclaims another
{fWHY, whom we have not proclaimed, or if you
receive a different spirit which you have not received,
or a different Good News which you have not
accepted, you put up with it well enough!
5 For I reckon that I am not inferior to the most
eminent emissaries.
6 But even if I am unskilled in word, yet not in
knowledge. Indeed, in every way we have been
manifested among you in all.
7 Or did I commit sin in humbling myself in order to
exalt you, because I brought good news, the Good
News of Elohim to you without being paid?
8 Other assemblies I robbed, by receiving wages to
serve you.
9 And when I was present with you, and in need, I
was not a burden to anyone, for what was lacking to
me the brothers who came from Makedonia supplied.
And in every way I kept myself - and shall keep - from
being a burden to you.
10 It is a truth of Mashiaḥ in me, that this boasting in
me shall not be stopped in the districts of Aḵaia.
11 Why? Is it that I do not love you? Elohim knows!
2632

QORIN’TIYIM 2

And I shall go on doing as I do, in order to cut off
the occasion from those desiring an occasion, so that
in that which they boast, they might be found also as
we are.
13 For such are false emissaries, deceptive workers,
masquerading as emissaries of Mashiaḥ.
14 And no wonder! For Satan himself masquerades
as a messenger of light!
15 It is not surprising, then, if his servants also
masquerade as servants of righteousness, whose
end shall be according to their works!
16 Again I say, let no one think me to be a fool. And
if otherwise, at least receive me as a fool, for me to
also boast a little.
17 What I speak, I speak not according to the Aḏon,
but as in foolishness, in this boldness of boasting.
18 Since many boast according to the flesh, I too shall
boast.
19 For you, being wise, put up with fools gladly!
20 For you put up with it if anyone enslaves you, if
anyone devours you, if anyone takes from you, if
anyone exalts himself, if one hits you in the face.
21 To shame, I say that we were too weak for that!
But in whatever anyone is bold - I say it in foolishness
- I am bold also.
22 Are they Iḇrim? So am I. Are they Yisra’ĕlites? So
am I. Are they the seed of Aḇraham? So am I.
23 Are they servants of Mashiaḥ? - I speak as beside
myself - I am more, in labours much more, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequently, in deaths
many times.
24 Five times I received from the Yahuḏim forty
stripes less one.
12

2633

2 CORINTHIANS

Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was
stoned, three times I was shipwrecked, a night and a
day I have been in the deep,
26 in many travels, in dangers of waters, in dangers
of robbers, in dangers from my own race, in dangers
from the gentiles, in dangers in the city, in dangers in
the desert, in dangers in the sea, in dangers among
false brothers;
27 in toil and hardship, in watchings often, in hunger
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness,
28 besides that from outside, what comes upon me
daily: the anxiety for all the assemblies.
29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to
stumble, and I do not burn?
30 If I have to boast, I shall boast of matters that show
up my weakness.
31 The Elohim and Father of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, who is baruḵ forever, knows that I am not
lying.
32 In Dammeseq the governor, under Aretas the
sovereign, was guarding the city of the Damascenes,
wanting to seize me,
33 but through a window I was let down in a basket
by the wall, and escaped from his hands.
25

12 To boast, indeed, is useless for me, for I shall go
on to visions and revelations of HWHY.
2 I know a man in Mashiaḥ who fourteen years ago
- whether in the body I do not know, or whether out of
the body I do not know, Elohim knows - such a one
was caught up to the third shamayim.
3 And I know such a man - whether in the body or
out of the body I do not know, Elohim knows -

2634

QORIN’TIYIM 2

that he was caught up into Paradise and heard
unspeakable words, which it is not right for a man to
speak.
5 Of such a one I shall boast, but of myself I shall
not boast, except in my weaknesses.
6 For if I shall want to boast, I shall not be a fool, for
I shall speak the truth. But I refrain, lest anyone
should think more of me than what he sees in me, or
hears of me.
7 And to keep me from exalting myself because of
the exceeding greatness of the revelations, a thorn in
the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan to
hit me, to keep me from exalting myself.
8 Concerning this I pleaded with the Aḏon three
times to take it away from me.
9 And He said to me, “My favour is sufficient for you,
for My power is perfected in weakness.” Most gladly,
then, I shall rather boast in my weaknesses, so that
the power Mashiaḥ rests on me.
10 Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in
insults, in needs, in persecutions, in distresses, for
the sake of Mashiaḥ. For when I am weak, then I am
strong.
11 I have become a fool - you have compelled me.
For I should have been commended by you, for in no
respect was I behind the most eminent emissaries,
though I am a nobody.
12 Indeed, the signs of an emissary were wrought
among you with all endurance, in signs and wonders
and powers.
13 For what is there in which you were inferior to
other assemblies, except that I myself was not a
burden to you? Forgive me this wrong!
14 See, I am ready to come to you for the third time.
And I shall not be a burden to you, for I do not seek
4

2635

2 CORINTHIANS

yours, but you. For the children should not lay up for
the parents, but the parents for the children.
15 And I shall most gladly spend and be spent for
your lives. If I love you more and more, am I to be
loved less?
16 But be it so, I did not burden you. But being crafty,
did I catch you with guile?
17 Did I take advantage of you by any of those whom
I sent to you?
18 I urged Titos, and sent our brother with him. Did
Titos take advantage of you? Did we not walk in the
same spirit - not in the same steps?
19 Again, do you think that we defend ourselves to
you? We speak before Elohim in Mashiaḥ. But all this,
beloved, is for your upbuilding.
20 For I fear lest, when I come, I do not find you such
as I want, and I be found by you such as you do not
want - lest there be strife, jealousies, outbursts of
wrath, selfish ambitions, slander, gossip, puffings up,
unrests,
21 and lest, when I come again, my Elohim should
humble me among you, and I shall mourn for many
who have sinned before and have not repented of the
uncleanness, and whoring, and indecency which they
have practised.

13 This is the third time I am coming to you. “By the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established.”
2 I have previously said, and I say beforehand, as
being present the second time, and now being absent
I write to those who have sinned before, and to all the
rest, that if I come again I shall not spare,

2636

QORIN’TIYIM 2

since you are seeking for proof of Mashiaḥ
speaking in me, who is not weak toward you, but
mighty in you.
4 For though He was impaled in weakness, yet He
lives by the power of Elohim. For we also are weak in
Him, but we shall live with Him by the power of Elohim
toward you.
5 Examine yourselves whether you are in the belief
- prove yourselves. Or do you not know yourselves,
that {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ is in you, unless you are
disapproved.
6 And I trust that you shall know that we are not
disapproved.
7 And we pray to Elohim that you do no evil at all not that we should appear approved, but that you
should do what is right, even though we should
appear unapproved.
8 For we have no power at all against the truth, but
for the truth.
9 For we rejoice when we are weak and you are
strong. And this also we pray for: your perfection.
10 For this reason I write this in my absence, so that,
being present I should not use sharpness, according
to the authority which the Aḏon has given me for
upbuilding and not for overthrowing.
11 For the rest, brothers, rejoice. Be made perfect, be
encouraged, be of one mind, live in peace. And the
Elohim of love and peace shall be with you.
12 Greet one another with a qodesh kiss.
13 All the qodeshim greet you.
14 The favour of the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, and
the love of HWHY, and the fellowship of the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh be with all of you. Amĕn.
3

2637

ROMANS

ROMIYIM
‫ רומיים‬mYYmWR

1 Sha’ul, a servant of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, a called
emissary, separated to the Good News of Elohim,
2 which He promised before through His neḇi’im in
the Qodesh Scriptures,
3 concerning His Bĕn, who came of the seed of
Dawiḏ according to the flesh,
4 who was designated Bĕn of HWHY with power,
according to the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh, by the resurrection
from the dead: {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, the Aḏon of us,
5 through whom we have received favour and office
of the emissary for belief-obedience among all the
nations on behalf of His Name,
6 among whom you also are the called ones of
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
7 To all who are in Rome, beloved of Elohim, called,
qodeshim: Favour to you and peace from HWHY our
Father and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
8 First, I truly thank my Elohim through {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ for you all, that your belief is spoken of in
all the world.
9 For HWHY is my witness, whom I serve with my
spirit in the Good News of His Bĕn, how unceasingly
I make mention of you,
10 always asking in my prayers, if at all possible, I
shall be baraḵ by the desire of Elohim, to come to you.
11 For I long to see you, so as to impart some spiritual
gift to you, for you to be established,
12 and that is, to be encouraged together among you,
each by the other’s belief - both yours and mine.
13 And I do not want you to be unaware, brothers,
that I often purposed to come to you, but was
2638

ROMIYIM

hindered until now, in order to have some fruit among
you, as also among the other gentiles.
14 I am a debtor both to Yawanites and to foreigners,
both to wise and to foolish.
15 That is why I am so eager to bring the Good News
also to you who are in Rome.
16 For I am not ashamed of the Good News of
Mashiaḥ, for it is the power of Elohim for deliverance
to everyone who believes, to the Yahuḏi first and also
to the Yawanite.
17 For in it the righteousness of Elohim is revealed
from belief to belief, as it has been written, “But the
righteous shall live by belief.”
18 For the wrath of Elohim is revealed from the
shamayim
against
all
wickedness
and
unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in
unrighteousness,
19 because that which is known of Elohim is manifest
among them, for Elohim has manifested it to them.
20 For since the creation of the world His invisibilities
have been clearly seen, being understood from what
has been made, both His everlasting power and
mightiness, for them to be without excuse,
21 because, although they knew Elohim, they did not
esteem Him as Elohim, nor gave thanks, but became
vain in their reasonings, and their undiscerning heart
was darkened.
22 Claiming to be wise, they became fools,
23 and changed the esteem of the incorruptible
Elohim into the likeness of an image of corruptible
man, and of birds and of four-footed beasts and of
reptiles.
24 Therefore Elohim gave them up to uncleanness in
the lust of their hearts, to disrespect their bodies
among themselves,
2639

ROMANS

who changed the truth of Elohim into the
falsehood, and worshipped and served what was
created rather than the Creator, who is baruḵ forever.
Amĕn.
26 Because of this Elohim gave them over to
degrading passions. For even their women
exchanged natural relations for what is against
nature,
27 and likewise, the men also, having left natural
relations with woman, burned in their lust for one
another, men with men committing indecency, and
receiving back the reward which was due for their
straying.
28 And even as they did not think it worthwhile to
possess the knowledge of Elohim, Elohim gave them
over to a worthless mind, to do what is improper,
29 having been filled with all unrighteousness,
whoring, wickedness, greed, evil; filled with envy,
murder, fighting, deceit, evil habits; whisperers,
30 slanderers, haters of Elohim, insolent, proud,
boasters, devisers of evils, disobedient to parents,
31 without
discernment,
Covenant
breakers,
unloving, unforgiving, ruthless;
32 who, though they know the righteousness of
Elohim, that those who practise such deserve death,
not only do the same but also approve of those who
practise them.
25

2 Therefore, O man, you are without excuse,
everyone who judges, for in which you judge another
you condemn yourself, since you who judge practise
the same.
2 And we know that the judgment of Elohim is
according to truth against those who practise such.
2640

ROMIYIM

And do you think, O man, you who judge those
practising such, and doing the same, that you shall
escape the judgment of Elohim?
4 Or do you despise the riches of His kindness, and
tolerance, and patience, not knowing that the
kindness of Elohim leads you to repentance?
5 But according to your hardness and your
unrepentant heart you are treasuring up for yourself
wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of Elohim,
6 who “shall render to each one according to his
works”:
7 everlasting ḥai to those who by persistence in
good work seek for esteem, and respect, and
incorruptibility;
8 but wrath and displeasure to those who are selfseeking and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness;
9 affliction and distress on every human being
working what is evil, of the Yahuḏi first, and also of
the Yawanite;
10 but esteem, respect, and peace to everyone
working what is good, to the Yahuḏi first and also to
the Yawanite.
11 For there is no partiality with Elohim.
12 For as many as sinned without Torah shall also
perish without Torah, and as many as sinned in the
Torah shall be judged by the Torah.
13 For not the hearers of the Torah are righteous in
the sight of Elohim, but the doers of the Torah shall
be declared right.
14 For when gentiles, who do not have the Torah, by
nature do what is in the Torah, although not having
the Torah, they are a Torah to themselves,
3

2641

ROMANS

who show the work of the Torah written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
between themselves their thoughts accusing or even
excusing,
16 in the day when HWHY shall judge the secrets of
men through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, according to my
Good News.
17 See, you are called a Yahuḏi, and rest on the
Torah, and make your boast in Elohim,
18 and know the desire, and approve what is
superior, being instructed out of the Torah,
19 and are trusting that you yourself are a guide to
the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,
20 an instructor of foolish ones, a teacher of infants,
having the form of knowledge and of the truth in the
Torah.
21 You, then, who teach another, do you not teach
yourself? You who proclaim that a man should not
steal, do you steal?
22 You who say, “Do not commit adultery,” do you
commit adultery? You who abominate idols, do you
rob temples?
23 You who make your boast in the Torah, through
the transgression of the Torah do you disrespect
Elohim?
24 For “The Name of HWHY is blasphemed among the
gentiles because of you,” as it has been written.
25 For circumcision indeed profits if you practise the
Torah, but if you are a transgressor of the Torah, your
circumcision has become uncircumcision.
26 So, if an uncircumcised one watches over the
righteousnesses of the Torah, shall not his
uncircumcision be reckoned as circumcision?
15

2642

ROMIYIM

And the uncircumcised by nature, who perfects
the Torah, shall judge you who notwithstanding letter
and circumcision are a transgressor of the Torah!
28 For he is not Yahuḏi who is outwardly, neither is
circumcision that which is outward in the flesh.
29 But a Yahuḏi is he who is inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in Ruaḥ, not literally,
whose praise is not from men but from Elohim.
27

3 What then is the advantage of the Yahuḏi, or what
is the value of the circumcision?
2 Much in every way! Because firstly indeed, that
they were entrusted with the Words of HWHY.
3 For what if some did not believe? Shall their
unbelief nullify the trustworthiness of Elohim?
4 Let it not be! But let Elohim be true, and every man
a liar, as it has been written, “That You should be
declared right in Your words, and prevail in Your
judging.”
5 But if our unrighteousness establishes the
righteousness of Elohim, what shall we say? Is
Elohim unrighteous who is inflicting wrath? I speak as
a man.
6 Let it not be! Otherwise how shall Elohim judge the
world?
7 For if the truth of Elohim has increased through my
lie, to His esteem, why am I also still judged as a
sinner?
8 And not, “Let us do evil so that the good might
come” - as we are wrongly accused and as some
claim that we say. Their judgment is in the right.
9 What then? Are we better? Not at all, for we have
previously accused both Yahuḏim and Yawanites that
they are all under sin.
2643

ROMANS

As it has been written, “There is none righteous,
no, not one!
11 “There is no one who is understanding, there is
none who is seeking Elohim.
12 “They all have turned aside, they have together
become worthless. There is none who does good, no,
not one.”
13 “Their throat is an open tomb, with their tongues
they have deceived,” “The poison of adders is under
their lips,”
14 “Whose mouth is filled with cursing and
bitterness.”
15 “Their feet are swift to shed blood,
16 ruin and wretchedness are in their ways,
17 and the way of peace they have not known.”
18 “There is no reverence of Elohim before their
eyes.”
19 And we know that whatever the Torah says, it says
to those who are in the Torah, so that every mouth
might be stopped, and all the world come under
judgment before Elohim.
20 Therefore by works of Torah no flesh shall be
declared right before Him, for by the Torah is the
knowledge of sin.
21 But now, apart from the Torah, a righteousness of
Elohim has been revealed, being witnessed by the
Torah and the Neḇi’im,
22 and the righteousness of Elohim is through belief
in {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ to all and on all who believe.For
there is no difference,
23 for all have sinned and fall short of the esteem of
Elohim,
24 being declared right, without paying, by His favour
through the redemption which is in Mashiaḥ {fWHY,
10

2644

ROMIYIM

whom Elohim put forth as an atonement, through
belief in His blood, to demonstrate His righteousness,
because in His tolerance Elohim had passed over the
sins that had taken place before,
26 to
demonstrate at the present time His
righteousness, that He is righteous and declares
righteous the one who has belief in {fWHY.
27 Where, then, is the boasting? It is shut out. By
what Torah? Of works? No, but by the Torah of belief.
28 For we reckon that a man is declared right by
belief without works of Torah.
29 Or is He the Elohim of the Yahuḏim only, and not
also of the gentiles? Yes, of the gentiles also,
30 since it is one Elohim who shall declare right the
circumcised by belief and the uncircumcised through
belief.
31 Do we then nullify the Torah through the belief?
Let it not be! On the contrary, we establish the Torah.
25

4 What, then, shall we say Aḇraham our father, to
have found, according to the flesh?
2 For if Aḇraham was declared right by works, he
has boasting, but not before Elohim.
3 For what does the Scripture say? “Aḇraham
believed HWHY, and it was reckoned to him for
righteousness.”
4 And to him who is working, the reward is not
reckoned as a favour but as a debt.
5 And to him who is not working but believes on Him
who is declaring right the wicked, his belief is
reckoned for righteousness,
6 even as Dawiḏ also says of the beraḵah of the
man to whom Elohim reckons righteousness without
works:
2645

ROMANS

“Baruḵ are those whose lawlessnesses are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
8 baraḵ is the man to whom HWHY shall by no means
reckon sin.”
9 Is this beraḵah then upon the circumcised, or also
upon the uncircumcised? For we affirm: Belief was
reckoned unto Aḇraham for righteousness.
10 How then was it reckoned? Being in circumcision,
or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision.
11 And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of the belief in uncircumcision, for
him to be a father of all those believing through
uncircumcision, for righteousness to be reckoned to
them also,
12 and the father of circumcision to those who not
only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the
steps of the belief which our father Aḇraham had in
uncircumcision.
13 For the promise that he should be the heir of the
world, was not to Aḇraham or to his seed through the
Torah, but through a righteousness of belief.
14 For if those who are of the Torah are heirs, belief
has been made useless, and the promise has been
nullified,
15 for the Torah works out wrath, for where there is
no Torah there is no transgression.
16 On account of this it is of belief, that it be according
to favour, for the promise to be made certain to all the
seed, not only to those who are of the Torah, but also
to those who are of the belief of Aḇraham, who is
father of us all 17 as it has been written, “I have made you a father
of many nations” - in the presence of Him whom he
7

2646

ROMIYIM

believed, even Elohim, who gives ḥai to the dead and
calls that which does not exist as existing,
18 who against expectation believed, in expectation,
so that he should become father of many nations,
according to what was said, “So shall your seed be.”
19 And not having grown weak in belief, he did not
consider his own body, already dead, being about a
hundred years old, and the deadness of Sarah’s
womb,
20 he did not hesitate about the promise of Elohim
through unbelief, but was strengthened in belief,
giving esteem to Elohim,
21 and being completely persuaded that what He had
promised He was also able to do.
22 Therefore also “it was reckoned to him for
righteousness.”
23 And not because of him alone was it written that it
was reckoned to him,
24 but also because of us, to whom it shall be
reckoned, to us who believe in Him who raised up
{fWHY our Aḏon from the dead,
25 who was delivered up because of our trespasses,
and was raised for us to be declared right.

5 Therefore, having been declared right by belief,
we have peace with Elohim through our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
2 through whom also we have access by belief into
this favour in which we stand, and we exult in the
expectation of the esteem of Elohim.
3 And not only this, but we also exult in pressures,
knowing that pressure works endurance;
4 and
endurance,
approvedness;
and
approvedness, expectation.
2647

ROMANS

And expectation does not disappoint, because the
love of Elohim has been poured out in our hearts by
the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh which was given to us.
6 For when we were still weak, Mashiaḥ in due time
died for the wicked.
7 For one shall hardly die for a righteous one,
though possibly for a good one someone would even
have the courage to die.
8 But HWHY proves His own love for us, in that while
we were still sinners, Mashiaḥ died for us.
9 Much more then, having now been declared right
by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
Him.
10 For if, being enemies, we were restored to favour
with HWHY through the death of His Bĕn, much more,
having been restored to favour, we shall be saved by
His ḥai.
11 And not only this, but we also exult in HWHY
through our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, through whom
we have now received the restoration to favour.
12 For this reason, even as through one man sin
entered into the world, and death through sin, and
thus death spread to all men, because all sinned 13 for until the Torah, sin was in the world, but sin is
not reckoned when there is no Torah.
14 But death reigned from Aḏam until Mosheh, even
over those who had not sinned according to the
likeness of the transgression of Aḏam, who is a type
of Him who was to come.
15 But the favourable gift is not like the trespass. For
if by the one man’s trespass many died, much more
the favour of HWHY, and the gift in favour of the one
Man, {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, overflowed to many.
16 And the favourable gift is not as by one having
sinned. For indeed the judgment was of one to
5

2648

ROMIYIM

condemnation, but the favourable gift is of many
trespasses unto righteousness.
17 For if by the trespass of the one, death reigned
through the one, much more those who receive the
overflowing favour and the gift of righteousness shall
reign in ḥai through the One, {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
18 So then, as through one trespass there resulted
condemnation to all men, so also through one
righteous act there resulted righteous-declaring of ḥai
to all men.
19 For as through the disobedience of one man many
were made sinners, so also through the obedience of
the One many shall be made righteous.
20 And the Torah came in beside, so that the
trespass would increase. But where sin increased,
favour increased still more,
21 so that as sin reigned in death, even so favour
might reign through righteousness to everlasting ḥai
through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our Aḏon.

6 What, then, shall we say? Shall we continue in sin,
to let favour increase?
2 Let it not be! How shall we who died to sin still live
in it?
3 Or do you not know that as many of us as were
immersed into Mashiaḥ {fWHY were immersed into
His death?
4 We were therefore buried with Him through
immersion into death, that as Mashiaḥ was raised
from the dead by the esteem of the Father, so also
we should walk in newness of ḥai.
5 For if we have come to be grown together in the
likeness of His death, we shall be also of the
resurrection,
2649

ROMANS

knowing this, that our old man was impaled with
Him, so that the body of sin might be rendered
powerless, to serve sin no longer.
7 For he who has died has been made right from sin.
8 And if we died with Mashiaḥ, we believe that we
shall also live with Him,
9 knowing that Mashiaḥ, having been raised from
the dead, dies no more - death no longer rules over
Him.
10 For in that He died, He died to sin once for all; but
in that He lives, He lives to Elohim.
11 So you also, reckon yourselves to be dead indeed
to sin, but alive to Elohim in Mashiaḥ {fWHY our
Aḏon.
12 Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body,
to obey it in its desires,
13 neither present your members as instruments of
unrighteousness to sin, but present yourselves to
Elohim as being alive from the dead, and your
members as instruments of righteousness to Elohim.
14 For sin shall not rule over you, for you are not
under the law but under favour.
15 What then? Shall we sin because we are not under
law but under favour? Let it not be!
16 Do you not know that to whom you present
yourselves servants for obedience, you are servants
of the one whom you obey, whether of sin to death,
or of obedience to righteousness?
17 But thanks to Elohim that you were servants of sin,
yet you obeyed from the heart that form of teaching
to which you were entrusted.
18 And having been let free from sin, you became
servants of righteousness.
19 I speak as a man, because of the weakness of
your flesh. For even as you presented your members
6

2650

ROMIYIM

as servants of uncleanness, and of lawlessness
resulting in lawlessness, so now present your
members as servants of righteousness resulting in
qodeshah.
20 For when you were servants of sin, you were free
from righteousness.
21 What fruit, therefore, were you having then, over
which you are now ashamed? For the end thereof is
death.
22 But now, having been let free from sin, and having
become servants of Elohim, you have your fruit
resulting in qodeshah, and the end, everlasting ḥai.
23 For the wages of sin is death, but the favourable
gift of Elohim is everlasting ḥai in Mashiaḥ {fWHY our
Aḏon.

7 Or do you not know, brothers - for I speak to those
knowing the Torah - that the Torah rules over a man
as long as he lives?
2 For the married woman has been bound by Torah
to the living husband, but if the husband dies, she is
released from the Torah of her husband.
3 So then, while her husband lives, she shall be
called an adulteress if she becomes another man’s.
But if her husband dies, she is free from that Torah,
so that she is not an adulteress, having become
another man’s.
4 So my brothers, you also were put to death to the
Torah through the body of Mashiaḥ, for you to
become another’s, the One who was raised from the
dead, that we should bear fruit to Elohim.
5 For when we were in the flesh, the passions of
sins, through the Torah, were working in our
members to bear fruit to death.
2651

ROMANS

But now we have been released from the Torah,
having died to what we were held by, so that we
should serve in newness of Ruaḥ and not in oldness
of letter.
7 What, then, shall we say? Is the Torah sin? Let it
not be! However, I did not know sin except through
the Torah. For also the covetousness I knew not if the
Torah had not said, “You shall not covet.”
8 But sin, having taken the occasion through the
Command, worked in me all covetousness. For apart
from Torah sin is dead.
9 And I was alive apart from the Torah once, but
when the Command came, the sin revived, and I died.
10 And the Command which was to result in ḥai, this
I found to result in death.
11 For sin, having taken the occasion through the
Command, deceived me, and killed through it.
12 So that the Torah truly is qodesh, and the
Command qodesh, and righteous, and good.
13 Therefore, has that which is good become death
to me? Let it not be! But the sin, that sin might be
manifest, was working death in me through what is
good, so that sin through the Command might
become an exceedingly great sinner.
14 For we know that the Torah is spiritual, but I am
fleshly, sold under sin.
15 For what I work, I know not. For what I want, that I
do not practise, but what I hate, that I do.
16 But if I do what I do not want, I agree with the
Torah that it is good.
17 And now, it is no longer I that work it, but the sin
dwelling in me.
18 For I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no
good. For to want is present with me, but to work the
good I do not find.
6

2652

ROMIYIM

For the good that I want to do, I do not do; but the
evil I do not want to do, this I practise.
20 And if I do that which I do not want, it is no longer
I who work it, but the sin dwelling in me.
21 I find therefore this law, that when I want to do the
good, that the evil is present with me.
22 For I delight in the Torah of HWHY according to the
inward man,
23 but I see another law in my members, battling
against the Torah of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.
24 Wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me
from this body of death?
25 Thanks to HWHY, through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our
Aḏon! So then, with the mind I myself truly serve the
Torah of HWHY, but with the flesh the law of sin.
19

8 There is, then, now no condemnation to those who
are in Mashiaḥ {fWHY, who do not walk according to
the flesh, but according to the Ruaḥ.
2 For the Torah of the Ruaḥ of the ḥai in ha’Mashiaḥ
{fWHY has freed me from the law of sin and of death.
3 For the Torah being powerless, in that it was weak
through the flesh, HWHY, having His own Bĕn in the
likeness of flesh of sin, and concerning sin,
condemned sin in the flesh,
4 so that the righteousness of the Torah should be
completed in us who do not walk according to the
flesh but according to the Ruaḥ.
5 For those who live according to the flesh put their
minds on that of the flesh, but those according to the
Ruaḥ, that of the Ruaḥ.
6 For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of
the Ruaḥ is ḥai and peace.
2653

ROMANS

Because the mind of the flesh is enmity towards
Elohim, for it does not subject itself to the Torah of
HWHY, neither indeed is it able,
8 and those who are in the flesh are unable to
please Elohim.
9 But you are not in the flesh but in the Ruaḥ, if
indeed the Ruaḥ of Elohim dwells in you. And if
anyone does not have the Ruaḥ of ha’Mashiaḥ, this
one is not His.
10 And if ha’Mashiaḥ is in you, the body is truly dead
on account of sin, but the Ruaḥ is ḥai on account of
righteousness.
11 And if the Ruaḥ of Him who raised {fWHY from the
dead dwells in you, He who raised ha’Mashiaḥ from
the dead shall also give ḥai to your mortal bodies
through His Ruaḥ dwelling in you.
12 So then, brothers, we are not debtors to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh.
13 For if you live according to the flesh, you are going
to die; but if by the Ruaḥ you put to death the deeds
of the body, you shall live.
14 For as many as are led by the Ruaḥ of Elohim,
these are sons of Elohim.
15 For you did not receive the spirit of bondage again
to fear, but you received the Ruaḥ of adoption as sons
by whom we cry out, “Abba, Father.”
16 The Ruaḥ Himself bears witness with our spirit that
we are children of Elohim,
17 and if children, also heirs - truly heirs of Elohim,
and co-heirs with ha’Mashiaḥ, if indeed we suffer with
Him, in order that we also be exalted together.
18 For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time
are not worth comparing with the esteem that is to be
revealed in us.
7

2654

ROMIYIM

For the intense longing of the creation eagerly
waits for the revealing of the sons of Elohim.
20 For the creation was subjected to futility, not from
choice, but because of Him who subjected it, in
anticipation,
21 that the creation itself also shall be delivered from
the bondage to corruption into the esteemed freedom
of the children of Elohim.
22 For we know that all the creation groans together,
and suffers the pains of childbirth together until now.
23 And not only so, but even we ourselves who have
the first-fruits of the Ruaḥ, we ourselves also groan
within ourselves, eagerly waiting for the adoption as
sons, the redemption of our body.
24 For in this expectation we were saved, but
expectation that is seen is not expectation, for when
anyone sees, does he expect it?
25 And if we expect what we do not see, we eagerly
wait for it with endurance.
26 And in the same way the Ruaḥ helps in our
weaknesses. For we do not know what we should
pray, but the Ruaḥ Himself pleads our case for us with
groanings unutterable.
27 And He who searches the hearts knows what the
mind of the Ruaḥ is, because He makes intercession
for the qodeshim according to Elohim.
28 And we know that all works together for good to
those who love Elohim, to those who are called
according to purpose.
29 Because those whom He knew beforehand, He
also ordained beforehand to be conformed to the
likeness of His Bĕn, that He become the first-born
born among many brothers.
30 And whom He ordained beforehand, these He
also called, and whom He called, these He also
19

2655

ROMANS

declared right. And whom He declared right, these He
also esteemed.
31 What then shall we say to this? If Elohim is for us,
who is against us?
32 Truly, He who did not spare His own Bĕn, but
delivered Him up on behalf of us all - how shall He
not, along with Him, freely give us all else?
33 Who shall bring any charge against Elohim’s
chosen ones? It is Elohim who is declaring right.
34 Who is he who is condemning? It is ha’Mashiaḥ
who died, and furthermore is also raised up, who is
also at the right hand of HWHY, who also makes
intercession for us.
35 Who shall separate us from the love of
ha’Mashiaḥ? Shall pressure, or distress, or
persecution, or scarcity of food, or nakedness, or
danger, or sword?
36 As it has been written, “For Your sake we are killed
all day long, we are reckoned as sheep of slaughter.”
37 But in all this we are more than overcomers
through Him who loved us.
38 For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor
messengers nor principalities nor powers, neither the
present nor the future,
39 nor height nor depth, nor any other creature, shall
be able to separate us from the love of HWHY which is
in Mashiaḥ {fWHY our Aḏon.

9 I speak the truth in Mashiaḥ, I do not lie, my
conscience also bearing me witness in the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh,
2 that I have great sadness and continual grief in my
heart.

2656

ROMIYIM

For I myself could have wanted to be banished
from Mashiaḥ for the sake of my brothers, my
relatives according to the flesh,
4 who are Yisra’ĕlites, whose is the adoption, and
the esteem, and the Covenants, and the giving of the
Torah, and the worship, and the promises,
5 whose are the fathers, and from whom is
ha’Mashiaḥ according to the flesh, who is over all,
baruḵ of HWHY forever. Amĕn.
6 However, it is not as though the Word of HWHY has
failed. For they are not all Yisra’ĕl who are of Yisra’ĕl,
7 neither are they all children because they are the
seed of Aḇraham, but, “In Yitsḥaq your seed shall be
called.”
8 That is, those who are the children of the flesh,
these are not the children of Elohim, but the children
of the promise are reckoned as the seed.
9 For this is the word of promise, “At this time I shall
come and Sarah shall have a son.”
10 And not only so, but Riḇqah having conceived by
one, our father Yitsḥaq.
11 Yet, before they were born or had done any good
or evil - in order that the purpose of Elohim, according
to choice, might stand, not of works but of Him who
calls 12 it was said to her, “The greater shall serve the
lesser,”
13 as it has been written, “Ya’aqoḇ I have loved, but
Ĕsaw I have hated.”
14 What,
then, shall we say? Is there
unrighteousness with Elohim? Let it not be!
15 For He says to Mosheh, “I shall favour whomever
I favour, and I shall have compassion on whomever I
have compassion.”
3

2657

ROMANS

So, then, it is not of him who is wanting, nor of him
who is running, but of Elohim who shows favour.
17 For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this same
purpose I have raised you up, to show My power in
you, and that My Name be declared in all the earth.”
18 So, then, He favours whom He wants, and He
hardens whom He wants.
19 Then you shall say to me, “Why does He still find
fault? For who has resisted His counsel?”
20 But who are you, O man, to talk back to Elohim?
Shall that which is formed say to him who formed it,
“Why have you made me like this?”
21 Does not the potter have authority over the clay,
from the same lump to make one vessel for value and
another not for value?
22 And if Elohim, desiring to show wrath, and to make
His power known, with much patience tolerated the
vessels of wrath prepared for destruction,
23 and that He might make known the riches of His
esteem on vessels of compassion, which He had
prepared beforehand for esteem,
24 even whom He called, not only us of the Yahuḏim,
but also of the gentiles?
25 As He says also in Hoshĕa, “I shall call them My
people, who were not My people, and her beloved,
who was not beloved.”
26 “And it shall be in the place where it was said to
them, ‘You are not My people,’ there they shall be
called sons of the living Elohim.”
27 And Yeshayahu cries out on behalf of Yisra’ĕl,
“Though the number of the children of Yisra’ĕl be as
the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved.
28 For He is bringing a matter to an end, and is
cutting it short in righteousness, because HWHY shall
cut short a matter on the earth.”
16

2658

ROMIYIM

And as Yeshayahu said before, “If HWHY of hosts
had not left us a seed, we would have become like
Seḏom, and we would have been made like Amorah.”
30 What shall we say then? That gentiles not
following after righteousness, have obtained
righteousness, even the righteousness of belief,
31 but
Yisra’ĕl following after the Torah of
righteousness, has not arrived at the Torah of
righteousness.
32 Why? Not because of belief, but as by works of
Torah. For they stumbled at the Stone of stumbling.
33 As it has been written, “See, I lay in Tsiyon a Stone
of stumbling and a Rock that makes for falling, and
everyone who is believing on Him shall not be put to
shame.”
29

10 Truly brothers, my heart’s desire and prayer to
Elohim for Yisra’ĕl is for deliverance.
2 For I bear them witness that they have an ardour
for Elohim, but not according to knowledge.
3 For not knowing the righteousness of Elohim, and
seeking to establish their own righteousness, they did
not subject themselves to the righteousness of
Elohim.
4 For Mashiaḥ is the goal of the ‘Torah unto
righteousness to everyone who believes.
5 For Mosheh writes about the righteousness which
is of the Torah, “The man who does these shall live
by them.”
6 But the righteousness of belief speaks in this way,
“Do not say in your heart, ‘Who shall ascend into the
shamayim?’ ” - that is, to bring Mashiaḥ down; or,
7 “ ‘Who shall descend into the abyss?’ ” - that is, to
bring Mashiaḥ up from the dead.
2659

ROMANS

But what does it say? “The Word is near you, in
your mouth and in your heart” - that is, the Word of
belief which we are proclaiming:
9 That if you confess with your mouth the Aḏon
{fWHY and believe in your heart that HWHY has raised
Him from the dead, you shall be saved.
10 For
with the heart one believes unto
righteousness, and one confesses with the mouth,
and so is saved.
11 Because the Scripture says, “Whoever puts his
trust in Him shall not be put to shame.”
12 Because there is no distinction between Yahuḏi
and Yawanite, for the same Aḏon of all is rich to all
those calling upon Him.
13 For “everyone who calls on the Name of HWHY
shall be saved.”
14 How then shall they call on Him in whom they have
not believed? And how shall they believe in Him of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without one proclaiming?
15 And how shall they proclaim if they are not sent?
As it has been written, “How pleasant are the feet of
those who bring the Good News of peace, who bring
the Good News of the good!”
16 However, not all obeyed the Good News. For
Yeshayahu says, “HWHY, who has believed our
report?”
17 So then belief comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of HWHY.
18 But I ask, Did they not hear? Yes indeed, “Their
voice went out to all the earth, and their words to the
ends of the world.”
19 But I ask, Did Yisra’ĕl not know? First Mosheh
says, “I shall provoke you to jealousy by those who
8

2660

ROMIYIM

are not a nation, I shall enrage you by an unwise
nation.”
20 And Yeshayahu boldly says, “I was found by those
not seeking Me, I was made manifest to those not
asking for Me.”
21 And to Yisra’ĕl He says, “All day long I have
stretched out My hands to a disobedient and backtalking people.”

11 I say then, has Elohim rejected His people? Let
it not be! For I also am a Yisra’ĕlite, of the seed of
Aḇraham, of the tribe of Binyamin.
2 Elohim has not rejected His people whom He
knew beforehand. Or do you not know what the
Scripture says of Ĕliyahu, how he pleads with HWHY
against Yisra’ĕl, saying,
3 “HWHY, they have killed Your neḇi’im and
overthrown Your altars, and I alone am left, and they
seek my life”?
4 But what does the answer of HWHY say to him? “I
have left for Myself seven thousand men who have
not bowed the knee to Ba’al.”
5 So therefore also, at this present time a remnant
according to the choice of favour has come to be.
6 And if by favour, it is no longer of works, otherwise
favour is no longer favour. And if it is of works, it is no
longer favour, otherwise work is no longer work.
7 What then? Yisra’ĕl has not obtained what it
seeks, but the chosen obtained it, and the rest were
hardened.
8 As it has been written, “HWHY has given them a
spirit of deep sleep, eyes not to see and ears not to
hear, unto this day.”

2661

ROMANS

Dawiḏ also says, “Let their table become for a
snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling-block and a
recompense to them,
10 let their eyes be darkened, not to see, and bow
down their back always.”
11 I say then, have they stumbled that they should
fall? Let it not be! But by their fall deliverance has
come to the gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.
12 And if their fall is riches for the world, and their
failure riches for the gentiles, how much more their
completeness!
13 For I speak to you, the gentiles, inasmuch as I am
an emissary to the gentiles, I esteem my service,
14 if somehow I might provoke to jealousy my own
flesh and save some of them.
15 For if their casting away is the restoration to favour
of the world, what is their acceptance but ḥai from the
dead?
16 Now if the first-fruit is qodesh, the lump is also.
And if the root is qodesh, so are the branches.
17 And if some of the branches were broken off, and
you, being a wild olive tree, have been grafted in
among them, and came to share the root and fatness
of the olive tree,
18 do not boast against the branches. And if you
boast, you do not bear the root, but the root - you!
19 You shall say then, “The branches were broken off
that I might be grafted in.”
20 Good! By unbelief they were broken off, and you
stand by belief. Do not be arrogant, but revere.
21 For if Elohim did not spare the natural branches,
He might not spare you either.
22 See then the kindness and sharpness of Elohim:
on those who fell sharpness, but toward you
9

2662

ROMIYIM

kindness, if you continue in kindness, otherwise you
also shall be cut off.
23 And they also, if they do not continue in unbelief,
shall be grafted in, for Elohim is able to graft them in
again.
24 For if you were cut out of the olive tree which is
wild by nature, and were grafted contrary to nature
into a good olive tree, how much more shall these
who are the natural, be grafted into their own olive
tree?
25 For I do not want you to be ignorant of this secret,
brothers, lest you should be wise in your own
estimation, that hardening in part has come over
Yisra’ĕl, until the completeness of the gentiles has
come in.
26 And so all Yisra’ĕl shall be saved, as it has been
written, “The Deliverer shall come out of Tsiyon, and
He shall turn away wickedness from Ya’aqoḇ,
27 and this is My Covenant with them, when I take
away their sins.”
28 Truly, regarding the Good News - enemies for your
sake, but concerning the choice, beloved for the sake
of the fathers.
29 For the gifts and the calling of Elohim are not to be
repented of.
30 For as you also at one time disobeyed Elohim, but
now have obtained compassion through their
disobedience,
31 so also these have now disobeyed, that through
the compassion shown you they also might obtain
compassion.
32 For Elohim has shut them all up to disobedience,
in order to have compassion on all.

2663

ROMANS

Oh, the depth of riches, and wisdom and
knowledge of Elohim! How unsearchable His
judgments and untraceable His ways!
34 “For who has known the mind of HWHY? Or who
has become His counsellor?”
35 “Or who first gave to Him, and it shall be given
back to him?”
36 Because of Him, and through Him, and to Him, are
all, to whom be esteem forever. Amĕn.
33

12 I call upon you, therefore, brothers, through the
compassion of Elohim, to present your bodies a living
offering - qodesh, well-pleasing to Elohim - your
reasonable worship.
2 And do not be conformed to this world, but be
transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you
prove what is that good and well-pleasing and perfect
desire of Elohim.
3 For I say, through the favour which has been given
to me, to everyone who is among you, not to think
more highly than he should think, but to think soberly,
as Elohim has given to each a measure of belief.
4 For as we have many members in one body, but
all members do not have the same function,
5 so we, the many, are one Body in Mashiaḥ, and
members each one of one another.
6 Now having different gifts, according to the favour
which was given to us, if neḇuah, according to the
proportion of belief;
7 if serving, in the serving; or he who is teaching, in
the teaching;
8 or he who encourages, in the encouragement; or
he who is sharing, in sincerity; he who is leading, in
diligence; he who shows compassion, joyously.
2664

ROMIYIM

Let love be without hypocrisy. Shrink from what is
wicked, cling to what is good.
10 In brotherly love, tenderly loving towards one
another, in appreciation, giving preference to each
other;
11 not idle in duty, ardent in spirit, serving the Aḏon;
12 rejoicing in the expectancy, enduring under
pressure, continuing steadfastly in prayer;
13 imparting to the needs of the qodeshim, pursuing
kindness towards strangers.
14 Baraḵ those who persecute you - baraḵ and do not
curse.
15 Rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with
those who weep.
16 Be of the same mind toward one another. Do not
be proud in mind, but go along with the lowly. Do not
be wise in your own estimation.
17 Repay no one evil for evil. Respect what is right in
the sight of all men.
18 If possible, on your part, be at peace with all men.
19 Beloved, do not revenge yourselves, but give
place to the wrath, for it has been written, “Vengeance
is Mine, I shall repay,” says HWHY.
20 “Instead, if your enemy hungers, feed him; if he
thirsts, give him a drink, for in so doing you shall heap
coals of fire on his head.”
21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with
good.
9

13 Let every being be in subjection to the governing
authorities. For there is no authority except from
Elohim, and the authorities that exist are appointed by
Elohim.

2665

ROMANS

So he who opposes the authority withstands the
institution of Elohim, and those who withstand shall
bring judgment on themselves.
3 For those ruling are an object of fear, not to good
works, but to evil. Do you want to be not afraid of the
authority? Do the good, and you shall have praise
from it,
4 for it is a servant of Elohim to you for good. But if
you do evil, be afraid, for it does not bear the sword
in vain. For it is a servant of Elohim, a revenger to
execute wrath on him who practises evil.
5 Therefore, it is necessary to be subject, not only
because of wrath but also because of the conscience.
6 For because of this you also pay taxes, for they
are servants of Elohim attending continually to these
duties.
7 Render therefore to all what is due to them: tax to
whom tax, toll to whom toll, fear to whom fear, respect
to whom respect.
8 Owe no one anything except to love one another,
for he who loves another has filled the Torah.
9 For this, “You shall not commit adultery,” “You
shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not
bear false witness,” “You shall not covet,” and if there
is any other command, is summed up in this word,
“You shall love your neighbour as yourself.”
10 Love does no evil to a neighbour. Therefore, love
is completion of the Torah.
11 And this, knowing the time, that it is already the
hour for us to wake up from sleep, for now our
deliverance is nearer than when we did believe.
12 The night is far advanced, the day has come near.
So let us put off the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armour of light.
2

2666

ROMIYIM

Let us walk becomingly, as in the day, not in wild
parties and drunkenness, not in living together and
indecencies, not in fighting and envy,
14 but put on the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, and make
no provision for the lusts of the flesh.
13

14 And receive him who is weak in the belief, not
criticising thoughts.
2 One indeed believes to eat all, but he who is weak
eats only vegetables.
3 He that eats, let him not despise him who does not
eat, and he that does not eat, let him not judge him
who eats, for Elohim received him.
4 Who are you that judges another’s servant? To his
own master he stands or falls. But he shall be made
to stand, for Elohim is able to make him stand.
5 One indeed judges one day above another,
another judges every day. Let each one be
completely persuaded in his own mind.
6 He who minds the day, minds it to HWHY. And he
who does not mind the day, to HWHY he does not mind
it. He who eats, eats to HWHY, for he gives Elohim
thanks. And he who does not eat, to HWHY he does
not eat, and gives Elohim thanks.
7 For not one of us lives to himself, and not one dies
to himself.
8 For both, if we live, we live unto the Aḏon, and if
we die, we die unto the Aḏon. Therefore, whether we
live or die, we are the Aḏon’s.
9 For unto this Mashiaḥ died and rose and lives
again, to rule over both the dead and the living.
10 But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you
despise your brother? For we shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Mashiaḥ.
2667

ROMANS

For it has been written, “As I live, says HWHY, every
knee shall bow to Me, and every tongue shall confess
to Elohim.”
12 Each one of us, therefore, shall give account of
himself to Elohim.
13 Therefore let us not judge one another any longer,
but rather judge this, not to put an obstacle or a
stumbling-block in our brother’s way.
14 I know and am persuaded in the Aḏon {fWHY that
naught is common of itself. But to him who regards
whatever to be common, to him it is common.
15 And if your brother is grieved because of your
food, you are no longer walking in love. Do not by your
food ruin the one for whom Mashiaḥ died.
16 Do not then allow your good to be spoken of as
evil.
17 For the reign of Elohim is not eating and drinking,
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.
18 For he who is serving Mashiaḥ in these is wellpleasing to Elohim and approved by men.
19 So, then, let us pursue that of peace and that for
building up one another.
20 Do not destroy the work of Elohim for the sake of
food. All indeed are clean, but evil to that man who
eats so as to cause stumbling.
21 It is good not to eat meat or drink wine, nor that by
which your brother stumbles.
22 Do you have belief? Have it to yourself before
Elohim. Baruḵ is he who does not condemn himself in
what he approves.
23 But he who doubts, if he eats, is condemned,
because it is not of belief, and all that is not of belief
is sin.
11

2668

ROMIYIM

15 But we who are strong ought to bear with the
failings of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
2 Let each one of us please his neighbour for his
good, to build him up.
3 For even ha’Mashiaḥ did not please Himself, but,
as it has been written, “The reproaches of those who
reproached You fell upon Me.”
4 For whatever was written before was written for
our instruction, that through endurance and
encouragement of the Scriptures we might have the
expectation.
5 And the Elohim of endurance and encouragement
give you to be of the same mind toward one another,
according to Mashiaḥ {fWHY,
6 that with one mind and one mouth, you might
praise the Elohim and Father of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
7 So accept one another, as Mashiaḥ also accepted
us, to the esteem of Elohim.
8 And I say that {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ has become a
servant of the circumcised for the truth of Elohim, to
confirm the promises made to the fathers,
9 and for the gentiles to praise Elohim for His
compassion, as it has been written, “Because of this
I shall confess to You among the gentiles, and I shall
sing to Your Name.”
10 And again it says, “Rejoice, O gentiles, with His
people!”
11 And again, “Praise HWHY, all you gentiles! Praise
Him, all you peoples!”
12 And again, Yeshayahu says, “There shall be a root
of Yishai, and He who shall rise to reign over the
2669

ROMANS

gentiles, on Him the gentiles shall put their
expectation.”
13 And the Elohim of expectation fill you with all joy
and peace in believing, that you overflow with
expectation by the power of the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh.
14 Now I myself am persuaded concerning you, my
brothers, that you too are filled with goodness,
complete in all knowledge, able also to admonish one
another.
15 But I have written more boldly to you, in part, as
reminding you, because of the favour given to me by
Elohim,
16 to be a servant of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ to the
gentiles, with the kehunnah duty of bringing the Good
News of Elohim, so that the offering of the gentiles
becomes acceptable, qadosh by the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.
17 Therefore I have cause for boasting in Mashiaḥ
{fWHY in that pertaining to Elohim.
18 For I shall not presume to speak of anything
except what Mashiaḥ has worked out through me, in
word and deed, to make the gentiles obedient,
19 in power of signs and wonders, in power of the
Ruaḥ of Elohim, so that from Yerushalayim and round
about to Illurikon I have completed the preaching of
the Good News of Mashiaḥ.
20 And so I was ambitious to bring the Good News
where Mashiaḥ had not been named, lest I should
build on another man’s foundation,
21 but as it has been written, “To whom it was not
announced concerning Him, they shall see, and those
that have not heard shall understand.”
2670

ROMIYIM

This is why I was often hindered from coming to
you.
23 But now, no longer having a place in these parts,
and having a longing to come to you for many years,
24 I shall come to you when I go to Spania. For I
expect to see you on my journey, and to be helped on
my way there by you, if first I be somewhat filled with
your company.
25 But now I am going to Yerushalayim to serve the
qodeshim.
26 For it pleased those from Makedonia and Aḵaia to
make some contribution for the poor among the
qodeshim who are in Yerushalayim.
27 For they were pleased, and they are their debtors.
For if the gentiles have shared in their spiritual
matters, their duty is also to serve them in material
matters.
28 Having completed this, then, and having put my
seal on this fruit of theirs, I shall return through you to
Spania.
29 And I know that when I come to you, I shall come
in the completeness of the beraḵah of the Good News
of Mashiaḥ.
30 But I urge you, brothers, through our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, and through the love of the Ruaḥ, to
strive together with me in prayers for me, unto Elohim,
31 that I might be delivered from those in Yahuḏah
who do not believe, and that my service for
Yerushalayim be well received by the qodeshim,
32 that I might come to you with joy, through the
desire of Elohim, and be refreshed together with you.
33 And the Elohim of peace be with you all. Amĕn.
22

2671

ROMANS

16 And I commend to you Phoibĕ our sister, who is
a servant of the assembly in Kengḵreai,
2 that you receive her in HWHY, worthy of the
qodeshim, and assist her in whatever matter she has
need of you. For she has been a great help to many,
including me.
3 Greet Priskilla and Aqulas, my fellow workers in
Mashiaḥ {fWHY,
4 who risked their own necks for my life, to whom
not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of
the gentiles,
5 and the assembly that is in their house. Greet my
beloved Epainetos, who is the first-fruits of Aḵaia to
Mashiaḥ.
6 Greet Miryam, who worked very hard for us.
7 Greet Andronikos and Yunias, my relatives and
my fellow prisoners, who are eminent among the
emissaries, who also were in Mashiaḥ before me.
8 Greet Amplias, my beloved in HWHY.
9 Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Mashiaḥ, and
Staḵus, my beloved.
10 Greet Apellĕs, the approved in Mashiaḥ. Greet
those who are of Aristobulos.
11 Greet Hĕrodion, my relative. Greet those who are
of Narkissos who are in HWHY.
12 Greet Truphaina and Truphosa, who work in
HWHY. Greet the beloved Persis, who worked very
hard in HWHY.
13 Greet Rufus, chosen in HWHY and his mother and
mine.
14 Greet Asugkritos, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas,
Hermĕs, and the brothers who are with them.
2672

ROMIYIM

Greet Philologos and Yulia, Nĕreus and his sister,
and Olumpas, and all the qodeshim who are with
them.
16 Greet one another with a qodesh kiss. The
assemblies of Mashiaḥ greet you.
17 Now I call upon you, brothers, watch out for those
who cause divisions and stumbling, contrary to the
teaching which you learned, and turn away from
them.
18 For such ones do not serve our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, but their own stomach, and by smooth
words and flattering speech they deceive the hearts
of the innocent.
19 Your obedience, indeed, is reported to all.
Therefore I rejoice concerning you, but I want you to
be wise indeed as to the good, and simple toward the
evil.
20 And the Elohim of peace shall crush Satan under
your feet shortly. The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ be with you. Amĕn.
21 Timotiyos, my fellow worker, and Lukios, and
Yason, and Sosipatros, my relatives, greet you.
22 I, Tertius, who wrote this letter, greet you in HWHY.
23 Gaios, the host of all the assembly and me, greets
you. Ĕrastos, the treasurer of the city, greets you, and
Quartus, a brother.
24 The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
you all. Amĕn.
25 And to Him who is able to establish you according
to my Good News and the preaching of {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, according to the revelation of the secret
which was kept silent since times of old,
15

2673

ROMANS

but now has been made manifest, and by
Scripture of neḇuah has been made known to all
nations, according to the Command of the everlasting
Elohim, for belief-obedience.
27 To HWHY, wise alone, be the esteem, through
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ forever. Amĕn.
26

2674

PHILEMON

PILĔYMON
‫! פילימון‬WmYLYp

1 Sha’ul, a prisoner of Mashiaḥ {fWHY, and Timotiyos
the brother, to Pilĕymon our beloved one and fellow
worker,
2 and Apphia our sister, and Arḵippos our fellow
soldier, and the assembly at your house:
3 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Adon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
4 I always thank my Elohim when I mention you in
my prayers,
5 hearing of your love and the belief which you have
toward the Aḏon {fWHY and toward all the qodeshim,
6 so that the sharing of your belief might become
working in the knowledge of all the good which is in
you toward Mashiaḥ {fWHY.
7 For we have much joy and encouragement in your
love, because the tender affections of the qodeshim
have been refreshed by you, brother.
8 Therefore, although I have much boldness in
Mashiaḥ to command you what is fitting,
9 because of love, I rather appeal - being such a one
as Sha’ul, the aged, and now also a prisoner of
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ 10 I appeal to you for my child Onĕsimos, whom I
brought forth while in my chains,
11 who formerly was of no use to you, but now is of
good use to you and to me,
12 whom I sent back to you, and receive him, that is,
my own tender affections,
13 whom I wanted to keep with me, that on your
behalf he might serve me in my chains for the Good
News.
2675

PILĔYMON

But without your opinion I wanted to do naught, so
that your good deed should not be by way of
necessity, but voluntary.
15 For he departed for a while, possibly because of
this, so that you might have him back forever,
16 no longer as a slave but more than a slave, as a
beloved brother, especially to me, and how much
more to you, both in the flesh and in the Aḏon.
17 So, if you regard me as your partner, receive him
as you would me.
18 But if he has wronged you or owes you whatever,
put that on my account.
19 I, Sha’ul, write with my own hand. I shall repay not to mention to you that you indeed owe yourself to
me also.
20 Yes, brother, let me derive pleasure from you in
the Aḏon, refresh my tender affections in the Aḏon.
21 Trusting in your obedience, I write to you, knowing
that you shall do even more than I say.
22 And at the same time also prepare a place for me
to stay, for I trust that through your prayers I shall be
given to you.
23 Epaphras, fellow prisoner of me in Mashiaḥ
{fWHY, greets you,
24 Markos, Aristarḵos, Dĕmas, Lukas, my fellow
workers.
25 The favour of our Aḏon {fWHY Mashiaḥ be with
your spirit. Amĕn.
14

2676

COLOSSIANS

QOLASIM
‫ קולוסים‬mYsWLWq

1 Sha’ul, an emissary of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ by the
desire of Elohim, and Timotiyos our brother,
2 to the qodeshim in Kolossai, and true brothers in
ha’Mashiaḥ: Favour to you and peace from HWHY our
Father and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
3 We give thanks to the Elohim and Father of our
Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, praying always for you,
4 having heard of your belief in Mashiaḥ {fWHY and
of your love for all the qodeshim,
5 because of the expectation that is laid up for you
in the shamayim, of which you heard before in the
Word of the truth of the Good News,
6 which has come to you, as also in all the world it
is bearing fruit and growing, as also among you, since
the day you heard and knew the favour of Elohim in
truth,
7 as you also learned from Epaphras, our beloved
fellow servant, who is a true servant of Mashiaḥ on
your behalf,
8 who also declared to us your love in the Ruaḥ.
9 That is also why we, from the day we heard, have
not ceased praying for you, and asking that you be
filled with the knowledge of His desire in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding,
10 to walk worthily of the Aḏon, pleasing all, bearing
fruit in every good work and increasing in the
knowledge of Elohim,
11 being empowered with all power, according to the
might of His esteem, for all endurance and patience
with joy,
2677

QOLASIM

giving thanks to the Father who has made us fit to
share in the inheritance of the qodeshim in the light,
13 who has delivered us from the authority of
darkness and transferred us into the reign of the Bĕn
of His love,
14 in whom we have redemption through His blood,
the forgiveness of sins,
15 who is the likeness of the invisible Elohim, the firstborn of all creation.
16 Because in Him were created all that are in the
shamayim and that are on earth, visible and invisible,
whether thrones or rulerships or principalities or
authorities - all have been created through Him and
for Him.
17 And He is before all, and in Him all hold together.
18 And He is the Head of the Body, the assembly,
who is the beginning, the first-born from the dead, that
He might become the One who is first in all.
19 Because in Him all the completeness was well
pleased to dwell,
20 and through Him to completely restore to favour all
unto Himself, whether on earth or in the shamayim,
having made peace through the blood of His stake.
21 And you, who once were estranged and enemies
in the mind by wicked works, but now He has
completely restored to favour
22 in the body of His flesh through death, to present
you qodesh, and blameless, and unreprovable before
Him,
23 if indeed you continue in the belief, founded and
steadfast, and are not moved away from the
expectation of the Good News which you heard,
which was proclaimed to every creature under the
shamayim, of which I, Sha’ul, became a servant,
12

2678

COLOSSIANS

who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill
up in my flesh what is lacking, in Mashiaḥ’s afflictions
for the sake of His Body, which is the assembly,
25 of which I became a servant according to the
administration of Elohim which was given to me for
you, to fill the Word of HWHY,
26 the secret which has been hidden from ages and
from generations, but now has been revealed to His
qodeshim,
27 to whom Elohim desired to make known what are
the riches of the esteem of this secret among the
gentiles: which is Mashiaḥ in you, the expectancy of
esteem,
28 whom we announce, warning every man and
teaching every man in all wisdom, in order to present
every man perfect in Mashiaḥ {fWHY,
29 for which I also labour, striving according to the
working of Him who works in me in power.
24

2 For I want you to know what a great struggle I have
for you and those in Laodikeia, and for as many as
have not seen my face in the flesh,
2 in order that their hearts might be encouraged,
being knit together in love, and to all riches of the
entire confirmation of understanding, to a true
knowledge of the secret of Elohim - even the Father,
and ha’Mashiaḥ,
3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.
4 And this I say, so that no one deceives you with
enticing words.
5 For though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with
you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the
steadfastness of your belief in Mashiaḥ.
2679

QOLASIM

Therefore, as you accepted Mashiaḥ {fWHY the
Aḏon, walk in Him,
7 having been rooted and built up in Him, and
established in the belief, as you were taught,
overflowing in it with thanksgiving.
8 See to it that no one makes a prey of you through
philosophy and empty deceit, according to the
tradition of men, according to the elementary matters
of the world, and not according to Mashiaḥ.
9 Because in Him dwells all the completeness of the
Almighty bodily,
10 and you have been made complete in Him, who is
the Head of all principality and authority.
11 In Him you were also circumcised with a
circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off
of the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision
of Mashiaḥ,
12 having been buried with Him in immersion, in
which you also were raised with Him through the
belief in the working of HWHY, who raised Him from
the dead.
13 And you, being dead in your trespasses and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, He has made alive
together with Him, having forgiven you all trespasses,
14 having blotted out the handwriting against us - by
the dogmas - which stood against us. And He has
taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the stake.
15 Having stripped
the principalities and the
authorities, He made a public display of them, having
prevailed over them in it.
16 Let no one therefore judge you in eating or in
drinking, or in respect of a Festival or a new moon or
Shabbathoth 17 which are a shadow of what is to come - but the
Body of ha’Mashiaḥ.
6

2680

COLOSSIANS

Let no one deprive you of the prize, one who takes
delight in false humility and worship of messengers,
taking his stand on what he has not seen, puffed up
by his fleshly mind,
19 and not holding fast to the Head, from whom all
the Body - nourished and knit together by joints and
ligaments - grows with the growth of Elohim.
20 If, then, you died with Mashiaḥ from the
elementary matters of the world, why, as though living
in the world, do you subject yourselves to dogmas:
21 “Do not touch, do not taste, do not handle” 22 which are all to perish with use - according to the
commands and teachings of men?
23 These indeed have an appearance of wisdom in
self-imposed worship, humiliation and harsh
treatment of the body - of no value at all, for
satisfaction of the flesh.
18

3 If, then, you were raised with Mashiaḥ, seek those
which are above, where Mashiaḥ is, seated at the
right hand of HWHY.
2 Mind those above, not those on the earth.
3 For you have died, and your ḥai has been hidden
with Mashiaḥ in Elohim.
4 When ha’Mashiaḥ, who is our ḥai, is manifested,
then you also shall be manifested with Him in esteem.
5 Therefore put to death your members which are
on the earth: whoring, uncleanness, passion, evil
desire and greed of gain, which is idolatry.
6 Because of these the wrath of Elohim is coming
upon the sons of disobedience,
7 in which you also once walked when you lived in
them.
8 But now, also put off all these: displeasure, wrath,
evil, blasphemy, filthy talk from your mouth.
2681

QOLASIM

Do not lie to each other, since you have put off the
old man with his practices,
10 and have put on the new one who is renewed in
knowledge according to the likeness of Him who
created him,
11 where there is not Yawanite and Yahuḏi,
circumcised and uncircumcised, foreigner, Skuthian,
slave, free, but Mashiaḥ is all, and in all.
12 Therefore, as chosen ones of Elohim, qodesh and
beloved, put on compassion, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, patience,
13 bearing with one another, and forgiving each other
if anyone has a complaint against another, indeed, as
Mashiaḥ forgave you so also should you.
14 But above all these, love, which is a bond of the
perfection.
15 And let the peace of Elohim rule in your hearts, to
which indeed you were called in one Body, and be
filled with thanks.
16 Let the Word of Mashiaḥ dwell in you richly,
teaching and admonishing one another in all wisdom,
singing with pleasure in your hearts to the Aḏon in
tehillim and songs of praise and spiritual songs.
17 And whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the
Name of the Aḏon {fWHY, giving thanks to HWHY the
Father through Him.
18 Wives, subject yourselves to your own husbands,
as is proper in the Aḏon.
19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be bitter
toward them.
20 Children, obey your parents in all, for this is wellpleasing to the Aḏon.
21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, lest they
become discouraged.
9

2682

COLOSSIANS

Servants, obey your masters according to the
flesh in all respects, not with eye-service, as menpleasers, but in sincerity of heart, revering Elohim.
23 And whatever you do, do it heartily, as to the Aḏon
and not to men,
24 knowing that from the Aḏon you shall receive the
reward of the inheritance. It is the Aḏon, Mashiaḥ, you
serve.
25 But he who does wrong shall be repaid for the
wrong which he has done, and there is no partiality.
22

4 Masters, give your servants what is righteous and
fair, knowing that you also have an Aḏon in the
shamayim.
2 Continue in prayer, watching therein, with
thanksgiving,
3 praying at the same time also for us, that Elohim
would open to us a door for the Word, to speak the
secret of Mashiaḥ, for which I am also in chains,
4 so that I make it clear, as I should speak.
5 Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside,
redeeming the time.
6 Let your word always be with favour, seasoned
with salt, so that you know how you ought to answer
each one.
7 Tuḵikos, who is a beloved brother, a true servant,
and a fellow servant in the Aḏon, shall give you all the
news about me.
8 I am sending him to you for this purpose, to know
your circumstances and to encourage your hearts,
9 with Onĕsimos, a true and beloved brother, who is
one of you. They shall let you know all the news here.
10 Aristarḵos my fellow prisoner greets you, with
Markos the relative of Barnaḇah about whom you
2683

QOLASIM

received instructions: if he comes to you, welcome
him,
11 also Yĕshua who is called Yustos. These are my
only fellow workers for the reign of Elohim who are of
the circumcision, who were to me a comfort.
12 Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of
Mashiaḥ, greets you, always wrestling for you in
prayers, so that you stand perfect and complete in all
the desire of Elohim.
13 For I bear him witness that he has a deep concern
for you, and for those who are in Laodikeia and those
in Hierapolis.
14 Lukas the beloved physician and Dĕmas greet
you.
15 Greet the brothers in Laodikeia, and Numphas
and the assembly that is in his house.
16 And when this letter is read among you, see that it
is read also in the assembly of the Laodikeians, and
that you likewise read the letter from Laodikeia.
17 And say to Arḵippos, “See to the service which you
have received in the Aḏon, so that you complete it.”
18 This greeting is in my own hand - Sha’ul.
Remember my chains. Favour be with you. Amĕn.

2684

EPHESIANS

EPH’SIYIM
‫ אפסיים‬mYYspA

1 Sha’ul, an emissary of {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ by the
desire of Elohim, to the qodeshim who are in Ephesos,
and true to Mashiaḥ {fWHY:
2 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
3 Baruḵ be the Elohim and Father of our Aḏon
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, who has baraḵ us with every
spiritual beraḵah in the shamayim in Mashiaḥ,
4 even as He chose us in Him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be qodesh and blameless
before Him in love,
5 having previously ordained us to adoption as sons
through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ to Himself, according to
the good pleasure of His desire,
6 to the praise of the esteem of His favour with which
He favoured us in the Beloved,
7 in whom we have redemption through His blood,
the forgiveness of trespasses, according to the riches
of His favour,
8 which He has lavished on us in all wisdom and
insight,
9 having made known to us the secret of His desire,
according to His good pleasure which He purposed in
Him,
10 to administer at the completion of time, to gather
together in one all in Mashiaḥ, both which are in the
shamayim and which are on earth, in Him,
11 in whom also we obtained an inheritance, being
previously ordained according to the purpose of Him
working all according to the counsel of His desire,
2685

EPH’SIYIM

for us to be the praise of His esteem - those having
first trusted in Mashiaḥ,
13 in whom you also, having heard the Word of the
truth, the Good News of your deliverance, in whom
also, having believed, you were sealed with the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh of promise,
14 who is the pledge of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, to the
praise of His esteem.
15 For this reason I too, having heard of your belief in
the Aḏon {fWHY and your love for all the qodeshim,
16 do not cease giving thanks for you, making
mention of you in my prayers,
17 that the Elohim of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
the Father of esteem, would give you a spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him,
18 the eyes of your understanding being enlightened,
so that you know what is the expectation of His
calling, and what are the riches of the esteem of His
inheritance in the qodeshim,
19 and what is the exceeding greatness of His power
toward us who are believing, according to the working
of His mighty strength,
20 which He wrought in ha’Mashiaḥ when He raised
Him from the dead and seated at His right hand in the
shamayim,
21 far above all rule and authority and power and
mastery, and every name that is named, not only in
this age but also in that which is to come.
22 And He put all under His feet, and gave Him to be
head over all, to the assembly,
23 which is His Body, the completeness of Him who
fills all in all.
12

2 And you were dead in trespasses and sins,
2686

EPHESIANS

in which you once walked according to the course
of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of
the air, of the spirit that is now working in the sons of
disobedience,
3 among whom also we all once lived in the lusts of
our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, and were by nature children of wrath, as also
the rest.
4 But HWHY, who is rich in compassion, because of
His great love with which He loved us,
5 even when we were dead in trespasses, made us
alive together with Mashiaḥ - by favour you have been
saved 6 and raised us up together, and made us sit
together in the shamayim in Mashiaḥ {fWHY,
7 in order to show in the coming ages the exceeding
riches of His favour in kindness toward us in Mashiaḥ
{fWHY.
8 For by favour you have been saved, through
belief, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of
Elohim,
9 it is not by works, so that no one should boast.
10 For we are His workmanship, created in Mashiaḥ
{fWHY unto good works, which HWHY prepared
beforehand that we should walk in them.
11 Therefore remember that you, once gentiles in the
flesh, who are called ‘the uncircumcision’ by what is
called ‘the circumcision’ made in the flesh by hands,
12 that at that time you were without Mashiaḥ,
excluded from the citizenship of Yisra’ĕl and
strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
expectation and without Elohim in the world.
13 But now in Mashiaḥ {fWHY you who once were far
off have been brought near by the blood of
ha’Mashiaḥ.
2

2687

EPH’SIYIM

For He is our peace, who has made both one, and
having broken down the partition of the barrier,
15 having abolished in His flesh the enmity - the law
of the commands in dogma - so as to create in
Himself one renewed man from the two, thus making
peace,
16 and to completely restore to favour both of them
unto Elohim in one body through the stake, having
destroyed the enmity by it.
17 And having come, He brought as Good News
peace to you who were far off, and peace to those
near.
18 Because through Him we both have access to the
Father by one Ruaḥ.
19 So then you are no longer strangers and
foreigners, but fellow citizens with the qodeshim and
members of the household of Elohim,
20 having been built upon the foundation of the
emissaries and neḇi’im, {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ Himself
being chief corner-stone,
21 in whom all the building, being joined together,
grows into a qodesh Mishkan in HWHY,
22 in whom you also are being built together into a
dwelling of Elohim in the Ruaḥ.
14

3 Because of this I, Sha’ul, the prisoner of {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ on behalf of you gentiles 2 if indeed you have heard of the administration of
the favour of Elohim that was given to me for you,
3 that by revelation was made known to me the
secret, as I wrote before briefly.
4 In reading this, then, you are able to understand
my insight into the secret of Mashiaḥ,

2688

EPHESIANS

which was not made known to the sons of men in
other generations, as it has now been revealed by the
Ruaḥ to His qodesh emissaries and neḇi’im:
6 The gentiles to be co-heirs, united in the same
Body, and partakers together in the promise in
Mashiaḥ through the Good News,
7 of which I became a servant according to the gift
of the favour of Elohim given to me, according to the
working of His power.
8 To me, the very least of all the qodeshim, this
favour was given, to bring the Good News of the
unsearchable riches of Mashiaḥ among the gentiles,
9 and to make all see how this secret is
administered, which for ages past has been hidden in
HWHY who created all through {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
10 so that now, through the assembly, the manysided wisdom of Elohim might be known to the
principalities and authorities in the shamayim,
11 according to the everlasting purpose which He
made in Mashiaḥ {fWHY our Aḏon,
12 in whom we have boldness and access, with
reliance, through belief in Him.
13 I pray therefore, that you do not lose heart at my
pressures on your behalf, which is your esteem.
14 For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of
our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
15 from whom all fatherhood in the shamayim and
earth is named,
16 in order that He might give you, according to the
riches of His esteem by power, to be strengthened in
the inner man, through His Ruaḥ,
17 that ha’Mashiaḥ might dwell in your hearts through
belief - having become rooted and grounded in love,
5

2689

EPH’SIYIM

in order that you might be strengthened to firmly
grasp, with all the qodeshim, what is the width and
length and depth and height,
19 to know the love of Mashiaḥ which surpasses
knowledge, in order that you might be filled to all the
completeness of Elohim.
20 And to Him who is able to do exceedingly above
what we ask or think, according to the power that is
working in us,
21 to Him be esteem in the assembly by Mashiaḥ
{fWHY unto all generations, for ever and ever. Amĕn.
18

4 I call upon you therefore, I the prisoner of the
Aḏon, to walk worthily of the calling with which you
were called,
2 with all humility and meekness, with patience,
bearing with one another in love,
3 being eager to guard the unity of the Ruaḥ in the
bond of peace 4 one Body and one Ruaḥ, as you also were called
in one expectation of your calling,
5 one Aḏon, one belief, one immersion,
6 one Elohim and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all.
7 But to each one of us favour was given according
to the measure of the gift of Mashiaḥ.
8 That is why it says, “When He went up on high, He
led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.”
9 But what does “He went up” mean, except that He
also first went down into the lower parts of the earth?
10 He who went down is also the One who went up
far above all the shamayim, to fill all.
11 And He Himself gave some as emissaries, and
some as neḇi’im, and some as evangelists, and some
as shepherds and teachers
2690

EPHESIANS

for the perfecting of the qodeshim, to the work of
service to a building up of the Body of ha’Mashiaḥ,
13 until we all come to the unity of the belief and of
the knowledge of the Bĕn of HWHY, to a perfect man,
to the measure of the stature of the completeness of
Mashiaḥ,
14 so that we should no longer be children, tossed
and borne about by every wind of teaching, by the
trickery of men, unto the craftiness of leading astray,
15 but, maintaining the truth in love, we grow up in all
respects into Him who is the head, Mashiaḥ,
16 from whom the entire Body, joined and knit
together by what every joint supplies, according to the
working by which each part does its share, causes
growth of the Body for the building up of itself in love.
17 So this I say, and witness in the Aḏon, that you
should no longer walk as the gentiles walk, in the
futility of their mind,
18 having been darkened in their understanding,
having been estranged from the ḥai of Elohim,
because of the ignorance that is in them, because of
the hardness of their heart,
19 who,
having become callous, have given
themselves up to indecency, to work all uncleanness
with greediness.
20 But you have not so learned Mashiaḥ,
21 if indeed you have heard Him and were taught by
Him, as truth is in {fWHY:
22 that you put off - with regard to your former
behaviour - the old man, being corrupted according to
the desires of the deceit,
23 and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
24 and that you put on the renewed man which was
created according to Elohim, in righteousness and
qodeshah of the truth.
12

2691

EPH’SIYIM

Therefore, having put off the false, speak truth,
each one with his neighbour, for we are members of
one another.
26 “Be wroth, but do not sin.” Do not let the sun go
down on your rage,
27 nor give place to the devil.
28 Let him who stole steal no more, but rather let him
labour, working with his hands what is good, so that
he has to share with those in need.
29 Let no corrupt word come out of your mouth, but
only such as is good for the use of building up, so as
to impart what is pleasant to the hearers.
30 And do not grieve the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh of Elohim,
by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, and displeasure, and
uproar, and slander be put away from you, along with
all evil.
32 And be kind towards one another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, as HWHY also forgave you in
Mashiaḥ.
25

5 Become, then, imitators of Elohim as beloved
children.
2 And walk in love, as Mashiaḥ also has loved us,
and gave Himself for us, a gift and an offering to HWHY
for a sweet-smelling fragrance.
3 But whoring and all uncleanness, or greed of gain,
let it not even be named among you, as is proper
among qodeshim 4 neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor coarse
jesting, which are not fitting, but rather thanksgiving.
5 For this you know, that no one who whores, nor
unclean one, nor one greedy of gain, who is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the reign of Mashiaḥ
and HWHY.
2692

EPHESIANS

Let no one deceive you with empty words, for
because of these the wrath of HWHY comes upon the
sons of disobedience.
7 Therefore do not become partakers with them.
8 For you were once darkness, but now, light in the
Aḏon. Walk as children of light 9 for the fruit of the Ruaḥ is in all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth 10 proving what is well-pleasing to the Aḏon.
11 And have no fellowship with the fruitless works of
darkness, but rather reprove them.
12 For it is a shame even to speak of what is done by
them in secret.
13 But all being reproved are manifested by the light,
for whatever is manifested is light.
14 That is why He says, “Wake up, you who sleep,
and arise from the dead, and Mashiaḥ shall shine on
you.”
15 See then that you walk exactly, not as unwise, but
as wise,
16 redeeming the time, because the days are wicked.
17 So then do not be foolish, but understand what the
desire of HWHY is.
18 And do not be drunk with wine, in which is loose
behaviour, but be filled with the Ruaḥ,
19 speaking to each other in tehillim and songs of
praise and spiritual songs, singing and striking the
strings in your heart to the Aḏon,
20 giving thanks always for all to HWHY the Father, in
the Name of our Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
21 subjecting yourselves to each other in the
reverence of Elohim.
22 Wives, subject yourselves to your own husbands,
as to the Aḏon.
6

2693

EPH’SIYIM

Because the husband is head of the wife, as also
ha’Mashiaḥ is head of the assembly, and He is
Saviour of the Body.
24 But as the assembly is subject to Mashiaḥ, so also
let the wives be to their own husbands in every
respect.
25 Husbands, love your wives, as Mashiaḥ also loved
the assembly and gave Himself for it,
26 in order to qadosh it and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the Word,
27 in order to present it to Himself a splendid
assembly, not having spot or wrinkle or any of this
sort, but that it might be qodesh and blameless.
28 In this way husbands ought to love their own wives
as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves
himself.
29 For no one ever hated his own flesh, but feeds and
cherishes it, as also the Aḏon does the assembly.
30 Because we are members of His Body, of His flesh
and of His bones.
31 “For this cause a man shall leave his father and
mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall
become one flesh.”
32 This secret is great, but I speak concerning
Mashiaḥ and the assembly.
33 However, you too, everyone, let each one love his
own wife as himself, and let the wife see that she
reveres her husband.
23

6 Children, obey your parents in the Aḏon, for this is
right.
2 “Respect your father and mother,” which is the first
Command with promise,
3 in order that it might be well with you, and you
might live long on the earth.”
2694

EPHESIANS

And you, fathers, do not provoke your children, but
bring them up in the instruction and admonition of the
Aḏon.
5 Servants, obey your masters according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in sincerity of heart, as
to Mashiaḥ;
6 not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as
servants of Mashiaḥ, doing the desire of Elohim from
the inner self,
7 rendering service with pleasure, as to the Aḏon,
and not to men,
8 knowing that whatever good anyone does, he
shall receive the same from the Aḏon, whether he is
slave or free.
9 And, masters, do the same to them, refrain from
threatening, knowing that your own Aḏon also is in the
shamayim, and there is no partiality with Him.
10 For the rest, my brothers, be strong in the Aḏon
and in the mightiness of His strength.
11 Put on the complete armour of Elohim, for you to
have power to stand against the schemes of the devil.
12 Because we do not wrestle against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against authorities,
against the world-rulers of the darkness of this age,
against spiritual wickedness in the shamayim.
13 Because of this, take up the complete armour of
Elohim, so that you have power to withstand in the
wicked day, and having done all, to stand.
14 Stand, then, having girded your waist with truth,
and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
15 and having fitted your feet with the preparation of
the Good News of peace;
16 above all, having taken up the shield of belief with
which you shall have power to quench all the burning
arrows of the wicked one.
4

2695

EPH’SIYIM

Take also the helmet of deliverance, and the
sword of the Ruaḥ, which is the Word of HWHY,
18 praying at all times, with all prayer and
supplication in the Ruaḥ, watching in all perseverance
and supplication for all the qodeshim;
19 also for me, that a word might be given to me in
the opening of my mouth, to be bold in making known
the secret of the Good News,
20 for which I am an envoy in chains, that in it I might
speak boldly, as I should speak.
21 Now, in order that you also might know about me,
how I am doing, Tuḵikos, a beloved brother and
trustworthy servant in the Aḏon, shall make all known
to you,
22 whom I sent to you for this same purpose, so that
you know about us, and might encourage your hearts.
23 Peace to the brothers, and love, with belief, from
HWHY the Father and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
24 Favour be with all those who love our Aḏon {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, undecayingly! Amĕn.
17

2696

PHILIPPIANS

PILIPIYIM
‫ פיליפאים‬mYApYLYp

1Sha’ul and Timotiyos, servants of

[VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, to all the qodeshim in Mashiaḥ [VWHY
who are in Philippi, with the overseers and attendants:
2 Favour to you and peace from HWHY our Father
and the Aḏon [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
3 I thank my Elohim in all my remembrance of you.
4 In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with
joy,
5 for your fellowship in the Good News from the first
day until now,
6 being persuaded of this, that He who has begun a
good work in you shall perfect it until the day of [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
7 It is right for me to think this of you all, because I
have you in my heart, all of you being sharers of the
favour with me, both in my chains and in the defence
and confirmation of the Good News.
8 For Elohim is my witness, how I long for you all
with the affection of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
9 And this I pray, that your love might extend more
and more in knowledge and all discernment,
10 for you to examine those that differ, in order to be
sincere, and not stumbling, until the day of Mashiaḥ,
11 being filled with the fruit of righteousness, through
[VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, to the esteem and praise of
HWHY.
12 And I want you to know, brothers, that what has
befallen me has turned out for the advancement of
the Good News,

2697

PILIPIYIM

so that it has become known to all the palace
guard, and to all the rest, that my chains are in
Mashiaḥ;
14 and most of the brothers, trusting in the Aḏon
because of my chains, are much more bold to
fearlessly speak the Word.
15 Some indeed proclaim Mashiaḥ even from envy
and strife, but some also out of pleasure 16 the former announce Mashiaḥ from selfish
ambition, not sincerely, thinking to add distress to my
chains,
17 but the latter out of love, knowing that I am
appointed for the defence of the Good News.
18 What then? Only that in every way, whether in
pretence or in truth, Mashiaḥ is announced. And in
this I rejoice, in fact, I shall rejoice.
19 For I know that this shall turn out for my
deliverance through your prayer and the supply of the
Ruaḥ of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
20 according to my intense longing and anticipation
that I shall not be ashamed at all, but that with all
boldness, as always, so now also Mashiaḥ shall be
made great in my body, whether by life or by death.
21 For to me, to live is Mashiaḥ, and to die is gain.
22 And if to live in the flesh is to me a fruit of work,
then what shall I choose? I do not know.
23 For I am pressed down by the two, having a desire
to depart and be with Mashiaḥ, which is much better,
24 but to remain in the flesh is more necessary for
your sake.
25 And being persuaded of this, I know that I shall
stay and continue with you all, for your progress and
joy of belief,
13

2698

PHILIPPIANS

so that your boasting might overflow in [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ on account of me, through my coming to
you again.
27 Only, behave yourselves worthily of the Good
News of Mashiaḥ, in order that whether I come and
see you or am absent, I hear about you, that you
stand fast in one spirit, with one being, striving
together for the belief of the Good News,
28 without being frightened in any way by those who
oppose, which to them truly is a proof of destruction,
but to you of deliverance, and that from HWHY.
29 Because to you it has been given as a favour, on
behalf of Mashiaḥ, not only to believe in Him, but also
to suffer for His sake,
30 having the same struggle which you saw in me,
and now hear to be in me.
26

2 If, then, there is any encouragement in Mashiaḥ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of Ruaḥ, if any
affection and compassion,
2 make my joy complete by being of the same mind,
having the same love, one in being and of purpose,
3 doing naught through selfishness or self-conceit,
but in humility consider others better than yourselves.
4 Each one should look out not only for his own
interests, but also for the interests of others.
5 For, let this mind be in you which was also in
Mashiaḥ [VWHY,
6 who, being in the form of Elohim, did not regard
equality with Elohim a matter to be grasped,
7 but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant,
and came to be in the likeness of men.
8 And having been found in fashion as a man, He
humbled Himself and became obedient unto death,
death even of a stake.
2699

PILIPIYIM

HWHY, therefore, has highly exalted Him and given
Him the Name which is above every name,
10 that at the Name of [VWHY every knee should bow,
of those in the shamayim, and of those on earth, and
of those under the earth,
11 and every tongue should confess that [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ is Aḏon, to the esteem of HWHY the
Father.
12 So that, my beloved, as you always obeyed - not
only in my presence, but now much rather in my
absence - work out your own deliverance with fear
and trembling,
13 for it is Elohim who is working in you both to desire
and to work for well-pleasing.
14 Do all without grumblings and disputings,
15 in order that you be blameless and faultless,
children of Elohim without blemish in the midst of a
crooked and corrupt generation, among whom you
shine as lights in the world,
16 holding on to the Word of ḥai, for a boast to me in
the day of Mashiaḥ, that I have not run in vain or
laboured in vain.
17 In fact, even if I am being poured out as a drink
offering on the offering and service of your belief, I am
glad and rejoice with you all.
18 So you too should be glad and rejoice with me.
19 But I trust in the Aḏon [VWHY to send Timotiyos to
you shortly, so that I too am encouraged by news
from you.
20 For I have no one of the same mind, who takes a
genuine interest in your welfare.
21 For all seek their own, not those of Mashiaḥ
[VWHY.
22 But you know he has proven himself, that as a son
with his father he served with me for the Good News.
9

2700

PHILIPPIANS

So I expect to send him as soon as I see how it
goes with me,
24 and I trust in the Aḏon that I myself shall also come
shortly.
25 But I thought it necessary to send to you
Epaphroditos, my brother, fellow worker, and fellow
soldier, and your emissary and servant to my need,
26 since he was longing for you all, and being
troubled because you had heard that he was sick.
27 For indeed he was sick, near to death, but Elohim
had compassion on him, and not only on him but on
me as well, lest I should have sadness upon sadness.
28 Therefore I sent him more eagerly, so that on
seeing him again you might rejoice, and I be less sad.
29 Receive him therefore in the Aḏon with all joy, and
hold such as he in esteem,
30 because for the work of Mashiaḥ he was near
death, risking his life, to fill up what was lacking in
your service toward me.
23

3 For the rest, my brothers, rejoice in HWHY. To write
the same to you is truly no trouble to me, and for you
it is safe.
2 Look out for dogs, look out for the evil workers,
look out for the mutilation!
3 For we are the circumcision, who are serving
Elohim in the Ruaḥ, and boasting in Mashiaḥ [VWHY,
and do not trust in the flesh,
4 though I too might have trust in the flesh. If anyone
else thinks to trust in the flesh, I more 5 circumcised the eighth day, of the race of Yisra’ĕl,
of the tribe of Binyamin, an Iḇri of Iḇrim, according to
Torah a Pharisee,

2701

PILIPIYIM

according to ardour, persecuting the assembly;
according to righteousness that is in the law, having
become blameless.
7 But what might have been a gain to me, I have
counted as loss, because of Mashiaḥ,
8 What is more, I even count all to be loss because
of the excellence of the knowledge of Mashiaḥ [VWHY
Aḏonai, for whom I have suffered the loss of all, and
count them as refuse, in order to gain Mashiaḥ,
9 and be found in Him, not having my own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through belief in Mashiaḥ, the righteousness which is
from Elohim on the basis of belief,
10 to know Him, and the power of His resurrection,
and the fellowship of His sufferings, being conformed
to His death,
11 if somehow I might attain to the resurrection out
from the dead.
12 Not that I have already received, or already been
perfected, but I press on, to lay hold of that for which
Mashiaḥ [VWHY has also laid hold of me.
13 Brothers, I do not count myself to have laid hold of
it yet, but only this: forgetting what is behind and
reaching out for what lies ahead,
14 I press on toward the goal for the prize of the high
calling of Elohim in Mashiaḥ [VWHY.
15 As many, then, as are perfect, should have this
mind. And if you think differently in any respect,
Elohim shall also reveal this to you.
16 But to what we have attained - walk by the same
rule, be of the same mind.
17 Become joint imitators of me, brothers, and regard
those who so walk, as you have us for a pattern.
6

2702

PHILIPPIANS

For many - of whom I have often told you, and now
say to you even weeping - walk as enemies of the
stake of Mashiaḥ.
19 Their end is destruction, their mighty one is their
stomach, and their esteem is in their shame - they
mind the earthly.
20 For our citizenship is in the shamayim, from which
we also eagerly wait for the Saviour, the Aḏon [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
21 who shall change our lowly body, to be conformed
to His esteemed body, according to the working by
which He is able even, to bring all under His control.
18

4 So then, my brothers, beloved and longed-for, my
joy and crown, stand firm in the Aḏon, beloved.
2 I appeal to Euodia and I appeal to Suntuḵĕ to be
of the same mind in the Aḏon.
3 And I also ask you, true companion, help these
women who laboured with me in the Good News, with
Klĕmĕs also, and the rest of my fellow workers,
whose names are in the Book of Ḥai.
4 Rejoice in HWHY always, again I say, rejoice!
5 Let your gentleness be known to all men. The
Aḏon is near.
6 Worry for naught, but in all, by prayer and petition,
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
to HWHY.
7 And the peace of HWHY, which surpasses all
understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds
through Mashiaḥ [VWHY.
8 For the rest, brothers, whatever is true, whatever
is noble, whatever is righteous, whatever is clean,
whatever is lovely, whatever is of good report, if there
is any uprightness and if there is any praise - think on
these.
2703

PILIPIYIM

And what you have learned and received and
heard and saw in me, practise these, and the Elohim
of peace shall be with you.
10 And I rejoiced in HWHY greatly that now at last your
concern for me has revived again - though you were
concerned, but had no chance.
11 Not that I speak concerning need, for I have
learned to be content in whatever state I am.
12 I know what it is to be humbled, and I know what it
is to have in excess. In any and all, have learned both
to be filled, and to be hungry, both to have in excess,
and to be in need.
13 I have strength to do all, through Mashiaḥ who
empowers me.
14 Yet you did well in sharing in my pressure.
15 And you know too, Pilipiyim, that in the beginning
of the Good News, when I went out from Makedonia,
no assembly shared with me concerning giving and
receiving, except you only,
16 because, even in Thessalonikĕ you sent to my
need, once and twice.
17 Not that I seek the gift, but I seek the fruit that is
multiplying to your account.
18 Indeed I have all and more than enough. I have
been filled, having received from Epaphroditos what
you sent, a sweet-smelling fragrance, an acceptable
offering, well-pleasing to Elohim.
19 And my Elohim shall fill all your need according to
His riches in esteem by Mashiaḥ [VWHY.
20 And to our Elohim and Father be esteem forever
and ever. Amĕn.
21 Greet every qodeshi in Mashiaḥ [VWHY. The
brothers with me greet you.
22 All the qodeshim greet you, but most of all those
of Kaisar’s household.
9

2704

PHILIPPIANS

The favour of our Aḏon [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
you all. Amĕn.

23

2705

1 TIMOTHY

TIMOTIYOS 1
‫טימותי א‬A YtWmYj

1 Sha’ul, an emissary of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
according to a command of Elohim our Saviour, and of
the Aḏon [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, our expectation,
2 to Timotiyos, a genuine child in the belief: Favour,
compassion, peace from HWHY our Father and [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ our Aḏon.
3 As I appealed to you when I went into Makedonia,
to remain in Ephesos, in order to command some not
to teach differently,
4 nor to pay attention to fables and endless
genealogies, which cause disputes rather than an
administration of Elohim which is in belief.
5 Now the goal of this command is love from a clean
heart, from a good conscience and a sincere belief,
6 which some, having missed, turned aside to
senseless talk,
7 wanting to be teachers of Torah, understanding
neither what they say nor concerning what they
strongly affirm.
8 And we know that the Torah is good if one uses it
legitimately,
9 knowing this: that Torah is not laid down for a
righteous being, but for the lawless and unruly, for the
wicked and for sinners, for the wrong-doers and
profane, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for
murderers,
10 for those who whore, for sodomites, for
kidnappers, for liars, for perjurers, and for whatever
else that is contrary to sound teaching,
11 according to the esteemed Good News of the
baruḵ Elohim which was entrusted to me.
2706

TIMOTIYOS 1

And I thank Mashiaḥ [VWHY our Aḏon who
empowered me, because He counted me trustworthy,
putting me into service,
13 me, although I was formerly a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and an insulter. But compassion was
shown me because being ignorant I did it in unbelief.
14 And the favour of our Aḏon was exceedingly
increased, with belief and love which are in Mashiaḥ
[VWHY.
15 Trustworthy is the word and worthy of all
acceptance, that Mashiaḥ [VWHY came into the world
to save sinners, of whom I am foremost.
16 But because of this I received compassion, so that
in me first, [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ might display all
patience, as an example to those who are going to
believe on Him for everlasting ḥai.
17 Now to the Sovereign of the ages, incorruptible,
invisible, to Elohim who alone is wise, be respect and
esteem forever and ever. Amĕn.
18 This charge I entrust to you, son Timotiyos,
according to the neḇuoth previously made concerning
you, that by them you might wage the good
campaign,
19 having belief and a good conscience, which some
have thrust aside and suffered shipwreck concerning
their belief.
20 Among these are Humenaios and Alexandros,
whom I delivered to Satan, in order to be taught not
to blaspheme.
12

2 First of all, then, I urge that petitions, prayers,
intercessions, and thanksgiving be made for all men,
2 for sovereigns and all those who are in authority,
in order that we lead a calm and peaceable life in all
reverence and seriousness.
2707

1 TIMOTHY

For this is good and acceptable before Elohim our
Saviour,
4 who desires all men to be saved and to come to
the knowledge of the truth.
5 For there is one Elohim, and one Mediator
between Elohim and men, the Man Mashiaḥ [VWHY,
6 who gave Himself a ransom for all, to be witnessed
in its own seasons,
7 for which I was appointed a proclaimer and an
emissary - I am speaking the truth in Mashiaḥ and not
lying - a teacher of the gentiles in belief and truth.
8 So I resolve that the men pray everywhere, lifting
up hands that are qodesh, without wrath and
disputing.
9 Likewise, that the women dress themselves
becomingly, with decency and sensibleness, not with
braided hair or gold or pearls or costly garments,
10 but with good works, which is becoming for women
undertaking worship of Elohim.
11 Let a woman learn in silence, in all subjection.
12 But I do not permit a woman to teach or to have
authority over a man, rather, to be in silence.
13 Because Aḏam was formed first, then Ḥawwah.
14 And Aḏam was not deceived, but the woman,
having been deceived, fell into transgression.
15 But she shall be saved in childbearing if they
continue in belief, and love, and qadosh, with
sensibleness.
3

3 Trustworthy is the word: If a man longs for the
position of an overseer, he desires a good work.
2 An overseer, then, should be blameless, the
husband of one wife, sober, sensible, orderly, kind to
strangers, able to teach,
2708

TIMOTIYOS 1

not given to wine, no brawler, but gentle, not
quarrelsome, not covetous,
4 one who rules his own house well, having his
children in subjection with all reverence,
5 for if a man does not know how to rule his own
house, how shall he look after the assembly of
Elohim?
6 Not a new convert, lest he become puffed up with
pride and fall into the judgment of the devil.
7 And he should even have a good witness from
those who are outside, lest he fall into reproach and
the snare of the devil.
8 Likewise attendants are to be reverent, not
double-tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy
for filthy gain,
9 holding to the secret of the belief with a clean
conscience.
10 And let these also be proved first, then let them
serve, if they are unreprovable.
11 Wives in the same way: reverent, not false
accusers, sober, trustworthy in every way.
12 Let attendants be the husbands of one wife, ruling
children and their own houses well.
13 For those who have served well as attendants gain
good standing for themselves, and much boldness in
the belief that is in Mashiaḥ [VWHY.
14 I am writing you this, expecting to come to you
shortly,
15 but if I delay, that you might know how you should
behave in the House of Elohim, which is the assembly
of the living Elohim - a support and foundation of the
truth.
16 And, beyond all question, the secret of reverence
is great - who was revealed in the flesh, declared right
in Ruaḥ, was seen by messengers, was proclaimed
3

2709

1 TIMOTHY

among nations, was believed on in the world, was
taken up in esteem.

4 But the Ruaḥ distinctly says that in latter times
some shall fall away from the belief, paying attention
to misleading spirits, and teachings of demons,
2 speaking lies in hypocrisy, having been branded
on their own conscience,
3 forbidding to marry, to abstain from foods which
Elohim created to be received with thanksgiving by
those who believe and know the truth.
4 Because every creature of Elohim is good, and
none is to be rejected if it is received with
thanksgiving,
5 for it is qadosh by the Word of HWHY and prayer.
6 If you present these to the brothers, you shall be a
good servant of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, being nourished
in the words of belief and of the good teaching which
you have followed closely.
7 But refuse profane and old wives’ fables, and
exercise yourself rather to reverence.
8 For bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but
reverence is profitable for all, having promise of the
present life, and of that which is to come.
9 Trustworthy is the word, and worthy of all
acceptance.
10 It is for this that we labour and struggle, because
we trust in the living Elohim, who is the Saviour of all
men, particularly of those who believe.
11 Command and teach these.
12 Let no one look down on your youth, but be an
example to the believers in word, in behaviour, in
love, in spirit, in belief, in cleanliness.
13 Until I come, give attention to reading, to
encouragement, to teaching.
2710

TIMOTIYOS 1

Do not neglect the gift that is in you, which was
given to you by neḇuah with the laying on of the hands
of the elderhood.
15 Practise these, be in them, so that your progress
might be plain to all.
16 Pay attention to yourself and to the teaching.
Continue in them, for in doing this you shall save both
yourself and those who hear you.
14

5 Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as
a father, younger ones as brothers,
2 elderly women as mothers, younger ones as
sisters, in all cleanliness.
3 Respect widows who are truly widows.
4 But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let
them first learn to treat their own house reverently,
and to repay their parents. For this is good and
acceptable before Elohim.
5 And she who is truly a widow, and left alone, trusts
in Elohim and continues in petitions and prayers night
and day.
6 But she who is living in luxury is dead while she
lives.
7 And command these, in order for them to be
blameless.
8 And if anyone does not provide for his own, and
especially for those of his household, he has denied
the belief and is worse than an unbeliever.
9 Do not enrol a widow unless she is over sixty years
of age, having been the wife of one man,
10 well reported for good works, if she has brought up
children, if she has lodged strangers, if she has
washed the feet of the qodeshim, if she has assisted
the afflicted, if she has closely followed every good
work.
2711

1 TIMOTHY

But refuse the younger widows, for when they
become headstrong against ha’Mashiaḥ, they desire
to marry,
12 having guilt because they put aside their first
belief.
13 Moreover, they learn to be idle, going about from
house to house, and not only idle but also gossips
and busybodies, speaking what is improper.
14 So I resolve that the younger widows marry, bear
children, manage the house, giving no occasion to the
adversary for reviling.
15 For already some have turned aside after Satan.
16 If any believing man or woman has widows, let
such assist them, and do not let the assembly be
burdened, in order to assist those who are truly
widows.
17 Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of
double respect, especially those who labour in the
Word and teaching.
18 For the Scripture says, “You shall not muzzle an
ox while it treads out the grain,” and, “The labourer is
worthy of his wages.”
19 Do not receive an accusation against an elder
except from two or three witnesses.
20 Reprove those who are sinning, in the presence of
all, so that the rest also might fear.
21 I earnestly witness before HWHY and the Aḏon
[VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, and the chosen messengers, that
you watch over these without prejudice, doing naught
with partiality.
22 Do not lay hands on anyone hastily, nor share in
sins of others. Keep yourself clean.
23 No longer drink only water, but use a little wine for
your stomach’s sake and your frequent ailments.
11

2712

TIMOTIYOS 1

The sins of some men are obvious, leading on to
judgment, but those of some men follow later.
25 In the same way, the good works are obvious,
while it is impossible to conceal those that are
otherwise.
24

6 Let those who are servants under a yoke regard
their own masters worthy of all respect, lest the Name
of HWHY and His teaching be blasphemed.
2 And those who have believing masters, let them
not disregard them because they are brothers, but
rather serve them because they are believing and
beloved ones, those receiving of the good service in
return. Teach and urge these.
3 If anyone teaches differently and does not agree
to the sound words, those of our Aḏon [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, and to the teaching which is according to
reverence,
4 he is puffed up, understanding naught, but is sick
about questionings and verbal battles from which
come envy, strife, slander, wicked suspicions,
5 worthless disputes of men of corrupt minds and
deprived of the truth, who think that reverence is a
means of gain - withdraw from such.
6 But reverence with contentment is great gain.
7 For we brought naught into the world, and it is
impossible to take any out.
8 When we have food and covering, we shall be
satisfied with these.
9 But those wanting to be rich fall into trial and a
snare, and into many foolish and injurious lusts which
plunge men in ruin and destruction.
10 For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil,
for which some, by longing for it, have strayed from
2713

1 TIMOTHY

the belief, and pierced themselves through with many
pains.
11 But you, O man of Elohim, flee from all this, and
pursue righteousness, reverence, belief, love,
endurance, meekness.
12 Fight the good fight of the belief, lay hold on
everlasting ḥai, to which you were also called and
have confessed the good confession before many
witnesses.
13 In the sight of HWHY who gives ḥai to all, and of
Mashiaḥ [VWHY who witnessed the good confession
before Pontius Pilatus, I charge you:
14 that
you guard the Command spotlessly,
blamelessly, until the appearing of our Aḏon [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
15 which in His own seasons He shall reveal - the
baruḵ and only Ruler, the Sovereign of sovereigns
and Aḏon of masters,
16 who
alone has immortality, dwelling in
unapproachable light, whom no one has seen or is
able to see, to whom be respect and everlasting
might. Amĕn.
17 Charge those who are rich in this present age not
to be high-minded, nor to trust in the uncertainty of
riches, but in the living Elohim, who gives us richly all
for enjoyment,
18 to do good, to be rich in good works, to be
generous, ready to share,
19 storing up for themselves a good foundation for
the time to come, so that they lay hold on everlasting
ḥai.
20 O Timotiyos! Watch over that which has been
entrusted to you, turning aside from the profane and
empty babblings and contradictions of the falsely
called ‘knowledge,’
2714

TIMOTIYOS 1

which some, having professed it, have missed
concerning the belief. Favour be with you. Amĕn.

21

2715

TITUS

TITOS
‫ טיטוס‬sWjYj

1 Sha’ul, a servant of HWHY and an emissary of {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, according to the belief of Elohim’s chosen
ones and knowledge of the truth according to
reverence,
2 in expectation of everlasting ḥai which HWHY, who
does not lie, promised before times of old,
3 but in its own times has manifested His Word
through preaching, with which I was entrusted
according to the command of HWHY our Saviour,
4 to Titos, a genuine child according to our common
belief: Favour, compassion, peace from HWHY the
Father and the Aḏon {fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ our Saviour.
5 The reason I left you in Krĕtĕ was that you should
straighten out what was left undone, and appoint
elders in every city as I commanded you:
6 if anyone is unreprovable, the husband of one
wife, having believing children not accused of loose
behaviour, or unruly.
7 For an overseer has to be unreprovable, as a
managing one of Elohim, not self-pleasing, not wroth,
not given to wine, no brawler, not greedy for filthy
gain,
8 but kind to strangers, a lover of what is good,
sensible, righteous, qodesh, self-controlled,
9 clinging to the trustworthy Word, according to the
teaching, in order to be able both to encourage by
sound teaching, and to reprove those who oppose it.
10 For there are many unruly men, senseless talkers
and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,

2716

TITOS

whose mouths have to be stopped, who upset
entire households, teaching what they should not, for
the sake of filthy gain.
12 One of them, a prophet of their own, said,
“Krĕtĕans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”
13 This witness is true. Therefore rebuke them
sharply, in order for them to be sound in the belief,
14 not paying attention to Yahuḏi fables, and
commands of men who turn from the truth.
15 Indeed, all are clean to the clean, but to those who
are defiled and unbelieving none is clean, but both
their mind and conscience are defiled.
16 They profess to know Elohim, but in works they
deny Him, being abominable, and disobedient, and
unfit for any good work.
11

2 But you, speak what is fitting for sound teaching:
the older men are to be sober, serious, sensible,
sound in belief, in love, in endurance,
3 the older women likewise are to be qodesh in
behaviour, not slanderers, not given to much wine,
teachers of what is good,
4 in order for them to train the young women to love
their husbands, to love their children,
5 to be sensible, blameless, workers at home, good,
subject to their own husbands, in order that the Word
of HWHY is not evil spoken of.
6 Likewise urge the young men to be sensible.
7 Show yourself an example of good works in all. In
teaching - uncorruptness, seriousness,
8 soundness of speech beyond reproach, in order
that the opponent is put to shame, having no evil to
say about you.
9 Servants should be subject to their own masters,
to be well-pleasing in every way, not back-talking,
2

2717

TITUS

not stealing, but showing all good trustworthiness,
so that they adorn the teaching of HWHY our Saviour
in every way.
11 For the saving Gift of HWHY has appeared to all
men,
12 instructing us to renounce wickedness and worldly
lusts, and to live sensibly, righteously, and reverently
in the present age,
13 looking for the baruḵ expectation and esteemed
appearance of the great Elohim and our Saviour
{fWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
14 who gave Himself for us, to redeem us from all
lawlessness and to cleanse for Himself a people, a
possession, ardent for good works.
15 Speak these, urge, and reprove with all authority.
Let no one despise you.
10

3 Remind them to be subject to rulers and authorities,
to obey, to be ready for every good work,
2 not to slander anyone, not to be quarrelsome, to
be gentle, showing all meekness to all men.
3 For we ourselves were also once foolish,
disobedient, led astray, serving various lusts and
pleasures, living in evil and envy, being hated and
hating one another.
4 But when the kindness and the love of HWHY our
Saviour toward man appeared,
5 He saved us, not by works of righteousness which
we have done but according to His compassion,
through the washing of rebirth, and renewal by the
Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh,
6 which He poured out on us richly through {fWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ our Saviour,

2718

TITOS

that having been declared right by His favour we
should become heirs according to the expectation of
everlasting ḥai.
8 Trustworthy is the word, and in this regard I want
you to strongly affirm, that those who have believed
in Elohim should keep their minds on maintaining
good works. This is good and profitable to men.
9 But keep away from foolish questions, and
genealogies, and strife and quarrels about the Torah,
for they are unprofitable and useless.
10 Reject a divisive man after the first and second
warning,
11 knowing that such a one has been corrupted, and
sins, being self-condemned.
12 When I shall send Artemas to you, or Tuḵikos, do
your best to come to me at Nikopolis, for I have
decided to spend the winter there.
13 Do your best to send Zĕnas the Lawyer and
Apollos on their journey, so that they lack naught.
14 And ours should also learn to maintain good
works, to meet urgent needs, so that they shall not be
without fruit.
15 All those with me greet you. Greet those who love
us in the belief. Favour be with you all. Amĕn.
7

2719

2 TIMOTHY

TIMOTIYOS 2
‫ טימותי ב‬B YtWmYj

1 Sha’ul, an emissary of [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ by the
desire of Elohim, according to the promise of ḥai which
is in Mashiaḥ [vWHY,
2 to
Timotiyos, my beloved son: Favour,
compassion, peace from HWHY the Father, and
Mashiaḥ [vWHY our Aḏon.
3 I thank Elohim, whom I serve with a clear
conscience, as my forefathers did, as I unceasingly
remember you in my prayers night and day,
4 longing to see you, as I remember your tears, so
that I might be filled with joy.
5 For I recollect the sincere belief which is in you,
which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and your
mother Eunikĕ, and I am persuaded is in you too.
6 For this reason I remind you to stir up the gift of
Elohim which is in you through the laying on of my
hands.
7 For Elohim has not given us a spirit of cowardice,
but of power and of love and of self-control.
8 So do not be ashamed of the witness of our Aḏon,
nor of me His prisoner, but suffer hardship with me for
the Good News according to the power of Elohim,
9 who has saved us and called us with a qodesh
calling, not according to our works, but according to
His own purpose and favour which was given to us in
Mashiaḥ [vWHY before times of old,
10 but now revealed by the appearing of our Saviour
[vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, who indeed abolished death and
brought ḥai and incorruptibility to light through the
Good News,
2720

TIMOTIYOS 2

for which I was appointed a proclaimer, and an
emissary, and a teacher of the gentiles.
12 For this reason I also suffer these, but I am not
ashamed, for I know whom I have believed and am
persuaded that He is able to watch over that which I
have entrusted to Him until that Day.
13 Hold the pattern of sound words which you have
heard from me, in belief and love which are in
Mashiaḥ [vWHY.
14 Watch over the good deposit that was entrusted to
you, by the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh dwelling in us.
15 You know this, that all those in Asia have turned
away from me, among whom are Phugellos and
Hermogenĕs.
16 The Aḏon grant compassion unto the household
of Onĕsiphoros, for he often refreshed me, and was
not ashamed of my chain,
17 but when he was in Rome, he eagerly searched
for me and found me.
18 The Aḏon grant to him to find compassion from the
Aḏon in that Day. And you know very well how many
ways he attended to me at Ephesos.
11

2 You then, my son, be strong in the favour that is
in Mashiaḥ [vWHY.
2 And what you have heard from me among many
witnesses, entrust these to trustworthy men who shall
be competent to teach others as well.
3 Suffer hardship as a good soldier of [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
4 No one serving as a soldier gets involved in the
affairs of this life, in order to please him who enlisted
him as a soldier.
5 And if anyone competes in a game, he is not
crowned unless he competes according to the rules.
2721

2 TIMOTHY

The hard-working farmer ought to be first to
receive his share of the crops.
7 Think over what I say, for the Aḏon shall give you
understanding into all this.
8 Remember that [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, of the seed of
Dawiḏ, was raised from the dead according to my
Good News,
9 for which I suffer hardship, as a criminal, unto
chains, but the Word of HWHY is not chained.
10 So I endure through it all for the sake of the
chosen, so that they too obtain deliverance which is
in Mashiaḥ [vWHY with everlasting esteem.
11 Trustworthy is the word: For if we died with Him,
we shall also live with Him.
12 If we endure, we shall also reign with Him. If we
deny, He also shall deny us.
13 If we are not trustworthy, He remains trustworthy,
it is impossible for Him to deny Himself.
14 Remind them of this, earnestly witnessing before
the Aḏon, not to wage verbal battles - which is
useless - to the overthrowing of the hearers.
15 Do your utmost to present yourself approved to
Elohim, a worker who does not need to be ashamed,
rightly handling the Word of Truth.
16 But keep away from profane, empty babblings, for
they go on to more wickedness,
17 and their word shall eat its way like gangrene.
Humenaios and Philĕtos are of this sort,
18 who have missed concerning the truth, saying that
the resurrection has already taken place, and
overthrow the belief of some.
19 However, the solid foundation of Elohim stands
firm, having this seal, “HWHY knows those who are
His,” and, “Let everyone who names the Name of
Mashiaḥ turn away from unrighteousness.”
6

2722

TIMOTIYOS 2

But in a large house there are not only vessels of
gold and silver, but also of wood and clay, some unto
value and some unto no value.
21 If, then, anyone cleanses himself from these, he
shall be a vessel unto value, having been qodesh, of
good use to the Aḏon, having been prepared for every
good work.
22 And flee from the lusts of youth, but pursue
righteousness, belief, love, peace with those calling
on the Aḏon out of a clean heart.
23 But refuse foolish and stupid questions, knowing
that they breed quarrels.
24 And a servant of the Aḏon should not quarrel but
be gentle towards all, able to teach, patient when
wronged,
25 in meekness instructing those who are in
opposition, lest somehow Elohim gives them
repentance unto a thorough knowledge of the truth,
26 and they come to their senses, out of the snare of
the devil, having been taken captive by him to do his
desire.
20

3 But know this, that in the last days hard times shall
come.
2 For men shall be lovers of self, lovers of money,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, thankless, wrong-doers,
3 unloving, unforgiving, slanderers, without selfcontrol, fierce, haters of good,
4 betrayers, reckless, puffed up, lovers of pleasure
rather than lovers of Elohim,
5 having a form of reverence but denying its power.
And turn away from these!

2723

2 TIMOTHY

For among them are those who creep into
households and captivate silly women loaded down
with sins, led away by various lusts,
7 always learning and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth.
8 And as Yoḥane and Mamrĕ opposed Mosheh, so
do these also oppose the truth - men of corrupt minds,
found worthless concerning the belief;
9 but they shall not go on further, for their folly shall
be obvious to all, as also that of those men became.
10 But you closely followed my teaching, the Way of
ḥai, the purpose, the belief, the patience, the love, the
endurance,
11 the persecutions, the sufferings, which came to
me at Antioḵeia, at Ikonion, at Lustra - what
persecutions I bore. Yet out of them all the Aḏon
delivered me.
12 And indeed, all those wanting to live reverently in
Mashiaḥ [vWHY, shall be persecuted.
13 But evil men and impostors shall go on to the
worse, leading astray and being led astray.
14 But you, stay in what you have learned and
trusted, having known from whom you have learned,
15 and that from a child you have known the Qodesh
Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for
deliverance through belief in Mashiaḥ [vWHY.
16 All Scripture is breathed by Elohim and profitable
for teaching, for reproof, for straightening, for
instruction in righteousness,
17 that the man of Elohim might be fitted, equipped
for every good work.
6

4 In the sight of HWHY and the Aḏon [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, who shall judge the living and the dead
2724

TIMOTIYOS 2

at His appearing and His reign, I earnestly charge
you:
2
Proclaim the Word! Be urgent in season, out of
season. Reprove, warn, appeal, with all patience and
teaching.
3
For there shall be a time when they shall not bear
sound teaching, but according to their own desires,
they shall heap up for themselves teachers tickling
the ear,
4
and they shall indeed turn their ears away from the
truth, and be turned aside to myths.
5
But you be sober in all, suffer hardships, do the
work of an evangelist, accomplish your service
completely.
6
For I am already being poured out, and the time of
my departure has arrived.
7
I have fought the good fight, I have finished the
race, I have guarded the belief.
8
For the rest, there is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Aḏon, the righteous Judge,
shall give to me on that Day, and not to me only but
also to all those loving His appearing.
9
Do your best to come to me soon,
10 for Dĕmas, having loved this present world, has
deserted me and went to Thessalonikĕ, Krĕskĕs to
Galatia, Titos to Dalmatia.
11 Lukas alone is with me. Take Markos and bring
him with you, for he is of good use to me for service.
12 And Tuḵikos I have sent to Ephesos.
13 Bring the cloak that I left with Karpos at Troas
when you come, and the books, especially the
parchments.
14 Alexandros the coppersmith did many evils to me.
The Aḏon shall repay him according to his works.
2725

2 TIMOTHY

You, too, beware of him, for he strongly opposed
our words.
16 At my first defence no one stood with me, but all
forsook me. Let it not be held against them.
17 But the Aḏon stood with me and strengthened me,
so that through me the preaching might be completely
accomplished, and that all the gentiles should hear.
And I was rescued out of the lion’s mouth.
18 And the Aḏon shall rescue me from every wicked
work and save me for His reign of the shamayim. To
Him be esteem forever and ever. Amĕn!
19 Greet Priska and Aqulas, and the house of
Onĕsiphoros.
20 Ĕrastos stayed in Qorinth, but I left Trophimos sick
in Milĕtos.
21 Do your best to come before winter. Eubulos
greets you, and Pudĕs, and Linos, and Klaudia, and
all the brothers.
22 The Aḏon [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with your spirit.
Favour be with you. Amĕn.
15

2726

HEBREWS

IḆRIM
‫ עברים‬mYRB[

1 HWHY, having of old spoken in many portions and
many ways to the fathers by the neḇi’im,
2 has in these last days spoken to us by the Bĕn,
whom He has appointed heir of all, through whom
also He made the ages,
3 who being the brightness of the esteem and the
exact representation of His substance, and sustaining
all by the Word of His power, having made a
cleansing of our sins through Himself, sat down at the
right hand of the Greatness on high,
4 having become so much better than the
messengers, as He has inherited a more excellent
Name than them.
5 For to which of the messengers did He ever say,
“You are My Bĕn, today I have brought You forth”?
And again, “I shall be to Him a Father, and He shall
be to Me a Bĕn”?
6 And when He again brings the First-Born into the
world, He says, “Let all the messengers of HWHY do
reverence to Him.”
7
And of the messengers indeed He says, “...who is
making His messengers spirits and His servants a
flame of fire.”
8 But to the Bĕn, “Your throne, O Elohim, is forever
and ever, a sceptre of straightness is the sceptre of
Your reign.
9 “You have loved righteousness and hated
lawlessness. Because of this, HWHY, Your Elohim,
has anointed You with the oil of gladness more than
Your companions.”
2727

IḆRIM

And, “You, Aḏonai, founded the earth in the
beginning, and the shamayim are the work of Your
hands.
11 “They shall perish, but You remain. And they shall
all grow old like a garment,
12 and like a mantle You shall fold them up, and they
shall be changed. But You are the same, and Your
years shall not fail.”
13 And to which of the messengers did He ever say,
“Sit at My right hand, until I make Your enemies a
footstool for Your feet”?
14 Are they not all serving spirits sent out to attend
those who are about to inherit deliverance?
10

2 Because of this we have to pay more attention to
what we have heard, lest we drift away.
2 For if the word spoken through messengers
proved to be firm, and every transgression and
disobedience received a right reward,
3 how shall we escape if we neglect so great a
deliverance, which first began to be spoken by the
Aḏon, and was confirmed to us by those that heard,
4 Elohim also bearing witness both with signs and
wonders, with various miracles, and gifts of the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh, distributed according to His own desire?
5 For it is not to messengers that He has subjected
the world to come, concerning which we speak.
6 But somewhere one has witnessed, saying, “What
is man that You remember him, or the son of man that
You look after him?
7 “You have made him a little lower than the
messengers. You have crowned him with esteem and
respect, and put him over the works of Your hands.
8 “You have put all in subjection under his feet.” For
in that He put all in subjection under him, He left
2728

HEBREWS

naught that is not subjected to him. But now we do
not yet see all subjected to him.
9 But we do see Him who was made for a little while
lower than the messengers, [VWHY, because of the
suffering of death crowned with esteem and respect,
that by the favour of Elohim He should taste death for
everyone.
10 For it was fitting for Him, because of whom all are
and through whom all are, in bringing many sons to
esteem, to make the Princely Leader of their
deliverance perfect through sufferings.
11 For both He who makes qadosh and those who
are being made qadosh are all of One, for which
reason He is not ashamed to call them brothers,
12 saying, “I shall announce Your Name to My
brothers, in the midst of the congregation I shall sing
praise to You.”
13 And again, “I shall put My trust in Him.” And again,
“See, I and the children whom HWHY gave Me.”
14 Therefore, since the children share in flesh and
blood, He Himself similarly shared in the same, so
that by means of His death He might destroy him
having the power of death, that is, the devil,
15 and deliver those who throughout life were held in
slavery by fear of death.
16 For, doubtless, He does not take hold of
messengers, but He takes hold of the seed of
Aḇraham.
17 So in every way He had to be made like His
brothers, in order to become a compassionate and
trustworthy Kohĕn ha’Gadol in matters related to
HWHY, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
18 For in what He had suffered, Himself being tried,
He is able to help those who are tried.
2729

IḆRIM

3 Therefore, qodesh brothers, partakers of the calling
of the shamayim, closely consider the Emissary and
Kohĕn ha’Gadol of our confession, Mashiaḥ [VWHY,
2 who was trustworthy to Him who appointed Him,
as also Mosheh in all His House.
3 For this One has been deemed worthy of more
esteem than Mosheh, as much as He who built the
house enjoys more respect than the house.
4 For every house is built by someone, but He who
built all is Elohim.
5 And Mosheh indeed was trustworthy in all His
House as a servant, for a witness of what would be
spoken,
6 but Mashiaḥ as a Bĕn over His own House, whose
House we are if we hold fast the boldness and the
boasting of the expectation firm to the end.
7 Therefore, as the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh says, “Today,
if you hear His voice,
8 do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, in
the day of trial in the wilderness,
9 where your fathers tried Me, proved Me, and saw
My works forty years.
10 “Therefore I was loathed with that generation, and
said, ‘They always go astray in their heart, and they
have not known My Ways.’
11 “As I swore in My wrath, ‘If they shall enter into My
rest...’ ”
12 Look out, brothers, lest there be in any of you a
wicked heart of unbelief in falling away from the living
Elohim,
13 but encourage one another daily, while it is called
“Today,” lest any of you be hardened by the deceit of
sin.
2730

HEBREWS

For we have become partakers of Mashiaḥ if we
hold fast the beginning of our trust firm to the end,
15 while it is said, “Today, if you hear His voice, do
not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.”
16 For who, having heard, rebelled? Was it not all
who came out of Mitsrayim, led by Mosheh?
17 And with whom was He loathed forty years? Was
it not with those who sinned, whose corpses fell in the
wilderness?
18 And to whom did He swear that they would not
enter into His rest, but to those who did not obey?
19 So we see that they were unable to enter in
because of unbelief.
14

4 Therefore, since a promise remains of entering into
His rest, let us fear lest any of you seem to have come
short of it.
2 For indeed the Good News was brought to us as
well as to them, but the Word which they heard did
not profit them, not having been mixed with belief in
those who heard it.
3 For we who have believed do enter into that rest,
as He has said, “As I swore in My wrath, if they shall
enter into My rest...” And yet His works have come
into being from the foundation of the world.
4 For somewhere He has said thus about the
seventh day, “And Elohim rested on the seventh day
from all His works,”
5 and in this again, “If they shall enter into My rest...”
6 Since then it remains for some to enter into it, and
those who formerly received the Good News did not
enter in because of disobedience,
7 He again defines a certain day, “Today,” saying
through Dawiḏ so much later, as it has been said,
2731

IḆRIM

“Today, if you hear His voice, do not harden your
hearts.”
8 For if Yahoshua established them in rest, he would
not have spoken of another day after that.
9 So there remains a Shabbath-keeping for the
people of Elohim.
10 For the one, having entered into His rest, has
himself also rested from his works, as Elohim from
His own.
11 Let us therefore do our utmost to enter into that
rest, lest anyone fall after the same example of
disobedience.
12 For the Word of HWHY is living, and working, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, cutting through
even to the dividing of being and spirit, and of joints
and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts and
intentions of the heart.
13 And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but
all are naked and laid bare before the eyes of Him
with whom is our account.
14 Therefore, since we have a great Kohĕn ha’Gadol
who has passed through the shamayim, [VWHY the
Bĕn of HWHY, let us hold fast our confession.
15 For we do not have a Kohĕn ha’Gadol unable to
sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who was
tried in all respects as we are, apart from sin.
16 Therefore, let us come boldly to the throne of
favour, in order to receive compassion, and find
favour for timely help.

5 For every kohĕn taken from among men is
appointed on behalf of men in matters relating to
HWHY, to offer both gifts and offerings for sins,

2732

HEBREWS

being able to have a measure of feeling for those
not knowing and being led astray, since he himself is
also surrounded by weakness.
3 And on account of this he has to offer for sins - as
for the people, so also for himself.
4 And no one obtains this esteem for himself, but he
who is called by HWHY, even as Aharon also was.
5 So also ha’Mashiaḥ did not extol Himself to
become Kohĕn ha’Gadol, but it was He who said to
Him, “You are My Bĕn, today I have brought You
forth.”
6 As He also says in another place, “You are a
Kohĕn forever according to the order of Malkitseḏeq,”
7 who, in the days of His flesh, when He had offered
up prayers and petitions with strong crying and tears
to Him who was able to save Him from death, and
was heard because of His reverence,
8 though being a Bĕn, He learned obedience by
what He suffered.
9 And having been perfected, He became the
Causer of everlasting deliverance to all those obeying
Him,
10 having been designated by HWHY a Kohĕn
ha’Gadol “according to the order of Malkitseḏeq,”
11 concerning whom we have much to say, and hard
to explain, since you have become dull of hearing.
12 For indeed, although by this time you ought to be
teachers, you need someone to teach you again the
first elements of the Words of HWHY. And you have
become such as need milk and not solid food.
13 For everyone partaking of milk is inexperienced in
the Word of righteousness, for he is a child.
14 But solid food is for the mature whose senses
have been trained by practice to discern both good
and evil.
2

2733

IḆRIM

6 Therefore, having left the Word of the beginning of
ha’Mashiaḥ, let us go on to perfection, not laying again
the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of
belief toward Elohim,
2 of the teaching of immersions, and of laying on of
hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of
everlasting judgment.
3 And this we shall do, if Elohim indeed permits.
4 For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted the gift of the
shamayim, and have become partakers of the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh,
5 and have tasted the good Word of HWHY and the
powers of the age to come,
6 and fall away, to renew them again to repentance
- having impaled for themselves the Bĕn of HWHY
again, and put Him to open shame.
7 For ground that is drinking the rain often falling on
it, and is bearing plants fit for those by whom it is tilled,
receives beraḵah from Elohim,
8 but if it brings forth thorns and thistles, it is rejected
and near to being cursed, and ends up by being
burned.
9 But although we speak in this way, beloved, we
are persuaded, concerning you, of better matters
which possess deliverance.
10 For HWHY is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labour of love which you have shown toward His
Name, in that you have attended to the qodeshim,
and do attend.
11 And we desire that each one of you show the
same eagerness, to the entire confirmation of
expectation until the end,
2734

HEBREWS

in order that you do not become sluggish, but
imitate those who through belief and patience inherit
the promises.
13 For Elohim, having promised Aḇraham, since He
could swear by no one greater, swore by Himself,
14 saying, “Truly, beraḵah I shall baraḵ you, and
increasing I shall increase you.”
15 And so, after being patient, he obtained the
promise.
16 For men do indeed swear by the one greater, and
an oath for confirmation is for them an end of all
dispute.
17 In this way Elohim, resolving to show even more
clearly to the heirs of promise the unchangeableness
of His purpose, confirmed it by an oath,
18 so that by two unchangeable matters in which it is
impossible for Elohim to lie, we might have strong
encouragement, we who have fled for refuge to lay
hold of the expectation put before us,
19 which we have as an anchor of the ḥai, both safe
and firm, and entering into that within the veil,
20 where [VWHY has entered as a forerunner for us,
having become Kohĕn ha’Gadol forever according to
the order of Malkitseḏeq.
12

7 For this Malkitseḏeq, Sovereign of Shalĕm, Kohĕn
of the Most High Elohim, who met Aḇraham returning
from the slaughter of the sovereigns and baraḵ him,
2 to whom also Aḇraham gave a tenth part of all, first
of all translated as, ‘Sovereign of Righteousness,’ and
then also Sovereign of Shalĕm, that is, ‘Sovereign of
Peace,’
3 without father, without mother, without genealogy,
having neither beginning of days nor end of ḥai, but
2735

IḆRIM

having been made like the Bĕn of HWHY, remains a
Kohĕn for all time.
4 Now see how great this one was, to whom even
the ancestor Aḇraham gave a tenth of the choicest
booty.
5 And truly, those who are of the sons of Lĕwi, who
receive the kehunnah, have a command to receive
tithes from the people according to the Torah, that is,
from their brothers, though they have come from the
loins of Aḇraham,
6 however, the One whose genealogy is not derived
from them received tithes from Aḇraham, and baraḵ
the One who held the promises.
7 And it is beyond all dispute that the lesser is baruḵ
by the better.
8 And here it is men who die that receive tithes, but
there it is someone of whom it is witnessed that He
lives.
9 And one might say that through Aḇraham even
Lĕwi, who received tithes, gave tithes,
10 for he was still in the loins of his father when
Malkitseḏeq met him.
11 Truly, then, if perfection were through the Lĕwitical
kehunnah - for under it the people were given the
Torah - why was there still need for another Kohĕn to
arise according to the order of Malkitseḏeq, and not
be called according to the order of Aharon?
12 For the kehunnah being changed, of necessity
there also takes place a change of law.
13 For He of whom this is said belongs to another
tribe, from which no one had attended at the altar.
14 For it is perfectly clear that our Aḏon arose from
Yahuḏah, a tribe about which Mosheh never spoke of
concerning kehunnah,
2736

HEBREWS

and this is clearer still, if another Kohĕn arises in
the likeness of Malkitseḏeq,
16 who has become, not according to the law of
fleshly command, but according to the power of an
endless ḥai,
17 for He witnesses, “You are a Kohĕn forever
according to the order of Malkitseḏeq.”
18 For there is indeed a laying aside of the former
command because of its weakness and
unprofitableness,
19 for the Torah perfected naught, but the bringing in
of a better expectation, through which we draw near
to Elohim.
20 And it was not without an oath!
21 For they indeed became kohenim without an oath,
but He with an oath by Him who said to Him, “HWHY
has sworn and shall not regret, ‘You are a Kohĕn
forever according to the order of Malkitseḏeq.’ ”
22 By as much as this [VWHY has become a
guarantor of a better Covenant.
23 And indeed, those that became kohenim were
many, because they were prevented by death from
continuing,
24 but He, because He remains forever, has an
unchangeable Kehunnah.
25 Therefore He is also able to save completely those
who draw near to HWHY through Him, ever living to
make intercession for them.
26 For it was fitting that we should have such a Kohĕn
ha’Gadol - kind, innocent, undefiled, having been
separated from sinners, and exalted above the
shamayim,
27 who does not need, as those kohenim ha’gadolim,
to offer up slaughter offerings day by day, first for His
15

2737

IḆRIM

own sins and then for those of the people, for this He
did once for all when He offered up Himself.
28 For the Torah appoints as kohenim ha’gadolim,
men who have weakness, but the word of the oath
which came after the Torah - the Bĕn having been
perfected forever.

8 Now the summary of what we are saying is: We
have such a Kohĕn ha’Gadol, who is seated at the
right hand of the throne of the Greatness in the
shamayim,
2 and who serves in the Miqdash and of the true
Tent, which HWHY put up, and not man.
3 For every kohĕn ha’gadol is appointed to offer
both gifts and slaughterings. So it was also necessary
for this One to have somewhat to offer.
4 For if indeed He were on earth, He would not be a
kohĕn, since there are kohenim who offer the gifts
according to the Torah,
5 who serve a copy and shadow of the shamayim,
as Mosheh was warned when he was about to make
the Tent. For He said, “See that you make all
according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.”
6 But now He has obtained a more excellent service,
inasmuch as He is also Mediator of a better
Covenant, which was constituted on better promises.
7 For if that first had been faultless, then no place
would have been sought for a second.
8 For finding fault with them, He says, “See, the
days are coming,” says HWHY, “when I shall conclude
with the house of Yisra’ĕl and with the house of
Yahuḏah, a Renewed Covenant,
9 not according to the Covenant that I made with
their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand
to lead them out of the land of Mitsrayim, because
2738

HEBREWS

they did not continue in My Covenant, and I
disregarded them,” says HWHY.
10 “Because this is the Covenant that I shall make
with the house of Yisra’ĕl after those days, says
HWHY, giving My Laws in their mind, and I shall write
them on their hearts, and I shall be their Elohim, and
they shall be My people.
11 “And they shall by no means teach each one his
neighbour, and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know
HWHY,’ because they all shall know Me, from the least
of them to the greatest of them.
12 “Because I shall forgive their unrighteousness,
and their sins and their lawlessnesses I shall no
longer remember.”
13 By saying, ‘renewed,’ He has made the first old.
Now what becomes old and growing aged is near
disappearing.

9 Now the first indeed had regulations of worship
and the earthly Miqdash.
2 For a Tent was prepared: the first part, in which
was the lampstand, and the table, and the
showbread, which is called the Miqdash.
3 And after the second veil, the part of the Tent
which is called Most Qodesh,
4 to which belonged the golden censer, and the ark
of the Covenant overlaid on all sides with gold, in
which were the golden pot that held the manna, and
the rod of Aharon that budded, and the tablets of the
Covenant,
5 and above it the keruḇim of esteem were
overshadowing the place of atonement - about which
we do not now speak in detail.

2739

IḆRIM

And these having been prepared like this, the
kohenim always went into the first part of the Tent,
accomplishing the services.
7 But into the second part the kohĕn ha’gadol went
alone once a year, not without blood, which he offered
for himself and for sins of ignorance of the people,
8 the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh signifying this, that the way
into the Qodesh Miqdash was not yet made manifest
while the first Tent has a standing,
9 which was a parable for the present time in which
both gifts and slaughterings are offered which are
unable to perfect the one serving, as to his
conscience,
10 only as to foods and drinks, and different
washings, and fleshly regulations imposed until a time
of straightening out.
11 But Mashiaḥ, having become a Kohĕn ha’Gadol of
the coming good, through the greater and more
perfect Tent not made with hands, that is, not of this
creation,
12 entered into the Qodesh Miqdash once for all, not
with the blood of goats and calves, but with His own
blood, having obtained everlasting redemption.
13 For if the blood of bulls and goats and the ashes
of a heifer, sprinkling the defiled, makes qadosh for
the cleansing of the flesh,
14 how much more shall the blood of ha’Mashiaḥ,
who through the everlasting Ruaḥ offered Himself
unblemished to HWHY, cleanse your conscience from
dead works to serve the living Elohim?
15 And because of this He is the Mediator of a
Renewed Covenant, so that, death having taken
place for redemption of the transgressions under the
first Covenant, those who are called might receive the
promise of the everlasting inheritance.
6

2740

HEBREWS

For where a covenant is, it is necessary for the
death of the covenanted one to be established.
17 For a covenant over those dead is firm, since it is
never valid while the covenanted one is living.
18 Therefore not even the first was instituted without
blood.
19 For when, according to Torah, every Command
had been spoken by Mosheh to all the people, he took
the blood of the heifer, with water, and scarlet wool,
and hyssop, and sprinkled both the Book itself and all
the people,
20 saying, “This is the blood of the Covenant which
HWHY commanded you.”
21 And in the same way he sprinkled with blood both
the Tent and all the vessels of the service.
22 And, according to the Torah, almost all is cleansed
with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no
forgiveness.
23 It was necessary, then, that the copies of the ones
of the shamayim should be cleansed with these, but
the ones of the shamayim themselves with better
slaughter offerings than these.
24 For Mashiaḥ has not entered into a Miqdash made
by hand - figures of the true - but into the shamayim
itself, now to appear in the presence of HWHY on our
behalf,
25 not that He should offer Himself often, as the
kohĕn ha’gadol enters into the Miqdash year by year
with blood not his own.
26 For if so, He would have had to suffer often, since
the foundation of the world. But now He has appeared
once for all at the end of the ages to put away sin by
the offering of Himself.
27 And as it awaits men to die once, and after this the
judgment,
16

2741

IḆRIM

so also ha’Mashiaḥ, having been offered once to
bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time,
apart from sin, to those waiting for Him, unto
deliverance.

28

10 For the Torah, having a shadow of the good to
come, and not the image itself of the matters, was
never able to make perfect those who draw near with
the same slaughter offerings which they offer
continually year by year.
2 Otherwise, would they not have ceased to be
offered? Because those who served, once cleansed,
would have had no more consciousness of sins.
3 But in those is a reminder of sins year by year.
4 For it is impossible for blood of bulls and goats to
take away sins.
5 Therefore, coming into the world, He says,
“Slaughtering and meal offering You did not desire,
but a body You have prepared for Me.
6 “In burnt offerings even for sin You did not delight.
7 “Then I said, ‘See, I come - in the roll of the Book
it has been written concerning Me - to do Your desire,
O Elohim.’ ”
8 Saying above, “Slaughter and meal offering, and
burnt offerings, even for sin You did not desire, nor
delighted in,” which are offered according to the
Torah,
9 then He said, “See, I come to do Your desire, O
HWHY.” He takes away the first to establish the
second.
10 By that desire we have been qadosh through the
offering of the body of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ once for all.
11 And indeed every kohĕn stands day by day doing
service, and repeatedly offering the same slaughter
offerings which are never able to take away sins.
2742

HEBREWS

But He, having offered one slaughter offering for
sins for all time, sat down at the right hand of HWHY,
13 waiting from that time onward until His enemies
are made a footstool for His feet.
14 For by one offering He has perfected for all time
those who are being qadosh.
15 And the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh also witnesses to us, for
after having said before,
16 “This is the Covenant that I shall make with them
after those days, says HWHY, giving My Laws into their
hearts, and in their minds I shall write them,”
17 and, “Their sins and their lawlessnesses I shall
remember no more.”
18 Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is
no longer a slaughter offering for sin.
19 So, brothers, having boldness to enter into the
Miqdash by the blood of [VWHY,
20 by a new and living way which He instituted for us,
through the veil, that is, His flesh,
21 and a Kohĕn ha’Gadol over the House of HWHY,
22 let us draw near with a true heart in completeness
of belief, having our hearts sprinkled from a wicked
conscience and our bodies washed with clean water.
23 Let us hold fast the confession of our expectation
without yielding, for He who promised is trustworthy.
24 And let us be concerned for one another in order
to stir up love and good works,
25 not forsaking the assembling of ourselves
together, as is the habit of some, but encouraging,
and so much more as you see the Day coming near.
26 For if we sin purposely after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a
slaughter offering for sins,
27 but some fearsome anticipation of judgment, and
a fierce fire which is about to consume the opponents.
12

2743

IḆRIM

Anyone who has disregarded the Torah of
Mosheh dies without compassion on the witness of
two or three witnesses.
29 How much worse punishment do you think shall
he deserve who has trampled the Bĕn of HWHY
underfoot, counted the blood of the Covenant by
which he was qadosh as common, and insulted the
Ruaḥ of favour?
30 For we know Him who has said, “Vengeance is
Mine, I shall repay, says HWHY.” And again, “HWHY
shall judge His people.”
31 It is fearsome to fall into the hands of the living
Elohim.
32 But remember the former days, when, after you
were enlightened, you endured a great struggle with
sufferings.
33 On the one hand you were exposed to reproaches
and pressures, and on the other hand you became
sharers with those who were so treated,
34 for you sympathised with me in my chains, and
you accepted with joy the seizure of your
possessions, knowing that you have a better and a
lasting possession for yourselves in the shamayim.
35 Do not, then, lose your boldness, which has great
reward.
36 For you have need of endurance, so that when you
have done the desire of Elohim, you receive the
promise:
37 “For yet a little while - He who is coming shall
come and shall not delay.”
38 “But the righteous shall live by belief, but if anyone
draws back, My being has no pleasure in him.”
39 But we are not of those who draw back to
destruction, but of belief to the preservation of ḥai.
28

2744

HEBREWS

11 And belief is the substance of what is expected,
the proof of what is not seen.
2 For by this the elders obtained witness.
3 By belief, we understand that the ages were
prepared by the Word of HWHY, so that what is seen
was not made of what is visible.
4 By belief, Heḇel offered to Elohim a greater
slaughter offering than Qayin, through which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, Elohim
witnessing of his gifts. And through it, having died, he
still speaks.
5 By belief, Ḥanoḵ was translated so as not to see
death, “and was not found because Elohim had
translated him.” For before his translation he obtained
witness, that he pleased Elohim.
6 But without belief it is impossible to please Him,
for he who comes to Elohim has to believe that He is,
and that He is a rewarder of those who earnestly seek
Him.
7 By belief, Noaḥ, having been warned of what was
yet unseen, having feared, prepared an ark to save
his house, through which he condemned the world
and became heir of the righteousness which is
according to belief.
8 By belief, Aḇraham obeyed when he was called to
go out to the place which he was about to receive as
an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where
he was going.
9 By belief, he sojourned in the land of promise as a
stranger, dwelling in tents with Yitsḥaq and Ya’aqoḇ,
the heirs with him of the same promise,
10 for he was looking for the city having foundations,
whose Builder and Maker is Elohim.
2745

IḆRIM

By belief also, Sarah herself was enabled to
conceive seed, and she bore a child when she was
past the normal age, because she deemed Him
trustworthy who had promised.
12 And so from one, and him as good as dead, were
born as numerous as the stars of the shamayim, as
countless as the sand which is by the seashore.
13 In belief all these died, not having received the
promises, but seeing them from a distance,
welcomed and embraced them, and confessed that
they were aliens and strangers on the earth.
14 For those who speak this way make it clear that
they seek a home country.
15 And yet, if they had indeed kept remembering that
from which they had come out, they would have had
the chance to return.
16 But now they long for a better, that is, of the
shamayim. Therefore HWHY is not ashamed to be
called their Elohim, for He has prepared a city for
them.
17 By belief, Aḇraham, when he was tried, offered up
Yitsḥaq, and he who had received the promises
offered up his only brought-forth son,
18 of whom it was said, “In Yitsḥaq your seed shall be
called,”
19 reckoning that Elohim was able to raise, even from
the dead, from which he received him back, as a type.
20 By belief, Yitsḥaq baraḵ Ya’aqoḇ and Ĕsaw
concerning that which was to come.
21 By belief, Ya’aqoḇ, when he was dying, baraḵ
each of the sons of Yosĕph, and did reverence on the
top of his staff.
22 By belief, Yosĕph, when he was dying, made
mention of the outgoing of the children of Yisra’ĕl, and
gave orders concerning his bones.
11

2746

HEBREWS

By belief, Mosheh, having been born, was hidden
three months by his parents, because they saw he
was a comely child, and were not afraid of the
sovereign’s command.
24 By belief, Mosheh, having become great, refused
to be called the son of the daughter of Pharaoh,
25 choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of
Elohim than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time,
26 deeming the reproach of Mashiaḥ greater riches
than the treasures in Mitsrayim, for he was looking to
the reward.
27 By belief, he left Mitsrayim, not fearing the wrath
of the sovereign, for he was steadfast, as seeing Him
who is invisible.
28 By belief, he performed the Pesaḥ and the
sprinkling of blood, lest he who destroyed the firstborn should touch them.
29 By belief, they passed through the Sea of Reeds
as by dry land, and when the Mitsrites tried it, they
were drowned.
30 By belief, the walls of Yeriḥo fell, having been
surrounded for seven days.
31 By belief, Raḥaḇ the whore did not perish with
those who did not believe, having received the spies
with peace.
32 And what more shall I say? For the time would fail
me to relate of Giḏ’on and Baraq and Shimshon and
Yiphtaḥ, also of Dawiḏ and Shemu’ĕl and the neḇi’im,
33 who through belief, overcame reigns, worked
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the
mouths of lions,
34 quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
became mighty in battle, put foreign armies to flight.
23

2747

IḆRIM

Women received their dead by resurrection. And
others were tortured, not accepting release, to obtain
a better resurrection.
36 And others had trial of mockings and floggings and
more, of chains and imprisonment.
37 They were stoned, they were tried, they were
sawn in two, they were slain with the sword. They
went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, being in need,
afflicted, mistreated,
38 of whom the world was not worthy - wandering in
deserts and mountains and caves and holes of the
earth.
39 And having obtained witness through the belief, all
these did not receive the promise,
40 Elohim having provided what is better for us, that
they should not be made perfect apart from us.
35

12 We too, then, having so great a cloud of
witnesses all around us, let us lay aside every weight
and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us
run with endurance the race put before us,
2 looking to the Princely Leader and Perfecter of our
belief, [VWHY, who for the joy that was put before Him
endured the stake, having despised the shame, and
sat down at the right hand of the throne of HWHY.
3 For consider Him who endured such opposition
from sinners against Himself, lest you become weary
and faint in your lives.
4 You have not yet resisted unto blood, striving
against sin.
5 And you have forgotten the appeal which speaks
to you as to sons, “My son, do not despise the
discipline of HWHY, nor faint when you are reproved
by Him,
2748

HEBREWS

for whom HWHY loves, He disciplines, and flogs
every son whom He receives.”
7 If you endure discipline, Elohim is treating you as
sons. For what son is there whom a father does not
discipline?
8 But if you are without discipline, of which all have
become sharers, then you are illegitimate and not
sons.
9 Moreover, we indeed had fathers of our flesh
disciplining us, and we paid them respect. Shall we
not much rather be subject to the Father of spirits, and
live?
10 For they indeed disciplined us for a few days as
seemed best to them, but He does it for our profit, so
that we might share His qodeshah.
11 And indeed, no discipline seems pleasant at the
time, but grievous, but afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have
been trained by it.
12 So, strengthen the hands which hang down and
the weak knees,
13 and make straight paths for your feet, lest the lame
be turned aside, but instead, to be healed.
14 Pursue peace with all, and qodeshah without
which no one shall see the Aḏon.
15 See to it that no one falls short of the favour of
Elohim, that no root of bitterness springing up causes
trouble, by which many become defiled,
16 lest there be anyone who whores, or profane one,
like Ĕsaw, who for a single meal sold his birthright.
17 For you know that afterward, when he wanted to
inherit the beraḵah, he was rejected, for he found no
place for repentance, though he sought it with tears.
6

2749

IḆRIM

For you have not drawn near to a mountain
touched and scorched with fire, and to blackness, and
darkness and storm,
19 and a sound of a trumpet, and a voice of words,
so that those who heard it begged that no further
Word should be spoken to them,
20 for they could not bear what was commanded, “If
even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be stoned
or shot through with an arrow.”
21 And so fearsome was the sight that Mosheh said,
“I exceedingly fear and tremble.”
22 But you have drawn near to Mount Tsiyon and to
the city of the living Elohim, to Yerushalayim of the
shamayim, to myriads of messengers,
23 to the entire gathering and assembly of the firstborn having been enrolled in the shamayim, and to
Elohim the Judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous
men made perfect,
24 and to [VWHY the Mediator of a New Covenant,
and to the blood of sprinkling which speaks better
than Heḇel.
25 Take heed not to refuse the One speaking. For if
those did not escape who refused the warning on
earth, much less we who turn away from Him from the
shamayim,
26 whose voice shook the earth then, but now He has
promised, saying, “Yet once more I shake not only the
earth, but also the shamayim.”
27 And this, “Yet once more,” makes clear the
removal of what is shaken - as having been made so that the unshaken might remain.
28 Therefore, receiving an unshakeable reign, let us
hold the favour, through which we serve Elohim
pleasingly with reverence and awe,
29 for indeed, our Elohim is a consuming fire.
18

2750

HEBREWS

13 Let the brotherly love continue.
Do not forget to receive strangers, for by so doing
some have unwittingly entertained messengers.
3 Remember the prisoners as if chained with them,
and those being mistreated, since you yourselves
also are in the Body.
4 Let marriage be respected by all, and the bed be
undefiled. But Elohim shall judge those who whore,
and adulterers.
5 In manner, be without covetousness, and be
satisfied with what you have. For He Himself has said,
“I shall never leave you nor forsake you,”
6 so that we boldly say, “HWHY is my helper, I shall
not fear what man shall do to me.”
7 Remember those leading you, who spoke the
Word of HWHY to you. Consider the outcome of their
behaviour and imitate their belief.
8 [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ is the same yesterday, and
today, and forever.
9 Do not be borne about by various and strange
teachings. For it is good for the heart to be
established by favour, not with foods which have not
profited those who have been occupied with them.
10 We have an altar from which those serving the
Tent have no authority to eat.
11 For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is
brought into the Miqdash by the kohĕn ha’gadol for
sin, are burned outside the camp.
12 And so [VWHY also suffered outside the gate, to
qadosh the people with His own blood.
13 Let us, then, go to Him outside the camp, bearing
His reproach.
14 For we have no lasting city here, but we seek the
one coming.
2

2751

IḆRIM

Through Him then, let us continually offer up a
slaughter offering of praise to HWHY, that is, the fruit
of our lips, giving thanks to His Name.
16 And do not forget to do good and to share, for with
such slaughter offerings Elohim is well pleased.
17 Obey those leading you, and be subject, for they
watch for your lives, as having to give account. Let
them do so with joy and not groaning, for that would
be of no advantage to you.
18 Pray for us, for we trust that we have a good
conscience, desiring to behave well in every way.
19 But I particularly encourage you to do this, that I
might be restored to you the sooner.
20 And the Elohim of peace who brought up our Aḏon
[VWHY from the dead, that great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
21 make you perfect in every good work to do His
desire, working in you what is pleasing in His sight,
through [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, to whom be esteem
forever and ever. Amĕn.
22 And I call upon you, brothers, bear with the word
of encouragement for I have written to you in few
words.
23 Know that brother Timotiyos has been released,
with whom I shall see you if he comes shortly.
24 Greet all those leading you, and all the qodeshim.
Those from Italia greet you.
25 Favour be with you all. Amĕn.
15

2752

JAMES

YA’AQOḆ
‫ יעקב‬Bq[Y

1 Ya’aqoḇ, a servant of HWHY and of the Aḏon [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, to the twelve tribes who are in the
dispersion: Greetings.
2 My brothers, count it all joy when you fall into
various trials,
3 knowing that the proving of your belief works
endurance.
4 And let endurance have a perfect work, so that you
be perfect and complete, lacking in naught.
5 If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of Elohim,
who gives to all generously and without reproach, and
it shall be given to him.
6 But he should ask in belief, not doubting, for he
who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven and
tossed by the wind.
7 For that man should not think that he shall receive
whatever from the Aḏon 8 he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his
ways.
9 And let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation,
10 but the rich in his humiliation, because as a flower
of the field he shall pass away.
11 For the sun rose with burning heat, and withered
the grass, and its flower fell, and its pretty appearance
perished. So also the rich man shall fade away in his
ways.
12 Baruḵ is the man who endures trial, for when he
has been proved, he shall receive the crown of ḥai
which the Aḏon has promised to those who love Him.

2753

YA’AQOB

Let no one say when he is enticed, “I am enticed
by Elohim,” for Elohim is not temptable by evil, and
He entices no one.
14 But each one is enticed when he is drawn away by
his own desires and trapped.
15 Then, when desire has conceived, it gives birth to
sin. And sin, when it has been accomplished, brings
forth death.
16 Do not go astray, my beloved brothers.
17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from
above, coming down from the Father of lights, with
whom there is no change, nor shadow of turning.
18 Having purposed it, He brought us forth by the
Word of truth, for us to be a kind of first-fruits of His
creatures.
19 So then, my beloved brothers, let every man be
swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath,
20 for the wrath of man does not work righteousness
of Elohim.
21 Therefore put away all filthiness and overflow of
evil, and receive with meekness the implanted Word,
which is able to save your lives.
22 And become doers of the Word, and not hearers
only, deceiving yourselves.
23 Because if anyone is a hearer of the Word and not
a doer, he is like a man who looks at his natural face
in a mirror,
24 for he looks at himself, and goes away, and
immediately forgets what he was like.
25 But he that looked into the perfect Torah, that of
freedom, and continues in it, not becoming a hearer
that forgets, but a doer of work, this one shall be baruḵ
in his doing.
13

2754

JAMES

If anyone among you thinks he is religious, and
does not bridle his tongue but deceives his own heart,
this one’s religion is worthless.
27 Clean and undefiled religion before the Elohim
and Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their
affliction, to keep oneself unstained from the world.
26

2 My brothers, do not hold the belief of our Aḏon
[vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, the Aḏon of esteem, with partiality.
2 For if there should come into your assembly a man
with gold rings, in a splendid robe, and there should
also come in a poor one dressed in rags,
3
and you pay attention to the one wearing the
splendid robe and say to him, “You sit here in a good
place,” and say to the poor one, “You stand there,” or,
“Sit here by my feet,”
4 have you not discriminated among yourselves,
and become judges with wicked thoughts?
5 Listen, my beloved brothers: Has Elohim not
chosen the poor of this world, rich in belief and heirs
of the reign which He promised to those who love
Him?
6 But you have shown disrespect towards the poor
man. Do not the rich oppress you and drag you into
the courts?
7 Do they not blaspheme that good Name by which
you are called?
8 If you truly accomplish the sovereign law
according to the Scripture, “You shall love your
neighbour as yourself,” you do well,
9 but if you show partiality, you commit sin, being
found guilty by the Torah as transgressors.
10 For whoever shall guard all the Torah, and yet
stumble in one point, he is guilty of all.
11 For He who said, “Do not commit adultery,” also
said, “Do not murder.” Now if you do not commit
2755

YA’AQOB

adultery, but you do murder, you have become a
transgressor of Torah.
12 So speak and so do as those who are to be judged
by a Torah of freedom.
13 For the judgment is without compassion to the one
who has shown no compassion. And compassion
boasts over judgment.
14 My brothers, what use is it for anyone to say he
has belief but does not have works? This belief is
unable to save him.
15 And if a brother or sister is naked and in need of
daily food,
16 but one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be
warmed and be filled,” but you do not give them the
bodily needs, what use is it?
17 So also belief, if it does not have works, is in itself
dead.
18 But someone might say, “You have belief, and I
have works.” Show me your belief without your works,
and I shall show you my belief by my works.
19 You believe that Elohim is one. You do well. The
demons also believe - and shudder!
20 But do you want to know, O foolish man, that the
belief without the works is dead?
21 Was not Aḇraham our father declared right by
works when he offered Yitsḥaq his son on the altar?
22 Do you see that the belief was working with his
works, and by the works the belief was perfected?
23 And the Scripture was filled which says, “Aḇraham
believed Elohim, and it was reckoned to him for
righteousness.” And he was called, “Elohim’s friend.”
24 You see, then, that a man is declared right by
works, and not by belief alone.

2756

JAMES

In the same way, was not Raḥaḇ the whore also
declared right by works when she received the
messengers and sent them out another way?
26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, so also
the belief is dead without the works.
25

3 Not many of you should become teachers, my
brothers, knowing that we shall receive greater
judgment.
2 For we all stumble in much. If anyone does not
stumble in word, he is a perfect man, able also to
bridle the entire body.
3 Look, we put bits in the mouths of horses, for them
to obey us, and we turn their body.
4 Look at the ships too: although they are so big and
are driven by strong winds, they are turned by a very
small rudder wherever the pilot intends.
5 So too the tongue is a little member, yet boasts
greatly. See how a little fire kindles a great forest!
6 And the tongue is a fire, the world of
unrighteousness. Like a forest among our members
the tongue is placed, the one defiling the entire body,
and lighting on fire the course of generations, rolling
from the beginning and in the end is lit on fire itself.
7 For every kind of beast and bird, of reptile and
creature of the sea, is tamed and has been tamed by
mankind.
8 But no man is able to tame the tongue. It is unruly,
evil, filled with deadly poison.
9 With it we baraḵ our Elohim and Father, and with
it we curse men, who have been made in the likeness
of Elohim.
10 Out of the same mouth proceed beraḵah and
cursing. My brothers, this should not be so.
11 Does the fountain send forth the sweet and the
bitter from the same opening?
2757

YA’AQOB

My brothers, is a fig tree able to bear olives, or a
grapevine figs? So neither is a fountain to make salt
and sweet water.
13 Who is wise and understanding among you? Let
him show by his good behaviour his works in
meekness of wisdom.
14 But if you have bitter jealousy and self-seeking in
your hearts, do not boast against and lie against the
truth.
15 This is not the wisdom coming down from above,
but it is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
16 For where jealousy and self-seeking are, there is
confusion and every foul deed.
17 But the wisdom from above is first clean, then
peaceable, gentle, ready to obey, filled with
compassion and good fruits, without partiality and
without hypocrisy.
18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by
those who make peace.
12

4 Where do fightings and strivings come from among
you? Do they not come from your pleasures that battle
in your members?
2 You desire, and do not have. You murder, and are
jealous, and are unable to obtain. You strive and fight,
and you do not possess, because you do not ask.
3 You ask and do not receive, because you ask
evilly, in order to spend it on your pleasures.
4 Adulterers and adulteresses! Do you not know that
friendship with the world is enmity with Elohim?
Whoever therefore intends to be a friend of the world
makes himself an enemy of Elohim.
5 Or do you think that the Scripture speaks to no
purpose? Does the Ruaḥ which dwells in us intensely
crave unto envy?
2758

JAMES

But He gives greater favour. Because of this He
says, “Elohim resists the proud, but gives favour to
the humble.”
7 So then subject yourselves to Elohim. Resist the
devil and he shall flee from you.
8 Draw near to Elohim and He shall draw near to
you. Cleanse hands, sinners. And cleanse hearts,
you double-minded!
9 Lament and mourn and weep! Let your laughter be
turned to mourning and your joy to sadness.
10 Humble yourselves in the sight of the Aḏon, and
He shall lift you up.
11 Brothers, do not speak against one another. He
that speaks against a brother and judges his brother,
speaks against Torah and judges Torah. And if you
judge Torah, you are not a doer of Torah but a judge.
12 There is one Lawgiver and Judge, who is able to
save and to destroy. Who are you to judge another?
13 Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow, let
us go to such and such a city, spend a year there, and
trade, and make a profit,”
14 when you do not know of tomorrow. For what is
your life? For it is a vapour that appears for a little,
and then disappears 15 instead of your saying, “If the Aḏon desires, we
shall live and do this or that.”
16 But now you boast in your proud speeches. All
such boasting is wicked.
17 To him, then, who knows to do good and does not
do it, to him it is sin.
6

5 Come now, rich ones, weep, crying aloud over the
hardships coming upon you!
2 Your riches have rotted, and your garments have
become moth-eaten.
2759

YA’AQOB

Your gold and silver have become rusty, and their
rust shall be a witness against you and shall eat your
flesh like fire. You have laid up treasure in the last
days.
4 See, the wages of the workmen who mowed your
fields, which you kept back, cry out. And the cries of
the reapers have reached the ears of HWHY of hosts.
5 You have lived on the earth in pleasure and luxury,
you have fattened your hearts, as in a day of
slaughter.
6 You have condemned, you have murdered the
righteous - he does not resist you.
7 So, brothers, be patient until the coming of the
Aḏon. See, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of
the earth, waiting patiently for it until it receives the
early and latter rain.
8 You too, be patient. Establish your hearts, for the
coming of the Aḏon has drawn near.
9 Do not grumble against each other, brothers, lest
you be judged. See, the Judge is standing at the door!
10 My brothers, as an example of suffering and
patience, take the neḇi’im, who spoke in the Name of
HWHY.
11 See, we call those baruḵ who endure. You have
heard of the endurance of lyoḇ and saw the purpose
of HWHY, that He is very sympathetic and
compassionate.
12 But above all, my brothers, do not swear, either by
the shamayim or by the earth or with any other oath.
But let your Yes be Yes, and your No, No, lest you fall
into judgment.
13 Is any of you suffering evil? Let him pray. Is
anyone in good spirits? Let him sing tehillim.
3

2760

JAMES

Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the
elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him,
having anointed him with oil in the Name of the Aḏon.
15 And the prayer of the belief shall save the sick, and
the Aḏon shall raise him up. And if he has committed
sins, he shall be forgiven.
16 Confess your trespasses to one another, and pray
for one another, so that you are healed. The earnest
prayer of a righteous one accomplishes much.
17 Ĕliyahu was a man with feelings like us, and he
prayed earnestly that it would not rain. And it did not
rain on the land for three years and six months.
18 And he prayed again, and the shamayim gave
rain, and the land brought forth its fruit.
19 Brothers, if anyone among you goes astray from
the truth, and someone turns him back,
20 let him know that he who turns a sinner from the
straying of His Way shall save a ḥai from death and
cover a great number of sins.
14

2761

1 PETER

KĔPHA 1
‫ כאפא א‬A ApAK

1 Kĕpha, an emissary of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, to the
chosen, strangers of the dispersion in Pontus, Galatia,
Kappadokia, Asia, and Bithunia,
2 according to the foreknowledge of HWHY the
Father, qadosh by the Ruaḥ unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ: Favour
and peace be increased to you.
3 Baruḵ be the Elohim and Father of our Aḏon
[VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, who according to His great
compassion has caused us to be born again to a
living expectation through the resurrection of [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ from the dead,
4 to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and
unfading, having been kept in the shamayim for you,
5 who are protected by the power of Elohim through
belief, for a deliverance ready to be revealed in the
last time,
6 in which you exult, even though for a little while, if
need be, you have been grieved by manifold trials,
7 in order that the proving of your belief - much more
precious than gold that perishes, and proven by fire might be found to result in praise and respect and
esteem at the revelation of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
8
whom having not seen, you love; in whom you
exult with unspeakable and esteemed joy, yet not
seeing, but believing,
9 obtaining the goal of your belief: a deliverance of
lives.
10 Concerning this deliverance the kohenim have
sought out and searched out, naḇa concerning the
favour for you,
2762

KĔPHA 1

searching to know what, or what sort of time, the
Ruaḥ which was in them was pointing out concerning
Mashiaḥ, when it was bearing witness beforehand the
sufferings of Mashiaḥ, and the esteems that would
follow,
12 to whom it was revealed that they were serving,
not themselves, but you, in these which now have
been announced to you through those who brought
the Good News to you by the Ruaḥ ha’Qodesh sent
from shamayim - into which messengers long to look
into.
13 Therefore, having girded up the loins of your mind,
being sober, put your expectation perfectly upon the
favour that is to be brought to you at the revelation of
[VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
14 as obedient children, not conforming yourselves to
the former lusts in your ignorance,
15 instead, as the One who called you is qodesh, so
you also should become qodesh in all behaviour,
16 because it has been written, “Be qodesh, for I am
qodesh.”
17 And if you call on the Father, who without partiality
judges according to each one’s work, pass the time
of your sojourning in reverence,
18 knowing that you were redeemed from your futile
behaviour inherited from your fathers, not with what
is corruptible, silver or gold,
19 but with the precious blood of Mashiaḥ, as of a
lamb unblemished and spotless,
20 foreknown, indeed, before the foundation of the
world, but manifested in these last times for your
sakes,
21 who through Him believe in HWHY who raised Him
from the dead and gave Him esteem, so that your
belief and expectation are in Elohim.
11

2763

1 PETER

Now that you have cleansed your lives in obeying
the truth through the Ruaḥ to unfeigned brotherly
love, love one another fervently with a clean heart,
23 having been born again - not of corruptible seed,
but incorruptible - through the living Word of HWHY,
which remains forever,
24 because “All flesh is as grass, and all the esteem
of man as the flower of the grass. The grass withers,
and its flower falls away,
25 but the Word of HWHY remains forever.” And this is
the Word, announced as Good News to you.
22

2 Having put aside, then, all evil, and all deceit, and
hypocrisies, and envyings, and all evil words,
2 as newborn infants, desire the unadulterated milk
of the Word, in order that you grow by it,
3 if indeed you have tasted that the Aḏon is good.
4 Drawing near to Him, a living Stone - rejected
indeed by men, but chosen by HWHY and precious 5 you also, as living stones, are being built up, a
spiritual house, a qodesh kehunnah, to offer up
spiritual slaughter offerings acceptable to HWHY
through [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
6 Because it is contained in the Scripture, “See, I lay
in Tsiyon a chief corner-stone, chosen, precious, and
he who believes on Him shall by no means be put to
shame.”
7 This esteem, then, is for you who believe; but to
those who are disobedient, “The stone which the
builders rejected has become the chief corner-stone,”
8 and “A stone of stumbling and a rock that makes
for falling,” who stumble because they are
disobedient to the Word, to which they also were
appointed.
2764

KĔPHA 1

But you are a chosen race, a royal kehunnah, a
qodesh nation, a people for a possession, that you
should proclaim the praises of Him who called you out
of darkness into His marvellous light,
10 who once were not a people, but now the people
of Elohim; who had not obtained compassion, but
now obtained compassion.
11 Beloved ones, I appeal to you as sojourners and
pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts which battle
against the being,
12 having your behaviour among the gentiles good so
that when they speak against you as evil-doers, let
them, by observing your good works, esteem Elohim
in a day of visitation.
13 Be subject to every institution of man because of
the Aḏon, whether to the sovereign as supreme,
14 or to governors, as to those who are sent by him
for the punishment of doers of evil, and a praise for
those who do good.
15 Because such is the desire of Elohim, that by
doing good you should put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men,
16 as free, yet not using your freedom as a cloak for
evil, but as servants of Elohim.
17 Respect all, love the brotherhood, revere Elohim,
respect the sovereign.
18 Servants, be subject to your masters with all
reverence, not only to the good and gentle, but also
to the crooked ones.
19 For this is favour, if because of conscience toward
Elohim anyone bears up under grief, suffering
unrighteously.
20 For what credit is there in enduring a beating when
you sin? But if you suffer for doing good and you
endure, this is favour with Elohim.
9

2765

1 PETER

For to this you were called, because Mashiaḥ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that you
should follow His steps,
22 “who committed no sin, nor was deceit found in His
mouth,”
23 who, being reviled, did not revile in return;
suffering, did not threaten, but committed to Him who
judges righteously;
24 who Himself bore our sins in His body on the
timber, so that we, having died to sins, might live unto
righteousness - by whose stripes you were healed.
25 For you were like sheep going astray, but have
now returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your
beings.
21

3 In the same way, wives, be subject to your own
husbands, so that if any are disobedient to the Word,
they, without a word, might be won by the behaviour
of their wives,
2 having seen your blameless behaviour in
reverence.
3 Your world should not be outward - arranging the
hair, wearing gold, or putting on dresses 4 but the hidden Man of the heart, with the
incorruptible ornament of a meek and peaceable
spirit, which is of great value before Elohim.
5 For in this way, in former times, the qodesh
women who trusted in Elohim also adorned
themselves, being subject to their own husbands,
6 as Sarah obeyed Aḇraham, calling him master, of
whom you became children, doing good, and not
frightened by any fear.
7 In the same way, husbands, live understandingly
together, giving respect to the wife, as to the weaker
2766

KĔPHA 1

vessel, and as being heirs together of the favour of
ḥai, so that your prayers are not hindered.
8 To sum up, let all of you be like-minded,
sympathetic, loving as brothers, tenderhearted,
humble-minded,
9 not returning evil for evil or reviling for reviling, but
on the contrary beraḵah, knowing that you were
called to this, in order to inherit a beraḵah.
10 For “He who was to love life and see good days,
let him keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from
speaking deceit,
11 let him turn away from evil and do good, let him
seek peace and pursue it.
12 “Because the eyes of HWHY are on the righteous,
and His ears are open to their prayers, but the face of
HWHY is against those who do evil.”
13 And who is the one doing evil to you, if you
become imitators of the good?
14 But even if you suffer for righteousness’ sake, you
are baruḵ. “And do not fear their threats, neither be
troubled.”
15 But qadosh HWHY Elohim in your hearts, and
always be ready to give an answer to everyone
asking you a reason concerning the expectation that
is in you, with meekness and reverence,
16 having a good conscience, so that when they
speak against you as doers of evil, those who falsely
accuse your good behaviour in Mashiaḥ, shall be
ashamed.
17 For it is better, if it is the desire of Elohim, to suffer
for doing good than for doing evil.
18 Because even Mashiaḥ once suffered for sins, the
righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to Elohim,
having been put to death indeed in flesh but made
alive in the Ruaḥ,
2767

1 PETER

in which also He went and proclaimed unto the
spirits in prison,
20 who were disobedient at one time when the
patience of Elohim waited in the days of Noaḥ, while
the ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is,
eight beings, were saved through water,
21 which figure now also saves us: immersion - not a
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of
a good conscience toward Elohim - through the
resurrection of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ,
22 who, having gone into shamayim, is at the right
hand of HWHY, messengers and authorities and
powers having been subjected to Him.
19

4 Therefore, since Mashiaḥ suffered for you in the
flesh, arm yourselves also with the same mind,
because he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased
from sin,
2 so that he no longer lives the rest of his time in the
flesh for the lusts of men, but according to the desire
of Elohim.
3 For enough of our past lifetime we have done the
desire of the gentiles, having walked in indecencies,
lusts, drunkenness, orgies, wild parties, and
abominable idolatries,
4 in which they are surprised that you do not run with
them in the same flood of loose behaviour,
blaspheming,
5 who shall give an account to Him who is ready to
judge the living and the dead.
6 For this reason the Good News was also brought
to those who are dead, so that, whereas they are
judged according to men in the flesh, they might live
according to Elohim in the spirit.
2768

KĔPHA 1

But the end of all has drawn near. Therefore be
sober-minded, and be attentive in the prayers.
8 And above all have fervent love for one another,
because love covers a great number of sins.
9 Welcome one another without grumbling.
10 As each one has received a gift, serve one
another, as good trustees of the manifold favour of
Elohim.
11 If anyone speaks - as the Words of HWHY. If
anyone serves - with the strength which Elohim
provides, so that HWHY might be praised in it all
through [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, to whom belong the
esteem and the rule forever and ever. Amĕn.
12 Beloved ones, do not be surprised at the fiery trial
that is coming upon you, to try you, as though some
unusual matter has befallen you,
13 but as you share Mashiaḥ’s sufferings, rejoice, in
order that you might rejoice exultingly at the
revelation of His esteem.
14 If you are reproached for the Name of Mashiaḥ baruḵ, because the Ruaḥ of esteem and of Elohim
rests upon you. On their part He is blasphemed, but
on your part He is praised.
15 For do not let any of you suffer as a murderer, or
thief, or doer of evil, or as a meddler.
16 But if being Mashiaḥiyim, let him not be ashamed,
but let him esteem Elohim in this matter.
17 Because it is time for judgment to begin from the
House of Elohim. And if firstly from us, what is the end
of those who do not obey the Good News of Elohim?
18 And if the righteous one is scarcely saved, where
shall the wicked and the sinner appear?
19 So then, those who suffer according to the desire
of Elohim should commit their lives to a trustworthy
Creator, in doing good.
7

2769

1 PETER

5 Therefore, as a fellow elder and a witness of the
sufferings of Mashiaḥ, and also a sharer of the esteem
that is to be revealed, I appeal to the elders among
you:
2 Shepherd the flock of Elohim which is among you,
serving as overseers, not by compulsion but
voluntarily, not out of greed for filthy gain, but eagerly,
3 neither as being masters over those entrusted to
you, but being examples to the flock.
4 And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you shall
receive the never-fading crown of esteem.
5 In the same way, you younger ones, be subject to
elders. And gird yourselves with humility toward one
another, for “Elohim resists the proud, but gives
favour to the humble.”
6 Humble yourselves, then, under the mighty hand
of Elohim, so that He exalts you in due time,
7 casting all your worry upon Him, for He is
concerned about you.
8 Be sober, watch, because your adversary the devil
walks about like a roaring lion, seeking someone to
devour.
9 Resist him, firm in the belief, knowing that the
same hardships are experienced by your brotherhood
in the world.
10 And the Elohim of all favour, who called you to His
everlasting esteem by Mashiaḥ [VWHY, after you
have suffered a while, Himself perfect, establish,
strengthen, and settle you.
11 To Him be the esteem and the might forever and
ever. Amĕn.
12 Through Sila the trustworthy brother, as I reckon,
I have written to you briefly, encouraging and
2770

KĔPHA 1

witnessing that this is the true favour of Elohim. In this
stand fast.
13 She who is in Baḇel, chosen together with you,
greets you, also my son, Markos.
14 Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to all
of you who are in Mashiaḥ [VWHY. Amĕn.

2771

2 PETER

KĔPHA 2
‫ כאפא ב‬B ApAK

1 Shim’on Kĕpha, a servant and emissary of [VWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, to those who have obtained a belief as
precious as ours by the righteousness of our Elohim
and of our Saviour [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ:
2 Favour and peace be increased to you in the
knowledge of HWHY and of [VWHY our Aḏon,
3 as His Mighty-like power has given to us all we
need for ḥai and reverence, through the knowledge of
Him who called us to esteem and uprightness.
4 Through these there have been given to us
exceedingly great and precious promises, so that
through these you might be partakers of the Mightylike nature, having escaped from the corruption in the
world, caused by lust.
5 And for this reason do your utmost to add to your
belief uprightness, to uprightness knowledge,
6 to
knowledge self-control, to self-control
endurance, to endurance reverence,
7 to reverence brotherly affection, and to brotherly
affection love.
8 For if these are in you and increase, they cause
you to be neither inactive nor without fruit in the
knowledge of our Aḏon ha’Mashiaḥ.
9 For he in whom these are not present is blind,
being shortsighted, and has forgotten that he has
been cleansed from his old sins.
10 For this reason, brothers, all the more do your
utmost to make firm your calling and choosing, for if
you are doing these you shall never stumble at all,
2772

KĔPHA 2

for in this way an entrance into the everlasting
reign of our Aḏon and Saviour [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ
shall be richly supplied to you.
12 And so I intend to remind you of these again and
again, though you know them and have been
established in the present truth.
13 But I think it is right, as long as I am in this tent, to
stir you up by a reminder,
14 knowing that the putting off of my tent is soon,
even as our Aḏon [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ made clear to
me.
15 And I shall do my utmost also, to see to it that you
always have a reminder of these after my departure.
16 For we did not follow cleverly devised stories when
we made known to you the power and coming of our
Aḏon [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, but were eye-witnesses of
His superbness.
17 For when He received respect and esteem from
HWHY the Father, such a voice came to Him from the
Excellent Esteem, “This is My Bĕn, the Beloved in
whom I delight.”
18 And we heard this voice which came from
shamayim when we were with Him on the qodesh
mountain.
19 And we have the neḇuah Word made more
certain, which you do well to heed as a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawns and the
morning star rises in your hearts,
20 knowing this first, that no neḇuah of Scripture
came to be of one’s own interpretation,
21 for neḇuah never came by the desire of man, but
men of Elohim spoke, being moved by the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh.
11

2773

2 PETER

2 But there also came to be false prophets among the
people, as also among you there shall be false
teachers, who shall secretly bring in destructive
heresies, and deny the Aḏon who bought them,
bringing swift destruction on themselves.
2 And many shall follow their destructive ways,
because of whom the Way of truth shall be evil
spoken of,
3 and in greed, with fabricated words, they shall use
you for gain. From of old their judgment does not
linger, and their destruction does not slumber.
4 For if HWHY did not spare the messengers who
sinned, but sent them to Gĕy-Hinnom, and delivered
them into chains of darkness, to be kept for judgment,
5 and did not spare the world of old, but preserved
Noaḥ, a proclaimer of righteousness, and seven
others, bringing in the flood on the world of the
wicked,
6 and having reduced to ashes the cities of Seḏom
and Amorah condemned them to destruction - having
made them an example to those who afterward would
live wickedly,
7 and rescued righteous Lot, who was oppressed
with the indecent behaviour of the lawless 8 for day after day that righteous man, dwelling
among them, tortured his righteous being by seeing
and hearing their lawless works.
9 HWHY knows how to rescue the reverent ones from
trial and to keep the unrighteous unto the day of
judgment, to be punished,
10 and most of all those walking after the flesh in filthy
lust and despising authority - bold, headstrong,
speaking evil of esteemed ones,
2774

KĔPHA 2

whereas messengers who are greater in strength
and power do not bring a slanderous accusation
against them before the Aḏon.
12 But these, like natural unreasoning beasts, having
been born to be caught and destroyed, blaspheme
that which they do not know, shall be destroyed in
their destruction,
13 being
about to receive the wages of
unrighteousness, deeming indulgence in the day of
pleasure, spots and blemishes, revelling in their own
deceptions while they feast with you,
14 having eyes filled with an adulteress, and unable
to cease from sin, enticing unstable beings, having a
heart trained in greed, children of a curse,
15 having left the right way they went astray, having
followed the way of Bil’am the son of Be’or, who loved
the wages of unrighteousness,
16 but he was rebuked for his transgression: a dumb
donkey speaking with the voice of a restrained man
the madness of the naḇi.
17 These are fountains without water, clouds driven
by a storm, to whom the blackest darkness is kept
forever.
18 For speaking arrogant nonsense, they entice through the lusts of the flesh, through indecencies the ones who have indeed escaped from those living
in delusion,
19 promising them freedom, though themselves
being slaves of corruption - for one is a slave to
whatever overcomes him.
20 For if, after they have escaped the defilements of
the world through the knowledge of the Aḏon and
Saviour [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, they are again entangled
in them and overcome, the latter end is worse for
them than the first.
11

2775

2 PETER

For it would have been better for them not to have
known the Way of righteousness, than having known
it, to turn from the qodesh Command delivered unto
them.
22 For them the proverb has proved true, “A dog
returns to his own vomit,” and, “A washed sow to her
rolling in the mud.”
21

3 This is now, beloved ones, the second letter I write

to you, in which I stir up your sincere mind, to
remember
2 the words previously spoken by the qodesh
neḇi’im, and of the Command of the Aḏon and
Saviour, by your emissaries,
3 knowing this first: that mockers shall come in the
last days with mocking, walking according to their
own lusts,
4 and saying, “Where is the promise of His coming?
For since the fathers fell asleep, all continues as from
the beginning of creation.”
5 For they choose to have this hidden from them:
that the shamayim were of old, and the earth standing
out of water and in the water, by the Word of HWHY,
6 through which the world at that time was
destroyed, being flooded with water.
7 And the present shamayim and the earth are
treasured up by the same Word, being kept for fire, to
a day of judgment and destruction of wicked men.
8 But, beloved ones, let not this one be hidden from
you: that with HWHY one day is as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day.
9 HWHY is not slow in regard to the promise, as some
count slowness, but is patient toward us, not wanting
that any should perish but that all should come to
repentance.
2776

KĔPHA 2

But the day of HWHY shall come as a thief in the
night, in which the shamayim shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with intense
heat, and the earth and the works that are in it shall
be burned up.
11 Seeing all these are to be destroyed in this way,
what kind of people ought you to be in qodesh
behaviour and reverence,
12 looking for and hastening the coming of the day of
Elohim, through which the shamayim shall be
destroyed, being lit on fire, and the elements melt with
intense heat!
13 But according to His promise we wait for a
renewed shamayim and a renewed earth in which
righteousness dwells.
14 So then, beloved ones, looking forward to this, do
your utmost to be found by Him in peace, spotless
and blameless,
15 and reckon the patience of our Aḏon as
deliverance, as also our beloved brother Sha’ul wrote
to you, according to the wisdom given to him,
16 as also in all letters, speaking in them concerning
these, in which some are hard to understand, which
those who are untaught and unstable twist to their
own destruction, as they do also the other Scriptures.
17 You, then, beloved ones, being forewarned,
watch, lest you also fall from your own steadfastness,
being led away with the delusion of the lawless,
18 but grow in the favour and knowledge of our Aḏon
and Saviour [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ. To Him be the
esteem both now and to a day that abides. Amĕn.
10

2777

1 JOHN

YOḤANAN 1
‫ יהוחנן א‬A !!XWhY

1 What was from the beginning, what we have heard,
what we have seen with our eyes, what we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled, concerning
the Word of Ḥai:
2 And the Ḥai was manifested, and we have seen,
and bear witness, and announce to you that
everlasting Ḥai which was with the Father and was
manifested to us.
3 We announce to you what we have seen and
heard, so that you too might have fellowship with us.
And truly our fellowship is with the Father and with His
Bĕn [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
4 And we write this to you in order that your joy might
be complete.
5 And this is the message which we have heard from
Him and announce to you, that Elohim is light and in
Him is no darkness at all.
6 If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and
walk in darkness, we lie and are not doing the truth.
7 But if we walk in the light as He is in the light, we
have fellowship with one another, and the blood of
[vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ His Bĕn cleanses us from all sin.
8 If we say that we have no sin, we are misleading
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
9 If we confess our sins, He is trustworthy and
righteous to forgive us the sins and cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.
10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make Him a
liar, and His Word is not in us.
2778

YOḤANAN 1

2 My little children, I write this to you, so that you do
not sin. And if anyone sins, we have an Intercessor
with the Father, [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, a righteous One.
2 And He Himself is an atoning offering for our sins,
and not for ours only but also for all the world.
3 And by this we know that we know Him, if we
guard His Commands.
4
The one who says, “I know Him,” and does not
guard His Commands, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him.
5 But whoever guards His Word, truly the love of
Elohim has been perfected in him. By this we know
that we are in Him.
6 The one who says he stays in Him ought himself
also to walk, even as He walked.
7 Beloved, I write no fresh command to you, but an
old Command which you have had from the
beginning. The old Command is the Word which you
heard from the beginning.
8 Again I write you a fresh command, which is true
in Him and in you, because the darkness is passing
away, and the true light now shines.
9 The one who says he is in the light, and hates his
brother, is in the darkness until now.
10 The one who loves his brother stays in the light,
and there is no stumbling-block in him.
11 But the one who hates his brother is in the
darkness and walks in the darkness, and does not
know where he is going, because the darkness has
blinded his eyes.
12 I write to you, little children, because your sins
have been forgiven on account of His Name.
13 I write to you, fathers, because you have known
Him from the beginning. I write to you, young men,
2779

1 JOHN

because you have overcome the wicked one. I write
to you, little children, because you have known the
Father.
14 I wrote to you, fathers, because you have known
Him from the beginning. I wrote to you, young men,
because you are strong, and the Word of HWHY stays
in you, and you have overcome the wicked one.
15 Do not love the world nor that which is in the world.
If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not
in him.
16 Because all that is in the world - the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life - is not
of the Father but is of the world.
17 And the world passes away, and the lust of it, but
the one doing the desire of Elohim remains forever.
18 Little children, it is the last hour. And as you have
heard that the anti-messiah is coming, even now
many anti-messiahs have come. This is how we know
that it is the last hour.
19 They went out from us, but they were not of us, for
if they had been of us, they would have stayed with
us - but in order that it might be made manifest that
none of them were of us.
20 And you have an anointing from the Qadosh One,
and you know all.
21 I did not write to you because you do not know the
truth, but because you know it, and because no
falsehood is of the truth.
22 Who is the liar, except the one denying that [vWHY
is ha’Mashiaḥ? This is the anti-messiah, the one
denying the Father and the Bĕn.
23 No one denying the Bĕn has the Father. The one
confessing the Bĕn has the Father as well.
24 As for you, let that stay in you which you heard
from the beginning. If what you heard from the
2780

YOḤANAN 1

beginning stays in you, you also shall stay in the Bĕn
and in the Father.
25 And this is the promise that He has promised us:
everlasting ḥai.
26 I have written this to you concerning those who
lead you astray.
27 But the anointing which you have received from
Him stays in you, and you have no need that anyone
should teach you. But as the same anointing teaches
you concerning all, and is true, and is no falsehood,
and even as it has taught you, you stay in Him.
28 And now, little children, stay in Him, so that when
He appears, we might have boldness and not be
ashamed before Him at His coming.
29 If you know that He is righteous, you know that
everyone doing righteousness has been born of Him.

3 See what love the Father has given us, that we
should be called children of Elohim! For this reason the
world does not know us, because it did not know Him.
2 Beloved ones, now we are children of Elohim. And
it has not yet been revealed what we shall be, but we
know that when He is revealed, we shall be like Him,
for we shall see Him as He is.
3 And everyone having this expectation in Him
cleanses himself, as He is clean.
4 Everyone doing sin also does lawlessness, and
sin is lawlessness.
5 And you know that He was manifested to take
away our sins, and in Him there is no sin.
6 Everyone staying in Him does not sin. Everyone
sinning has neither seen Him nor known Him.
7 Little children, let no one lead you astray. The one
doing righteousness is righteous, even as He is
righteous.
2781

1 JOHN

The one doing sin is of the devil, because the devil
has sinned from the beginning. For this purpose the
Bĕn of HWHY was manifested: to destroy the works of
the devil.
9 Everyone having been born of Elohim does not
sin, because His seed stays in him, and he is
powerless to sin, because he has been born of
Elohim.
10 In this the children of Elohim and the children of
the devil are manifest: Everyone not doing
righteousness is not of Elohim, neither the one not
loving his brother.
11 Because this is the message that you heard from
the beginning, that we should love one another,
12 not as Qayin who was of the wicked one and killed
his brother. And why did he kill him? Because his
works were wicked but those of his brother were
righteous.
13 Do not marvel, my brothers, if the world hates you.
14 We know that we have passed out of death into
ḥai, because we love the brothers. The one not loving
his brother stays in death.
15 Everyone hating his brother is a murderer, and you
know that no murderer has everlasting ḥai staying in
him.
16 By this we have known love, because He laid
down His ḥai for us. And we ought to lay down life for
the brothers.
17 But whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his
brother in need, and shuts up his tender affections
from him, how does the love of Elohim stay in him?
18 My little children, let us not love in word or in
tongue, but in deed and in truth.
19 And by this we know that we are of the truth, and
shall put our hearts at rest before Him,
8

2782

YOḤANAN 1

that if our heart condemns us, HWHY is greater
than our heart, and knows all.
21 Beloved ones, if our heart does not condemn us,
we have boldness toward HWHY.
22 And whatever we ask we receive from Him,
because we guard His Commands and do what is
pleasing in His sight.
23 And this is His command, that we should believe
in the Name of His Bĕn [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ and love
one another, as He gave us command.
24 And the one guarding His Commands stays in
Him, and He in him. And by this we know that He
stays in us, by the Ruaḥ which He gave us.
20

4 Beloved ones, do not believe every spirit, but prove
the spirits, whether they are of Elohim, because many
false prophets have gone out into the world.
2 By this you know the Ruaḥ of Elohim: Every spirit
that confesses that [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ has come in
the flesh is of Elohim,
3 and every spirit that does not confess that [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ has come in the flesh is not of Elohim.
And this is that of the anti-messiah which you heard
is coming, and now is already in the world.
4 You are of Elohim, little children, and have
overcome them, because He who is in you is greater
than he who is in the world.
5 They are of the world, therefore they speak as of
the world, and the world hears them.
6 We are of Elohim - the one knowing Elohim hears
us. He who is not of Elohim does not hear us. By this
we know the Ruaḥ of the Truth and the spirit of the
delusion.

2783

1 JOHN

Beloved ones, let us love one another, because
love is of Elohim, and everyone who loves has been
born of Elohim, and knows HWHY.
8 The one who does not love does not know HWHY,
for HWHY is love.
9 By this the love of HWHY was manifested in us, that
HWHY has sent His only brought-forth Bĕn into the
world, in order that we might live through Him.
10 In this is love, not that we loved HWHY, but that He
loved us and sent His Bĕn to be an atoning offering
for our sins.
11 Beloved ones, if HWHY so loved us, we also ought
to love one another.
12 No one has seen HWHY at any time. If we love one
another, Elohim stays in us, and His love has been
perfected in us.
13 By this we know that we stay in Him, and He in us,
because He has given us of His Ruaḥ.
14 And we have seen and bear witness that the
Father has sent the Bĕn, Saviour of the world.
15 Whoever confesses that [vWHY is the Bĕn of
HWHY, Elohim stays in him, and he in Elohim.
16 And we have known and believed the love that
HWHY has for us. HWHY is love, and he who stays in
love stays in Elohim, and Elohim in him.
17 By this, love has been perfected with us, in order
that we might have boldness in the day of judgment,
because as He is so are we in this world.
18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out
fear, because fear holds punishment, and he who
fears has not been made perfect in love.
19 We love Him because He first loved us.
20 If someone says, “I love Elohim,” and hates his
brother, he is a liar. For the one not loving his brother
7

2784

YOḤANAN 1

whom he has seen, how is he able to love HWHY
whom he has not seen?
21 And we have this command from Him, that the one
loving Elohim should love his brother too.

5 Everyone who believes that [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ has
been born of Elohim, and everyone who loves the One
bringing forth also loves the one having been born of
Him.
2 By this we know that we love the children of
Elohim, when we love HWHY and guard His
Commands.
3 For this is the love for HWHY, that we guard His
Commands, and His Commands are not heavy,
4 because everyone having been born of Elohim
overcomes the world. And this is the overcoming that
has overcome the world: our belief.
5 Who is the one who overcomes the world but he
who believes that [vWHY is the Bĕn of HWHY?
6 This is the One that came by water and blood:
[vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, not only by water, but by water
and blood. And it is the Ruaḥ who bears witness,
because the Ruaḥ is the Truth.
7 Because there are three who bear witness:
8 the Ruaḥ, and the water, and the blood. And the
three are in agreement.
9 If we receive the witness of men, the witness of
Elohim is greater, because this is the witness of HWHY
which He has witnessed concerning His Bĕn.
10 The one who believes in the Bĕn of HWHY has the
witness in himself, the one who does not believe
HWHY has made Him a liar, because he has not
believed the witness that HWHY has given concerning
His Bĕn.
2785

1 JOHN

And this is the witness: that HWHY has given us
everlasting ḥai, and this ḥai is in His Bĕn.
12 He who possesses the Bĕn possesses ḥai, he who
does not possess the Bĕn of HWHY does not possess
ḥai.
13 I have written this to you who believe in the Name
of the Bĕn of HWHY, so that you know that you
possess everlasting ḥai, and so that you believe in the
Name of the Bĕn of HWHY.
14 And this is the boldness that we have in Him, that
if we ask whatever according to His desire, He hears
us.
15 And if we know that He hears us, whatever we ask,
we know that we have the petitions that we have
asked of Him.
16 If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin, not unto
death, he shall ask, and He shall give him ḥai for
those not sinning unto death. There is a sin unto
death. I do not say that he should pray about that.
17 All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not
unto death.
18 We know that everyone having been born of
Elohim does not sin, but the one having been born of
Elohim guards himself, and the wicked one does not
touch him.
19 We know that we are of Elohim, and all the world
lies in the wicked one.
20 And we know that the Bĕn of HWHY has come and
has given us an understanding, so that we might
know the true One. And we are in the true One, in His
Bĕn [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ. This is the true Elohim and
everlasting ḥai.
21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amĕn.
11

2786

2 JOHN

YOḤANAN 2
‫ יהוחנן ב‬B !!XWhY

1 The elder, to a chosen Kuria and her children,
whom I love in truth, and not only I, but also all those
who have known the truth,
2 because of the truth which stays in us and shall be
with us forever:
3 Favour, compassion, peace be with you from
HWHY the Father, and from the Aḏon [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ, the Bĕn of the Father, in truth and love.
4 I rejoiced greatly because I found some of your
children walking in truth, as we received a command
from the Father.
5 And now I ask you, Kuria, not as though I wrote a
fresh command to you, but that which we have had
from the beginning: that we love one another.
6 And this is the love, that we walk according to His
Commands. This is the Command, that as you have
heard from the beginning, you should walk in it.
7 Because many who are leading astray went out
into the world who do not confess [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ
as coming in the flesh. This one is he who is leading
astray and the anti-messiah.
8 See to yourselves, that we do not lose what we
worked for, but that we might receive a complete
reward.
9 Everyone who is transgressing and not staying in
the teaching of Mashiaḥ does not possess Elohim.
The one who stays in the teaching of Mashiaḥ
possesses both the Father and the Bĕn.
10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this
teaching, do not receive him into your house nor greet
him,
2787

YOḤANAN 2

for he who greets him shares in his wicked works.
12 Having much to write to you, I did not want to do
so with paper and ink, but I expect to come to you and
speak face to face, so that our joy might be complete.
13 The children of your chosen sister greet you.
Amĕn
11

2788

3 JOHN

YOḤANAN 3
‫ יהוחנן ג‬g !!XWhY

1 The elder, to the beloved Gaios, whom I love in
truth:
2 Beloved ones, I pray for you to do well in every
way, and be in health, as your life is doing well.
3 For I rejoiced greatly when brothers came and
witnessed of the truth in you, as you walk in the truth.
4 I have no greater joy than to hear of my children
walking in truth.
5 Beloved ones, you are acting trustworthy in
whatever you do for the brothers and for strangers,
6 who have borne witness of your love before the
assembly. If you send them forward worthily of
Elohim, you shall do well,
7 because they went out for the sake of the Name,
receiving naught from the gentiles.
8 Therefore we ought to receive such, so that we
become fellow workers for the truth.
9 I wrote to the assembly, but Diotrephĕs, who loves
to be the first among them, does not receive us.
10 So if I come, I shall call to mind his works which
he does, babbling against us with wicked words. And
not satisfied with that, he himself does not receive the
brothers, and forbids those who want to, putting them
out of the assembly.
11 Beloved ones, do not imitate the evil, but the good.
The one who is doing good is of Elohim, but he who
is doing evil has not seen Elohim.
12 Dĕmĕtrìos has a good witness from all, and from
the truth itself. And we also bear witness, and you
know that our witness is true.
2789

YOḤANAN 3

I had much to write, but I do not want to write to
you with pen and ink,
14 but I expect to see you shortly, and we shall speak
face to face. Peace to you. The friends greet you.
Greet the friends by name.
13

2790

JUDE

YAHUḎAH
‫ יהודה‬hdWhY

1 Yahuḏah, a servant of [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, and
brother of Ya’aqoḇ, to those who are called, qadosh by
HWHY the Father, and preserved in [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ:
2 Compassion, and peace, and love be increased to
you.
3 Beloved ones, making all haste to write to you
concerning our common deliverance, I felt the
necessity to write to you urging you to earnestly
contend for the belief which was once for all delivered
to the qodeshim.
4 For certain men have slipped in, whose judgment
was written about long ago, wicked ones corrupting
the favour of our Elohim for indecency, and denying
the only Aḏon HWHY and our Aḏon [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ.
5 But I intend to remind you, though you once knew
this, that HWHY, having saved a people out of the land
of Mitsrayim, afterward destroyed those who did not
believe.
6 And the messengers who did not keep their own
principality, but left their own dwelling, He has kept in
everlasting shackles under darkness for the judgment
of the great day.
7 Even as Seḏom and Amorah and the cities around
them in a similar way to these, having given
themselves over to whoring and gone after strange
flesh, are put forth as an example, undergoing judicial
punishment of everlasting fire.
8 In the same way, indeed, these dreamers defile
the flesh, and reject authority, and speak evil of
esteemed ones.
2791

YAHUḎAH

But Miḵa’ĕl the chief messenger, in contending
with the devil, when he disputed about the body of
Mosheh, presumed not to bring against him a
blasphemous accusation, but said, “HWHY rebuke
you!”
10 But these blaspheme that which they do not know.
And that which they know naturally, like unreasoning
beasts, in these they corrupt themselves.
11 Woe to them! Because they have gone in the way
of Qayin, and gave themselves to the delusion of
Bil’am for a reward, and perished in the rebellion of
Qoraḥ.
12 These are rocky reefs in your love feasts, feasting
with you, feeding themselves without reverence,
waterless clouds borne about by the winds, late
autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, pulled up by
the roots,
13 wild waves of the sea foaming up their own
shame, straying stars for whom blackness of
darkness is kept forever.
14 And Ḥanoḵ, the seventh from Aḏam, also naḇu of
these, saying, “See, HWHY comes with His myriads of
qodeshim,
15 to execute judgment on all, to punish all who are
wicked among them concerning all their wicked works
which they have committed in a wicked way, and
concerning all the harshness which wicked sinners
have spoken against Him.”
16 These are grumblers, complainers, who walk
according to their own lusts, and their mouth speaks
proudly, admiring appearance for the sake of gain.
17 But you, beloved ones, remember the words
spoken before by the emissaries of our Aḏon [vWHY
ha’Mashiaḥ,
9

2792

JUDE

because they told you that there would be
mockers in the last times who would walk according
to their own wicked lusts.
19 These are the ones who cause divisions, not
having the Ruaḥ.
20 But you, beloved ones, building yourselves up on
your most qodesh belief, praying in the Ruaḥ
ha’Qodesh,
21 keep yourselves in the love of Elohim, looking for
the compassion of our Aḏon [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ unto
everlasting ḥai.
22 And show compassion toward some who are
doubting,
23 but others save with fear, snatching them out of
the fire, hating, even the garment defiled by the flesh.
24 And to Him who is able to keep you from
stumbling, and to present you blameless before the
presence of His esteem with exceeding joy,
25 to the only wise Elohim, our Saviour, be esteem
and greatness and might and authority, both now and
forever. Amĕn.
18

2793

REVELATION

ḤAZON
‫! חזון‬WzXb

1 Revelation of [VWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, which Elohim
gave Him to show His servants what has to take place
with speed. And He signified it by sending His
messenger to His servant Yoḥanan,
2 who bore witness to the Word of HWHY, and the
witness of [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ - to all he saw.
3 Baruḵ is he who reads and those who hear the
words of this neḇuah, and guard what is written in it,
for the time is near.
4 Yoḥanan, to the seven assemblies that are in Asia:
Favour to you and peace from Him who is and who
was and who is coming, and from the seven Ruaḥoth
that are before His throne,
5 and from [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ, the trustworthy
Witness, the first-born from the dead, and the ruler of
the sovereigns of the earth. To Him who loved us and
washed us from our sins in His own blood,
6 and has made us sovereigns and kohenim to His
Elohim and Father, to Him be esteem and rule forever
and ever. Amĕn.
7 See, He is coming with the clouds, and every eye
shall see Him, even they who pierced Him. And all the
tribes of the earth shall mourn because of Him. Yes,
Amĕn.
8 “I am the ‘Aleph’ and the ‘Tau’, Beginning and
End,” says HWHY “who is and who was and who is to
come, Ĕl Shaddai.”
9 I, Yoḥanan, both your brother and co-sharer in
pressure, and in the reign and endurance of [vWHY
2794

ḤAZON

ha’Mashiaḥ, came to be on the island that is called
Patmos for the Word of HWHY and for the witness of
[vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.
10 I came to be in the Ruaḥ on the Day of HWHY, and
I heard behind me a loud voice, as of a trumpet,
11 saying, “I am the ‘Aleph’ and the ‘Tau’, the First
and the Last,” and, “Write in a book what you see and
send it to the seven assemblies of Asia - to Ephesos,
and to Smurna, and to Pergamos, and to Thuatira,
and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodikeia.”
12 And I turned to see the voice which spoke with me.
And having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
13 and in the midst of the seven lampstands One like
the Bĕn of Aḏam, dressed in a robe down to the feet
and girded about the chest with a golden band.
14 And His head and hair were white as white wool,
as snow, and His eyes as a flame of fire,
15 and His feet like burnished brass, as if refined in a
furnace, and His voice as the sound of many waters.
16 And in His right hand He held seven stars, and out
of His mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and His
face was as the sun shining in its strength.
17 And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead, and
He placed His right hand on me, saying, “Do not be
afraid, I am the First and the Last,
18 and the living One. And I became dead, and see,
I am living forever and ever. Amĕn. And I possess the
keys of the grave and of death.
19 “Write therefore what you have seen, both what is
now and what shall take place after these:
20 “The secret of the seven stars which you saw in
My right hand, and the seven golden lampstands: The
seven stars are messengers of the seven assemblies,
2795

REVELATION

and the seven lampstands which you saw are seven
assemblies.

2 “To the messenger of the assembly of Ephesos
write, ‘He who is holding the seven stars in His right
hand, who is walking in the midst of the seven golden
lampstands, says this:
2 “I know your works, and your labour, and your
endurance, and that you are not able to bear evil
ones, and have tried those who say they are
emissaries and are not, and have found them false;
3 and you have been bearing up and have
endurance, and have laboured for My Name’s sake
and have not become weary.
4 “But I hold this against you, that you have left your
first love.
5 “So remember from where you have fallen, and
repent and do the first works, or else I shall come to
you speedily and remove your lampstand from its
place, unless you repent.
6 “Yet this you have, that you hate the works of the
Nikolaitĕns, which I also hate.
7 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes I shall
give to eat from the tree of ḥai, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of Elohim.” ’
8 “And to the messenger of the assembly in Smurna
write, ‘This says the First and the Last, who became
dead, and came to ḥai:
9 “I know your works, and pressure, and poverty yet you are rich - and the blasphemy of those who say
they are Yahuḏim and are not, but are a congregation
of Satan.
2796

ḤAZON

“Do not be afraid of what you are about to suffer.
See, the devil is about to throw some of you into
prison, in order to try you, and you shall have
pressure ten days. Be trustworthy until death, and I
shall give you the crown of ḥai.
11 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies. He who overcomes shall by
no means be harmed by the second death.” ’
12 “And to the messenger of the assembly in
Pergamos write, ‘He who has the sharp two-edged
sword, says this:
13 “I know your works, and where you dwell, where
the throne of Satan is. And you hold fast to My Name,
and did not deny the belief in Me, even in the days in
which Antipas was My trustworthy witness, who was
killed near you, where Satan dwells.
14 “But I hold a little against you, because you have
there those who adhere to the teaching of Bil’am, who
taught Balaq to put a stumbling-block before the
children of Yisra’ĕl, to eat offerings to idols, and to
commit whoring.
15 “So you also have those who adhere to the
teaching of the Nikolaitĕns, which I hate.
16 “Repent, or else I shall come to you speedily and
fight against them with the sword of My mouth.
17 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes I shall
give some of the hidden manna to eat. And I shall give
him a white stone, and on the stone a renewed Name
written which no one knows except him who receives
it.” ’
10

2797

REVELATION

“And to the messenger of the assembly in Thuatira
write, ‘This says the Bĕn of HWHY, who has eyes like
a flame of fire, and His feet like burnished brass:
19 “I know your works, and love, and service, and
belief, and your endurance. And as for your works,
the last are more than the first.
20 “But I hold against you that you allow that woman
lzeḇel, who calls herself a prophetess, to teach and
lead My servants astray to commit whoring and to eat
offerings to idols.
21 “And I gave her time to repent of her whoring, and
she did not repent.
22 “See, I am throwing her into a sickbed, and those
who commit adultery with her into great affliction,
unless they repent of their works.
23 “And I shall slay her children with death. And all
the assemblies shall know that I am the One
searching the kidneys and hearts. And I shall give to
each one of you according to your works.
24 “And to you I say, and to the rest in Thuatira, as
many as do not possess this teaching, and who have
not known the depths of Satan, as they call them, I
am not putting on you another burden.
25 “But hold fast what you have until I come.
26 “And he who overcomes, and guards My works
until the end, to him I shall give authority over the
nations,
27 and he shall shepherd them with a rod of iron, as
the potter’s vessels shall be broken to pieces, as I
also have received from My Father.
28 “And I shall give him the morning star.
29 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says
to
the
assemblies.”
’
18

2798

ḤAZON

3 “And to the messenger of the assembly in Sardis
write, ‘He who has the seven Ruaḥoth of Elohim and
the seven stars, says this, “I know your works, that
you have a name that you are alive, but you are dead.
2 “Wake up, and strengthen what remains and is
about to die, for I have not found your works complete
before Elohim.
3 “Remember, then, how you have received, and
heard. And watch and repent. If, then, you do not
wake up, I shall come up on you as a thief, and you
shall not know at all what hour I come upon you.
4 “Nevertheless, you have a few names in Sardis
who have not defiled their garments. And they shall
walk with Me in white, because they are worthy.
5 “He who overcomes shall be dressed in white
robes, and I shall by no means blot out his name from
the Book of Ḥai, but I shall confess his name before
My Father and before His messengers.
6 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies.” ’
7 “And to the messenger of the assembly in
Philadelphia write, ‘He who is qodesh, He who is true,
He who has the key of Dawiḏ, He who opens and no
one shuts, and shuts and no one opens, says this:
8 “I know your works - see, I have put before you an
open door, and no one is able to shut it - that you have
little power, yet have guarded My Word, and have not
denied My Name.
9 “See, I am giving up those of the congregation of
Satan, who say they are Yahuḏim and are not, but lie.
See, I am making them come and worship before
your feet, and to know that I have loved you.
2799

REVELATION

“Because you have guarded My Word of
endurance, I also shall guard you from the hour of trial
which shall come upon all the world, to try those who
dwell on the earth.
11 “See, I am coming speedily! Hold what you have
that no one take your crown.
12 “He who overcomes, I shall make him a supporting
post in the Mishkan of My Elohim, and he shall by no
means go out. And I shall write on him the Name of
My Elohim and the name of the city of My Elohim, the
renewed Yerushalayim, which comes down out of the
shamayim from My Elohim, and My renewed Name.
13 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies.” ’
14 “And to the messenger of the assembly in
Laodikeia write, ‘The Amĕn, the Trustworthy and True
Witness, the Beginning of the creation of HWHY, says
this:
15 “I know your works, that you are neither cold nor
hot. I would that you were cold or hot.
16 “So, because you are lukewarm, and neither cold
nor hot, I am going to vomit you out of My mouth.
17 “Because you say, ‘Rich I am, and I am made rich,
and need none at all,’ and do not know that you are
wretched, and pitiable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.
18 “I advise you to buy from Me gold refined in the
fire, so that you become rich; and white garments, so
that you become dressed, so that the shame of your
nakedness might not be shown; and anoint your eyes
with ointment, so that you see.
19 “As many as I love, I reprove and discipline. So be
ardent and repent.
10

2800

ḤAZON

“See, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone
hears My voice and opens the door, I shall come in to
him and dine with him, and he with Me.
21 “To him who overcomes I shall give to sit with Me
on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with
My Father on His throne.
22 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Ruaḥ
says to the assemblies.” ’ ”
20

4 After this I looked and saw a door having been
opened in the shamayim. And the first voice which I
heard was like a trumpet speaking with me, saying,
“Come up here and I shall show you what has to take
place after this.”
2 And immediately I came to be in the Ruaḥ and saw
a throne placed in the shamayim, and seated on the
throne.
3 And He who sat there was like a jasper and a ruby
stone in appearance. And there was a rainbow
around the throne, like an emerald in appearance.
4 And around the throne were twenty-four thrones,
and on the thrones I saw twenty-four elders sitting,
dressed in white robes. And they had crowns of gold
on their heads.
5 And out of the throne came lightnings, and
thunders, and voices. And seven lamps of fire were
burning before the throne, which are the seven
Ruaḥoth of Elohim.
6 And before the throne there was a sea of glass,
like crystal. And in the midst of the throne, and around
the throne, were four living creatures, covered with
eyes in front and in back.
7 And the first living creature was like a lion, and the
second living creature like a calf, and the third living
2801

REVELATION

creature had a face like a man, and the fourth living
creature was like a flying eagle.
8 And the four living creatures, each having six
wings, were covered with eyes around and within.
And they do not cease, day or night, saying, “qodesh,
qodesh, qodesh, HWHY Ĕl Shaddai, who was, and
who is, and who is coming!”
9 And when the living creatures give esteem and
respect and thanks to Him who sits on the throne,
who lives forever and ever,
10 the twenty-four elders fall down before Him who
sits on the throne and bow before Him who lives
forever and ever, and they cast their crowns before
the throne, saying,
11 “You are worthy, O HWHY, to receive esteem and
respect and power, for You have created all, and
because of Your desire they are, and were created.”

5 And I saw in the right hand of Him who sat on the
throne a scroll written inside and on the back, having
been sealed with seven seals.
2 And I saw a strong messenger proclaiming with a
loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to
loosen its seals?”
3 And no one in the shamayim or on the earth or
under the earth was able to open the scroll, or to look
at it.
4 And I wept much, because no one was found
worthy to open and read the scroll, or to look at it.
5 And one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep.
See, the Lion of the tribe of Yahuḏah, the Root of
Dawiḏ, overcame to open the scroll and to loosen its
seven seals.”
2802

ḤAZON

And I looked and saw in the midst of the throne
and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the
elders a Lamb standing, as having been slain, having
seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven
Ruaḥoth of Elohim sent out into all the earth.
7 And He came and took the scroll out of the right
hand of Him sitting on the throne.
8 And when He took the scroll, the four living
creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before
the Lamb, each holding a harp, and golden bowls
filled with incense, which are the prayers of the
qodeshim.
9 And they sang a renewed song, saying, “You are
worthy to take the scroll, and to open its seals,
because You were slain, and have redeemed us to
HWHY by Your blood out of every tribe and tongue and
people and nation,
10 and made us sovereigns and kohenim to our
Elohim, and we shall reign upon the earth.”
11 And I looked, and I heard the voice of many
messengers around the throne, and the living
creatures, and the elders. And the number of them
was myriads of myriads, and thousands of thousands,
12 saying with a loud voice, “Worthy is the Lamb
having been slain to receive power and riches and
wisdom, and strength and respect and esteem and
beraḵah!”
13 And every creature which is in the shamayim and
on the earth and under the earth and such as are in
the sea, and all that are in them, I heard saying, “To
Him sitting on the throne, and to the Lamb, be the
beraḵah and the respect and the esteem and the
might, forever and ever!”
6

2803

REVELATION

And the four living creatures said, “Amĕn!” And the
twenty-four elders fell down and bowed before Him
who lives forever and ever.

14

6 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals,
and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, like
a sound of thunder, “Come and see.”
2 And I looked and saw a white horse, and he who
sat on it holding a bow. And a crown was given to him,
and he went out overcoming and to overcome.
3 And when He opened the second seal, I heard the
second living creature saying, “Come and see.”
4 And another horse, fiery red, went out. And it was
given to the one who sat on it to take peace from the
earth, and that they should slay one another. And a
great sword was given to him.
5 And when He opened the third seal, I heard the
third living creature say, “Come and see.” And I
looked and saw a black horse, and he who sat on it
holding a pair of scales in his hand.
6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the four living
creatures saying, “A measure of wheat for a denarius,
and three measures of barley for a denarius. And do
not harm the oil and the wine.”
7 And when He opened the fourth seal, I heard the
voice of the fourth living creature saying, “Come and
see.”
8 And I looked and saw a pale horse. And he who
sat on it had the name Death, and the grave followed
with him. And authority was given to them over a
fourth of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger,
and with death, and by the beasts of the earth.

2804

ḤAZON

And when He opened the fifth seal, I saw under
the altar the beings of those having been slain for the
Word of HWHY and for the witness which they held,
10 and they cried with a loud voice, saying, “How
long, O Aḏonai, qodesh and true, until You judge and
avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?”
11 And there was given to each one a white robe, and
they were told that they should rest a little while
longer, until both their fellow servants and their
brothers, who would be killed as they were, reached
completion.
12 And I looked when He opened the sixth seal and
saw a great earthquake came to be. And the sun
became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood.
13 And the stars of the shamayim fell to the earth, as
a fig tree drops its unripe figs, being shaken by a
strong wind.
14 And the shamayim departed like a scroll being
rolled up, and every mountain and island was moved
out of its place.
15 And the sovereigns of the earth, and the great
ones, and the rich ones, and the commanders, and
the mighty, and every slave and every free one, hid
themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the
mountains,
16 and said to the mountains and rocks, “Fall on us
and hide us from the face of Him sitting on the throne
and from the wrath of the Lamb,
17 because the great day of His wrath has come, and
who is able to stand?”
9

2805

REVELATION

7 And after this I saw four messengers standing at
the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of
the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth,
nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
2 And I saw another messenger coming up from the
rising of the sun, holding the seal of the living Elohim.
And he cried with a loud voice to the four messengers
to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea,
3 saying, “Do not harm the earth, nor the sea, nor
the trees until we have sealed the servants of our
Elohim upon their foreheads.”
4 And I heard the number of those who were sealed,
one hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed out of all
the tribes of the children of Yisra’ĕl:
5 of the tribe of Yahuḏah twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Re’uḇĕn twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Gaḏ twelve thousand were
sealed,
6 of the tribe of Ashĕr twelve thousand were sealed,
of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand were sealed,
of the tribe of Menashsheh twelve thousand were
sealed,
7 of the tribe of Shim’on twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Lĕwi twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Yissasḵar twelve thousand were
sealed,
8 of the tribe of Zeḇulun twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Yosĕph twelve thousand were
sealed, of the tribe of Binyamin twelve thousand were
sealed.
9 After this I looked and saw a great crowd which no
one was able to count, out of all nations and tribes
2806

ḤAZON

and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne
and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, and
palm branches in their hands,
10 and crying out with a loud voice, saying,
“Deliverance belongs to our Elohim who sits on the
throne, and to the Lamb!”
11 And all the messengers stood around the throne
and the elders and the four living creatures, and fell
on their faces before the throne and worshipped
Elohim,
12 saying, “Amĕn! The beraḵah, and the esteem, and
the wisdom, and the thanksgiving, and the respect,
and the power, and the might, to our Elohim forever
and ever. Amĕn.”
13 And one of the elders responded, saying to me,
“Who are these dressed in white robes, and where
did they come from?”
14 And I said to him, “Master, you know.” And he said
to me, “These are those coming out of the great
distress, having washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb.
15 “Because of this they are before the throne of
Elohim, and serve Him day and night in His Dwelling
Place. And He who sits on the throne shall dwell
among them.
16 “They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any
more, neither shall the sun strike them, nor any heat,
17 because the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne
shall shepherd them and lead them to fountains of
waters of ḥai. And Elohim shall wipe away every tear
from their eyes.”

2807

REVELATION

8 And when He opened the seventh seal, there came
to be silence in the shamayim for about half an hour.
2 And I saw the seven messengers who stand
before Elohim, and to them were given seven
trumpets.
3 And another messenger came and stood at the
altar, holding a golden censer, and much incense was
given to him, that he should offer it with the prayers of
all the qodeshim upon the golden altar which was
before the throne.
4 And the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of
the qodeshim, went up before Elohim from the hand
of the messenger.
5 And the messenger took the censer, and filled it
with fire from the altar, and threw it to the earth. And
there were noises, and thunders, and lightnings, and
an earthquake.
6 And the seven messengers who held the seven
trumpets prepared themselves to sound.
7 And the first messenger sounded, and there came
to be hail and fire mixed with blood, and they were
thrown to the earth. And a third of the trees were
burned up, and all green grass was burned up.
8 And the second messenger sounded, and as it
were, a great mountain burning with fire was thrown
into the sea, and a third of the sea became blood,
9 and a third of the living creatures in the sea died,
and a third of the ships were destroyed.
10 And the third messenger sounded, and a great
star fell from the shamayim, burning like a torch, and
it fell on a third of the rivers and on the fountains of
water,
2808

ḤAZON

and the name of the star is called Wormwood. And
a third of the waters became wormwood, and many
men died from the waters, because they were made
bitter.
12 And the fourth messenger sounded, and a third of
the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a
third of the stars, so that a third of them were
darkened. And a third of the day did not shine, and
likewise the night.
13 And I looked, and I heard an eagle flying in midshamayim, crying with a loud voice, “Woe, woe, woe
to those dwelling upon the earth, because of the
remaining blasts of the trumpet of the three
messengers who are about to sound!”
11

9 And the fifth messenger sounded, and I saw a star
from the shamayim which had fallen to the earth. And
the key to the pit of the deep was given to it.
2 And he opened the pit of the deep, and smoke
went up out of the pit like the smoke of a great
furnace. And the sun was darkened, also the air,
because of the smoke of the pit.
3 And out of the smoke locusts came upon the earth,
and authority was given to them as the scorpions of
the earth possess authority.
4 And it was said to them that they shall not harm
the grass of the earth, or anything green, or any tree,
but only those men who do not have the seal of HWHY
upon their foreheads.
5 And it was given to them that they should not kill
them, but to torture them for five months. And their
torture was like the torture of a scorpion when it stings
a man.
2809

REVELATION

And in those days men shall seek death and shall
not find it. And they shall long to die, but death shall
flee from them.
7 And the locusts looked like horses prepared for
battle, and on their heads were crowns like gold, and
their faces were like the faces of men.
8 And they had hair like women’s hair, and their
teeth were like lions’ teeth.
9 And they had breastplates like breastplates of
iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound
of chariots of many horses running into battle.
10 And they have tails like scorpions, and stings. And
in their tails is their authority to harm men five months.
11 And they have over them a sovereign, the
messenger of the pit of the deep, whose name in lḇri
is Abaddon, but in Yawanite he has the name
Apolluon.
12 The first woe is past. See, two woes are still
coming after this.
13 And the sixth messenger sounded, and I heard a
voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is
before Elohim,
14 saying to the sixth messenger who had the
trumpet, “Release the four messengers, those having
been bound at the great river Perath.”
15 And the four messengers, those having been
prepared for the hour and day and month and year,
were released to kill a third of mankind.
16 And the number of the armies of the horsemen
was two hundred million, and I heard the number of
them.
17 And this is how I saw the horses in the vision and
those who sat on them, having breastplates of fiery
6

2810

ḤAZON

red, and hyacinth blue, and sulphur yellow. And the
heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and
out of their mouths came fire, and smoke, and
sulphur.
18 A third of mankind was killed by these three, by
the fire and the smoke and the sulphur which came
out of their mouths.
19 For the authority of the horses is in their mouth and
in their tails, for their tails are like serpents, having
heads. And with them they do harm.
20 And the rest of mankind, who were not killed by
these plagues, did not repent of the works of their
hands, that they should not worship the demons, and
idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone,
and of wood, which are neither able to see, nor to
hear, nor to walk.
21 And they did not repent of their murders, nor of
their drug sorceries, nor of their whoring, nor of their
thefts.

10 And I saw another strong messenger coming
down from the shamayim, robed in a cloud, and a
rainbow on his head, and his face was like the sun, and
his feet like columns of fire,
2 and having in his hand a little book opened. And
he placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on
the land,
3 and cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roars.
And when he cried out, seven thunders spoke their
sounds.
4 And when the seven thunders spoke their sounds,
I was about to write, but I heard a voice from the

2811

REVELATION

shamayim saying to me, “Seal up what the seven
thunders spoke, and do not write them.”
5 And the messenger whom I saw standing on the
sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to the
shamayim,
6 and swore by Him who lives forever and ever, who
created the shamayim and what is in it, the earth and
what is in it, and the sea and what is in it, that there
shall be no further delay,
7 but in the days of the sounding of the seventh
messenger, when he is about to sound, the secret of
Elohim shall also be ended, as He declared to His
servants the neḇi’im.
8
And the voice which I heard out of the shamayim
spoke to me again and said, “Go, take the little book
which is opened in the hand of the messenger
standing on the sea and on the earth.”
9 And I went to the messenger and said to him,
“Give me the little book.” And he said to me, “Take
and eat it, and it shall make your stomach bitter, but
it shall be as sweet as honey in your mouth.”
10 And I took the little book out of the messenger’s
hand and ate it, and it was as sweet as honey in my
mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach was
made bitter.
11 And he said to me, “You have to naḇa again
concerning many peoples and nations and tongues
and sovereigns.”

11 And a reed like a rod was given to me, and the
messenger stood, saying, “Rise and anoint the
Mishkan of Elohim, and the altar, and those
worshipping in it.
2812

ḤAZON

“But cast out the court which is outside the
Mishkan, and do not anoint it, for it has been given to
the gentiles, and they shall trample the qodesh city
under foot for forty-two months.
3 “And I shall give unto my two witnesses, and they
shall naḇa one thousand two hundred and sixty days,
clad in sackcloth.”
4 These are the two olive trees and the two
lampstands that are standing before the Elohim of the
earth.
5 And if anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out
from their mouth and consumes their enemies. And if
anyone wants to harm them, he has to be killed in that
way.
6 These possess authority to shut the shamayim, so
that no rain falls in the days of their neḇuah. And they
possess authority over waters to turn them to blood,
and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as
they want.
7 And when they have ended their witness, the
beast coming up out of the pit of the deep shall fight
against them, and overcome them, and kill them,
8 and their dead bodies lie in the street of the great
city which spiritually is called Seḏom and Mitsrayim,
where also our Aḏon was impaled,
9 and some of the peoples and tribes and tongues
and nations see their dead bodies for three and a half
days, and do not allow their dead bodies to be placed
into tombs,
10 and those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them
and exult. And they shall send gifts to each other,
because these two neḇi’im tortured those dwelling on
the earth.
2

2813

REVELATION

And after the three and a half days a spirit of ḥai
from Elohim entered into them, and they stood upon
their feet, and great fear fell on those who saw them.
12 And they heard a loud voice from the shamayim
saying to them, “Come up here.” And they went up
into the shamayim in a cloud, and their enemies saw
them.
13 And in that hour there came to be a great
earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell. And in the
earthquake seven thousand men were killed, and the
rest became afraid and gave esteem to the Elohim of
the shamayim.
14 The second woe is past, and see, the third woe is
coming speedily.
15 And the seventh messenger sounded, and there
came to be loud voices in the shamayim, saying, “The
reign of this world has become that of our Aḏon, and
of His Mashiaḥ, and He shall reign forever and ever!”
16 And the twenty-four elders sitting before Elohim on
their thrones fell on their faces and worshipped
Elohim,
17 saying, “We give You thanks, O HWHY Ĕl Shaddai,
the One who is and who was and who is coming,
because You have taken Your great power and
reigned.
18 “And the nations were enraged, and Your wrath
has come, and the time of the dead to be judged, and
to give the reward to Your servants the neḇi’im and to
the qodeshim, and to those who revere Your Name,
small and great, and to destroy those who destroy the
earth.”
19 And the Mishkan of Elohim was opened in the
shamayim, and the ark of His Covenant was seen in
11

2814

ḤAZON

His Mishkan. And there came to be lightnings, and
voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and great
hail.

12 And a great sign was seen in the shamayim: a
woman clad with the sun, with the moon under her feet,
and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
2 And being pregnant, she cried out in labour and in
pain to give birth.
3 And another sign was seen in the shamayim: and
see, a great, fiery red dragon having seven heads and
ten horns, and seven crowns on his heads.
4 And his tail draws a third of the stars of the
shamayim and throws them to the earth. And the
dragon stood before the woman who was about to
give birth, to devour her child as soon as it was born.
5 And she bore a male child who was to shepherd
all nations with a rod of iron. And her child was caught
away to Elohim and to His throne.
6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where
she has a place prepared by Elohim, to be nourished
there one thousand two hundred and sixty days.
7 And there came to be fighting in the shamayim:
Miḵa’ĕl and his messengers fought against the
dragon. And the dragon and his messengers fought,
8 but they were not strong enough, nor was a place
found for them in the shamayim any longer.
9 And the great dragon was thrown out, that serpent
of old, called the Devil and Satan, who leads all the
world astray. He was thrown to the earth, and his
messengers were thrown out with him.
10 And I heard a loud voice saying in the shamayim,
“Now have come the deliverance and the power and
2815

REVELATION

the reign of our Elohim, and the authority of His
Mashiaḥ, for the accuser of our brothers, who
accused them before our Elohim day and night, has
been thrown down.
11 “And they overcame him because of the Blood of
the Lamb, and because of the Word of their witness,
and they did not love their lives to the death.
12 “Because of this, rejoice O shamayim, and you
who dwell in them! Woe to the earth and the sea,
because the devil has come down to you, having
great wrath, knowing that he has little time.”
13 And when the dragon saw that he had been
thrown to the earth, he persecuted the woman who
gave birth to the male child.
14 And the woman was given two wings of a great
eagle, to fly into the wilderness to her place, where
she is nourished for a time and times and half a time,
from the presence of the serpent.
15 And out of his mouth the serpent spewed water
like a river after the woman, to cause her to be swept
away by the river.
16 And the earth helped the woman, and the earth
opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which
the dragon had spewed out of his mouth.
17 And the dragon was enraged with the woman, and
he went to fight with the remnant of her seed, those
guarding the Commands of HWHY and possessing the
witness of [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ.

13 And I stood on the sand of the sea. And I saw
a beast coming up out of the sea, having seven heads
and ten horns, and on his horns ten crowns, and on
his heads names of blasphemy.
2816

ḤAZON

And the beast I saw was like a leopard, and his
feet were like the feet of a bear, and his mouth like
the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave him his
power, and his throne, and great authority.
3 And I saw one of his heads, as having been slain
to death, and his deadly wound was healed. And all
the earth marvelled after the beast.
4 And they worshipped the dragon who gave
authority to the beast. And they worshipped the beast,
saying, “Who is like the beast? Who is able to fight
with him?”
5 And he was given a mouth speaking greatness
and blasphemies, and he was given authority to do so
forty-two months.
6 And he opened his mouth in blasphemies against
HWHY, to blaspheme His Name, and His Tent, and
those dwelling in the shamayim.
7 And it was given to him to fight with the qodeshim
and to overcome them. And authority was given to
him over every tribe and tongue and nation.
8 And all those dwelling on the earth, whose names
have not been written in the Book of Ḥai of the slain
Lamb, from the foundation of the world shall worship
him.
9 If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
10 He who brings into captivity shall go into captivity,
he who kills with the sword has to be killed with the
sword. Here is the endurance and the belief of the
qodeshim.
11 And I saw another beast coming up out of the
earth, and he had two horns like a lamb and spoke
like a dragon.
12 And he exercises all the authority of the first beast
in his presence, and causes the earth and those who
dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.
2

2817

REVELATION

And he does great signs, so that he even makes
fire come down from the shamayim on the earth
before men.
14 And he leads astray those dwelling on the earth
because of those signs which he was given to do
before the beast, saying to those dwelling on the
earth to make an image to the beast who was
wounded by the sword, yet lived.
15 And there was given to him to give spirit to the
image of the beast, that the image of the beast should
both speak and cause to be killed as many as would
not worship the image of the beast.
16 And he causes all, both small and great, and rich
and poor, and free and slave, to be given a mark upon
their right hand or upon their foreheads,
17 and that no one should be able to buy or sell
except he that has the mark or the name of the beast,
or the number of his name.
18 Here is the wisdom! He who has understanding,
let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is the
number of a man, and his number is 666.
13

14 And I looked and saw a Lamb standing on Mount
Tsiyon, and with Him one hundred and forty-four
thousand, having His Father’s Name written upon their
foreheads.
2
And I heard a voice out of the shamayim, like the
voice of many waters, and like the voice of loud
thunder, and I heard the sound of harpists playing
their harps.
3
And they sang a renewed song before the throne,
and before the four living creatures, and the elders.
And no one was able to learn that song except the
hundred and forty-four thousand who were redeemed
from the earth.
2818

ḤAZON

They are those who were not defiled with women,
for they are maidens. They are those following the
Lamb wherever He goes. They were redeemed from
among men, being first-fruits to HWHY and to the
Lamb.
5
And in their mouth was found no falsehood, for
they are blameless before the throne of Elohim.
6
And I saw another messenger flying in midshamayim, holding the everlasting Good News to
announce to those dwelling on the earth, even to
every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
7
saying with a loud voice, “Revere Elohim and give
esteem to Him, because the hour of His judgment has
come. And worship Him who made the shamayim and
the earth, and sea, and fountains of water.”
8
And another messenger followed, saying, “Baḇel
is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she has
made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
whoring.”
9
And a third messenger followed them, saying with
a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and his
image, and receives his mark upon his forehead or
upon his hand,
10 he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of HWHY,
which is poured out undiluted into the cup of His
wrath. And he shall be tortured with fire and sulphur
before the qodesh messengers and before the Lamb.
11 “And the smoke of their torture goes up forever
and ever. And they have no rest day or night, those
worshipping the beast and his image, also if anyone
receives the mark of his name.”
4

2819

REVELATION

Here is the endurance of the qodeshim, here are
those guarding the Commands of HWHY and the belief
of [vWHY.
13 And I heard a voice out of the shamayim saying to
me, “Write, ‘Baruḵ are the dead who die in the Aḏon
from now on.’ ” “Yes,” says the Ruaḥ, “in order that
they rest from their labours, and their works follow
with them.”
14 And I looked and saw a white cloud, and sitting on
the cloud was One like the Bĕn of Aḏam, having on
His head a golden crown, and in His hand a sharp
sickle.
15 And another messenger came out of the Mishkan,
crying with a loud voice to the One sitting on the
cloud, “Send Your sickle and reap, because the hour
has come for You to reap, because the harvest of the
earth is ripe.”
16 And the One sitting on the cloud thrust in His sickle
on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
17 And another messenger came out of the Mishkan
which is in the shamayim, and he too held a sharp
sickle.
18 And another messenger came out from the altar,
having authority over the fire, and he cried with a loud
cry to him having the sharp sickle, saying, “Send your
sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the
earth, because her grapes are ripe.”
19 And the messenger thrust his sickle into the earth
and gathered the vine of the earth, and threw it into
the great winepress of the wrath of HWHY.
20 And the winepress was trodden outside the city,
and blood came out of the winepress, up to the bridles
12

2820

ḤAZON

of the horses, for about one thousand, six hundred
stadion.

15 And I saw another sign in the shamayim, great
and marvellous: seven messengers having the seven
last plagues, for the wrath of HWHY was ended in them.
2 And I saw like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and
those overcoming the beast and his image and his
mark and the number of his name, standing on the
sea of glass, holding harps of Elohim.
3 And they sing the song of Mosheh the servant of
HWHY, and the song of the Lamb, saying, “Great and
marvellous are Your works, HWHY Ĕl Shaddai!
Righteous and true are Your Ways, O Sovereign of
the qodeshim!
4 “Who shall not revere You, O HWHY, and esteem
Your Name? Because You alone are kind. Because
all nations shall come and worship before You, for
Your righteousnesses have been made manifest.”
5 And after this I looked and saw the Mishkan of the
Tent of Witness in the shamayim was opened.
6 And out of the Mishkan came the seven
messengers having the seven plagues, dressed in
clean bright linen, and having their chests girded with
golden bands.
7 And one of the four living creatures gave to the
seven messengers seven golden bowls filled with the
wrath of HWHY who lives forever and ever.
8 And the Mishkan was filled with smoke from the
esteem of Elohim and from His power, and no one
was able to enter the Mishkan until the seven plagues
of the seven messengers were ended.

2821

REVELATION

16 And I heard a loud voice from the Mishkan
saying to the seven messengers, “Go and pour out
the bowls of the wrath of HWHY on the earth.”
2 And the first went and poured out his bowl upon
the earth, and an evil and wicked sore came upon the
men, those having the mark of the beast and those
worshipping his image.
3 And the second messenger poured out his bowl
on the sea, and it became blood, as of a dead one,
and every living creature in the sea died.
4 And the third messenger poured out his bowl on
the rivers and fountains of water, and they became
blood.
5 And I heard the messenger of the waters saying,
“You are righteous, O HWHY, the One who is and who
was and who shall be, because You have judged
these.
6 “Because they have shed the blood of qodeshim
and neḇi’im, and You have given them blood to drink
for they deserve it.”
7 And I heard another out of the altar saying, “Yes,
HWHY Ĕl Shaddai, true and righteous are Your
judgments.”
8 And the fourth messenger poured out his bowl on
the sun, and it was given to him to burn men with fire.
9 And men were burned with great heat, and they
blasphemed the Name of HWHY who possesses
authority over these plagues. And they did not repent,
to give Him esteem.
10 And the fifth messenger poured out his bowl on
the throne of the beast, and his reign became
darkened. And they gnawed their tongues from pain.
2822

ḤAZON

And they blasphemed the Elohim of the shamayim
for their pains, and their sores, and did not repent of
their works.
12 And the sixth messenger poured out his bowl on
the great river Perath, and its water was dried up, in
order to prepare the way of the sovereigns from the
east.
13 And I saw, out of the mouth of the dragon, and out
of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet, three unclean spirits, as frogs,
14 for they are spirits of demons, doing signs, which
go out to the sovereigns of the entire world, to gather
them to the battle of that great day of HWHY Ĕl
Shaddai.
15 “See, I am coming as a thief. Baruḵ is he who is
staying awake and guarding his garments, lest he
walk naked and they see his shame.”
16 And they gathered them together to the place
called in Iḇri, Har Meḡiddo.
17 And the seventh messenger poured out his bowl
into the air, and a loud voice came out of the Mishkan
of the shamayim, from the throne, saying, “It is done!”
18 And there came to be noises and thunders and
lightnings. And there came to be a great earthquake,
such a mighty and great earthquake as had not came
to be since men were on the earth.
19 And the great city became divided into three parts,
and the cities of the nations fell. And great Baḇel was
remembered before Elohim, to give her the cup of the
wine of the fierceness of His wrath.
20 And every island fled away, and the mountains
were not found.
11

2823

REVELATION

And great hail from the shamayim fell upon men,
every hailstone about the weight of a talanton. And
men blasphemed Elohim for the plague of the hail,
because that plague was exceedingly great.

21

17 And one of the seven messengers who had the
seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying to me,
“Come, I shall show you the judgment of the great
whore sitting on many waters,
2 with whom the sovereigns of the earth committed
whoring, and the inhabitants of the earth were made
drunk with the wine of her whoring.”
3 And he carried me away in the Ruaḥ into the
wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet
beast covered with names of blasphemy, having
seven heads and ten horns.
4 And the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet,
and adorned with gold and precious stones and
pearls, holding in her hand a golden cup filled with
abominations and the filthiness of her whoring,
5 and upon her forehead a name written, a secret:
BAḆEL THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE
WHORES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE
EARTH.
6 And I saw the woman, drunk with the blood of the
qodeshim, and with the blood of the witnesses of
[vWHY. And having seen her, I marvelled - greatly
marvelled!
7 And the messenger said to me, “Why did you
marvel? Let me explain to you the secret of the
woman and of the beast she rides, which has the
seven heads and the ten horns.

2824

ḤAZON

“The beast that you saw was, and is not, and is
about to come up out of the pit of the deep and goes
to destruction. And those dwelling on the earth,
whose names are not written in the Book of Ḥai from
the foundation of the world, shall marvel when they
see the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
9
“Here is the mind having wisdom: The seven
heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits.
10 “And there are seven sovereigns: five have fallen,
and one is, and the other has not yet come. And when
he comes, he has to remain a little while.
11 “And the beast that was, and is not, is himself also
the eighth, and is of the seven, and goes to
destruction.
12 “And the ten horns which you saw are ten
sovereigns who have not yet received a reign, but
receive authority as sovereigns with the beast for one
hour.
13 “They have one mind, and they shall give their
power and authority to the beast.
14 “They shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them, for He is Aḏon of masters and
Sovereign of sovereigns. And those with Him are
called, and chosen, and trustworthy.”
15 And he said to me, “The waters which you saw,
where the whore sits, are peoples, and crowds, and
nations, and tongues.
16 “And the ten horns which you saw on the beast,
these shall hate the whore, and lay her waste and
naked, and eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
17 “For Elohim gave it into their hearts to do His mind,
to be of one mind, and to give their reign to the beast,
until the words of Elohim shall be accomplished.
8

2825

REVELATION

“And the woman whom you saw is that great city
having sovereignty over the sovereigns of the earth.”

18

18 And after this I saw another messenger coming
down from the shamayim, having great authority, and
the earth was lightened from his esteem.
2 And he cried with a mighty voice, saying, “Baḇel
the great is fallen, is fallen, and has become a
dwelling place of demons, a haunt for every unclean
spirit, and a haunt for every unclean and hated bird,
3 because all the nations have drunk of the wine of
the wrath of her whoring, and the sovereigns of the
earth have committed whoring with her, and the
merchants of the earth have become rich through the
power of her riotous living.”
4 And I heard another voice from the shamayim
saying, “Come out of her, my people, lest you share
in her sins, and lest you receive of her plagues.
5 “Because her sins have piled up to reach the
shamayim, and Elohim has remembered her
unrighteousnesses.
6 “Render to her as she indeed rendered, and repay
her double according to her works. In the cup which
she has mixed, mix for her double.
7 “As much as she esteemed herself and lived
luxuriously, so much torture and grief give to her,
because in her heart she says, ‘I sit as sovereigness,
and I am not a widow, and I do not see mourning at
all.’
8 “Because of this her plagues shall come in one
day: death and mourning and scarcity of food. And
she shall be burned up with fire, because HWHY
Elohim who judges her is mighty.
2826

ḤAZON

“And the sovereigns of the earth who committed
whoring and lived luxuriously with her shall weep and
mourn over her, when they see the smoke of her
burning,
10 standing at a distance for fear of her torture,
saying, ‘Woe! Woe, the great city Baḇel, the mighty
city, because your judgment has come in one hour!’
11 “And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn
over her, because no one buys their merchandise any
more 12 merchandise of gold and silver, and precious
stone and pearls, and fine linen and purple, and silk
and scarlet, and all citron wood, and every object of
ivory, and every object of most precious wood and
bronze and iron and marble,
13 and cinnamon and incense, and fragrant oil and
frankincense, and wine and oil, and fine flour and
wheat, and cattle and sheep, and horses and
carriages, and bodies and lives of men.
14 “And the fruit that your being longed for has gone
from you. And all your riches and splendour are lost
to you, and you shall find them no more, not at all.
15 “The merchants of these, those who became rich
by her, shall stand at a distance for fear of her torture,
weeping and mourning,
16 and saying, ‘Woe! Woe, the great city that was
dressed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, and
adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls!
17 ‘For in one hour such great riches was laid waste.’
And every shipmaster, and every passenger, and
sailors, and as many as work the sea, stood at a
distance,
9

2827

REVELATION

and cried out when they saw the smoke of her
burning, saying, ‘What is like this great city?’
19 “And they threw dust on their heads and cried out,
weeping and mourning, and saying, ‘Woe! Woe, the
great city, in which all who had ships on the sea
became rich by her wealth! For in one hour she was
laid waste.’
20 “Rejoice over her, O shamayim, and you qodesh
emissaries and neḇi’im, for HWHY has completely
avenged you on her!”
21 And one mighty messenger picked up a stone like
a great millstone and threw it into the sea, saying,
“With such a rush the great city Baḇel shall be thrown
down, and shall not be found any more at all.
22 “And the sound of harpists, and musicians, and
flutists, and trumpeters shall not be heard in you any
more at all. And no craftsman of any trade shall be
found in you any more at all. And the sound of a
millstone shall not be heard in you any more at all.
23 “And the light of a lamp shall not shine in you any
more at all. And the voice of bridegroom and bride
shall not be heard in you any more at all. For your
merchants were the great ones of the earth, for by
your drug sorcery all the nations were led astray.
24 “And in her was found the blood of neḇi’im and
qodeshim, and of all who were slain on the earth.”
18

19 And after this I heard a loud voice of a great
crowd in the shamayim, saying, “HalleluYah!
Deliverance and esteem and respect and power to
HWHY our Elohim!
2 “Because true and righteous are His judgments,
because He has judged the great whore who
2828

ḤAZON

corrupted the earth with her whoring. And He has
avenged on her the blood of His servants shed by
her.”
3 And a second time they said, “HalleluYah! And her
smoke rises up forever and ever!”
4 And the twenty-four elders and the four living
creatures fell down and worshipped Elohim who sat
on the throne, saying, “Amĕn! HalleluYah!”
5 And a voice came from the throne, saying, “Praise
our Elohim, all you His servants and those who revere
Him, both small and great!”
6 And I heard as the voice of a great crowd, as the
sound of many waters and as the sound of mighty
thunders, saying, “HalleluYah, for HWHY Ĕl Shaddai
reigns!
7 “Let us be glad and rejoice and give Him praise,
for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife
prepared herself.”
8 And to her it was given to be dressed in fine linen,
clean and bright, for the fine linen is the
righteousnesses of the qodeshim.
9 And he said to me, “Write, ‘Baruḵ are those who
have been called to the marriage supper of the Lamb!’
” And he said to me, “These are the true words of
Elohim.”
10 And I fell at his feet to worship him, but he said to
me, “See, do not! I am your fellow servant, and of your
brothers who possess the witness of [vWHY. Worship
HWHY! For the witness of [vWHY is the spirit of
neḇuah.”
11 And I saw the shamayim opened, and there was a
white horse. And He who sat on him was called
2829

REVELATION

Trustworthy and True, and in righteousness He
judges and fights.
12 And His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on His
head were many crowns, having a Name that had
been written, which no one had perceived except
Himself.
13 And having been dressed in a robe dipped in blood
- and His Name is called: The Word of HWHY.
14 And the armies in the shamayim, dressed in fine
linen, white and clean, followed Him on white horses.
15 And out of His mouth goes a sharp sword, that with
it He should smite the nations. And He shall shepherd
them with a rod of iron. And He treads the winepress
of the fierceness and wrath of Ĕl Shaddai.
16 And on His robe and on His banner He has a name
written: SOVEREIGN OF SOVEREIGNS AND AḎON
OF MASTERS.
17 And I saw one messenger standing in the sun, and
he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that
fly in mid-shamayim, “Come and gather together for
the supper of the great Elohim,
18 to eat the flesh of sovereigns, and the flesh of
commanders, and the flesh of strong ones, and the
flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and the
flesh of all people, free and slave, both small and
great.”
19 And I saw the beast, and the sovereigns of the
earth, and their armies, gathered together to fight Him
who sat on the horse and His army.
20 And the beast was seized, and with him the false
prophet who worked signs in his presence, by which
he led astray those who received the mark of the
beast and those who worshipped his image. The two
2830

ḤAZON

were thrown alive into the lake of fire burning with
sulphur.
21 And the rest were killed with the sword which
came from the mouth of Him who sat on the horse,
and all the birds were filled with their flesh.

20 And I saw a messenger coming down from the
shamayim, having the key to the pit of the deep and a
great chain in his hand.
2 And he seized the dragon, the serpent of old, who
is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand
years,
3 and he threw him into the pit of the deep, and shut
him up, and put a seal on him, so that he should lead
the nations no more astray until the thousand years
were ended. And after that he has to be released for
a little while.
4 And I saw thrones - and they sat on them, and
judgment was given to them - and the lives of those
who had been beheaded because of the witness they
bore to [vWHY and because of the Word of HWHY, and
who did not worship the beast, nor his image, and did
not receive his mark upon their foreheads or upon
their hands. And they lived and reigned with Mashiaḥ
for a thousand years.
5 And the rest of the dead did not come to ḥai until
the thousand years were ended - this is the first
resurrection.
6 Baraḵ and qodesh is the one having part in the first
resurrection. The second death possesses no
authority over these, but they shall be kohenim of
HWHY and of Mashiaḥ, and shall reign with Him a
thousand years.
2831

REVELATION

And when the thousand years have ended, Satan
shall be released from his prison,
8 and he shall go out to lead the nations astray
which are in the four corners of the earth, Goḡ and
Maḡoḡ, to gather them together for battle, whose
number is as the sand of the sea.
9 And they came up over the breadth of the earth
and surrounded the camp of the qodeshim and the
beloved city. And fire came down from Elohim out of
the shamayim and consumed them.
10 And the devil, who led them astray, was thrown
into the lake of fire and sulphur where the beast and
the false prophet are. And they shall be tortured day
and night forever and ever.
11 And I saw a great white throne and Him who was
sitting on it, from whose face the earth and the
shamayim fled away, and no place was found for
them.
12 And I saw the dead, small and great, standing
before the throne, and books were opened. And
another Book was opened, which is Ḥai. And the
dead were judged from what was written in the books,
according to their works.
13 And the sea gave up the dead who were in it, and
death and the grave gave up the dead who were in
them. And they were judged, each one according to
his works.
14 And the death and the grave were thrown into the
lake of fire. This is the second death.
15 And if anyone was not found written in the Book of
Ḥai, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
7

2832

ḤAZON

21 And I saw a renewed shamayim and a renewed
earth, for the former shamayim and the former earth
had passed away, and the sea is no more.
2 And I, Yoḥanan, saw the qodesh city, renewed
Yerushalayim, coming down out of the shamayim
from Elohim, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband.
3 And I heard a loud voice from the shamayim
saying, “See, the Booth of Elohim is with men, and He
shall dwell with them, and they shall be His people,
and Elohim Himself shall be with them and be their
Elohim.
4 “And Elohim shall wipe away every tear from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor
mourning, nor crying. And there shall be no more
pain, for the former have passed away.”
5 And He who was sitting on the throne said, “See,
I make all new.” And He said to me, “Write, for these
words are true and trustworthy.”
6 And He said to me, “It is done! I am the ‘Aleph’ and
the ‘Tau’, the Beginning and the End. To the one who
thirsts I shall give of the fountain of the water of ḥai
without payment.
7 “The one who overcomes shall inherit all this, and
I shall be his Elohim and he shall be My son.
8 “But as for the cowardly, and untrustworthy, and
abominable, and murderers, and those who whore,
and drug sorcerers, and idolaters, and all the false,
their part is in the lake which burns with fire and
sulphur, which is the second death.”
9 And one of the seven messengers who held the
seven bowls filled with the seven last plagues came
2833

REVELATION

to me and spoke with me, saying, “Come, I shall show
you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.”
10 And he carried me away in the Ruaḥ to a great and
high mountain, and showed me the great city, the
qodesh Yerushalayim, descending out of the
shamayim from Elohim,
11 having the esteem of Elohim, and her light was like
a most precious stone, like a jasper stone, clear as
crystal,
12 and having a great and high wall, having twelve
gates, and at the gates twelve messengers, and
names written on them, which are of the twelve tribes
of the children of Yisra’ĕl:
13 three gates on the east, three gates on the north,
three gates on the south, and three gates on the west.
14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations,
and on them were the names of the twelve emissaries
of the Lamb.
15 And he who spoke with me had a golden
measuring rod, to measure the city, and its gates, and
its wall.
16 And the city lies four-cornered, and its length is as
great as its breadth. And he measured the city with
the rod: twelve thousand stadion - the length, and the
breadth, and height of it are equal.
17 And he measured its wall: one hundred and fortyfour ammah, according to the measure of a man, that
is, of a messenger.
18 And the structure of its wall was jasper. And the
city was clean gold, like clear glass.
19 And the foundations of the wall of the city were
adorned with all kinds of precious stones: the first
2834

ḤAZON

foundation jasper, the second sapphire, the third
agate, the fourth emerald,
20 the fifth sardonyx, the sixth ruby, the seventh
chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth
chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth
amethyst.
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls - each
one of the gates was a single pearl. And the street of
the city was clean gold, like transparent glass.
22 And I saw no Mishkan in it, for HWHY Ĕl Shaddai is
its Mishkan, and the Lamb.
23 And the city had no need of the sun, nor of the
moon, to shine in it, for the esteem of Elohim
lightened it, and the Lamb is its lamp.
24 And the nations, of those who are saved, shall
walk in its light, and the sovereigns of the earth bring
their esteem into it.
25 And its gates shall not be shut at all by day, for
night shall not be there.
26 And they shall bring the esteem and the
appreciation of the nations into it.
27 And there shall by no means enter into it whatever
is unclean, neither anyone doing abomination and
falsehood, but only those who are written in the
Lamb’s Book of Ḥai.

22 And he showed me a river of water of ḥai, clear
as crystal, coming from the throne of HWHY and of the
Lamb.
2 In the middle of its street, and on either side of the
river, was the tree of ḥai, which bore twelve fruits,
each tree yielding its fruit every month. And the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
2835

REVELATION

And no longer shall there be any curse, and the
throne of HWHY and of the Lamb shall be in it, and His
servants shall serve Him.
4 And they shall see His face, and His Name be
upon their foreheads.
5 And night shall be no more, and they shall have
no need of a lamp or the light of the sun, because
HWHY Elohim shall give them light. And they shall
reign forever and ever.
6 And he said to me, “These words are trustworthy
and true. And HWHY Elohim of the qodesh neḇi’im has
sent His messenger to show His servants what has to
take place with speed.
7 “See, I am coming speedily! Baruḵ is he who
guards the words of the neḇuah of this book.”
8 And I, Yoḥanan, saw and heard these. And when
I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet
of the messenger who showed me these.
9 And he said to me, “See, do not! For I am your
fellow servant, and of your brothers the neḇi’im, and
of those who are guarding the words of this book.
Worship HWHY.”
10 And he said to me, “Do not seal the words of the
neḇuah of this book, because the time is near.
11 “He who does wrong, let him do more wrong; he
who is filthy, let him be more filthy; he who is
righteous, let him be more righteous; he who is
qodesh, let him be more qodesh.
12 “And see, I am coming speedily, and My reward is
with Me, to give to each according to his work.
13 “I am the ‘Aleph’ and the ‘Tau’, the Beginning and
the End, the First and the Last.
3

2836

ḤAZON

“Baruḵ are those doing His Commands, so that the
authority shall be theirs unto the tree of ḥai, and to
enter through the gates into the city.
15 “But outside are the dogs and those who enchant
with drugs, and those who whore, and the murderers,
and the idolaters, and all who love and do falsehood.
16 “I, [vWHY, have sent My messenger to witness
these to you in the assemblies. I am the Root and the
Offspring of Dawiḏ, the Bright and Morning Star.”
17 And the Ruaḥ and the bride say, “Come!” And he
who hears, let him say, “Come!” And he who thirsts,
come! And he who desires it, take the water of ḥai
without paying!
18 For I witness to everyone hearing the words of the
neḇuah of this book: If anyone adds to them, HWHY
shall add to him the plagues that are written in this
book,
19 and if anyone takes away from the words of the
book of this neḇuah, HWHY shall take away his part
from the Book of Ḥai, and out of the qodesh city,
which are written in this Book.
20 He that bears witness of these says, “Yes, I am
coming speedily.” Amĕn. Yes, come, Aḏonai [vWHY!
21 The favour of our Aḏon [vWHY ha’Mashiaḥ be with
the qodeshim. Amĕn.
14

2837

Miqdash - Set-apart Place
(Sanctuary)
miqdashim - set-apart places
Mishkan - Dwelling Place
(Tabernacle)
Mishkanoth - Dwelling Places
Mitsrayim - Egypt
naḇi - prophet*
neḇi'im - prophets
neḇiyah - prophetess
naḇa - prophesy*/prophesying
naḇu - prophesied
neḇuah - prophecy
neḇuoth - prophecies
Paras - Persia
Pelesheth - Philistia
Pesaḥ - Passover
Perath - Euphrates
qodesh - set-apart (holy*)
qodeshah - set-apartness
(holiness)
qodeshi - set-apart one (saint*)
qodeshim - set-apart ones (saints)
qadosh - set-apart
(sanctify/sanctified)
Qadosh One - Set-apart One
Ruaḥ ha'Qodesh - Set-apart Spirit
(Holy* Spirit)
Ruaḥ - Spirit
Ruaḥoth - Spirits
Shabbath - Sabbath
Shabbathoth - Sabbaths
Shaḇuoth - Weeks
shamayim - heaven/s*
Sukkoth - Booths
talmid - taught one (disciple)
talmidim - taught ones (disciples)

GLOSSARY
HWHY -YHWH
[FWHY- Yahoshua
Aḏon / Aḏonai - Master / my
Master
ammah - cubit/s
Ashshur-Assyria
Ba'al* - Lord*
Baḇel - Babylon*
baraḵ - bless*/blesses/blessed
baruḵ - blessed
beraḵah - blessing
bireḵoth - blessings
Bĕn - Son
Dammeseq / Darmeseq Damascus
Ĕl/Eloah/Elohim - Almighty (God*)
Ĕl Shaddai - the Almighty
Gĕy-Hinnom - Hell*
Ḥai - Life*
Hallelu-Yah - you praise Yah
HalleliHWHY- I praise HWHY
Hallĕl Yah - Praise Yah
Hĕyḵal - Temple*
Iḇri / Iḇrim - Hebrew I Hebrews
Keruḇ / keruḇim - angelic being/s
kohĕn - priest*
kohenim - priests
kohĕn ha'gadol - high priest
kehunnah - priesthood
Maḏai - Media
Mashiaḥ - Messiah (Christ*)
ha'Mashiaḥ - the Messiah
Mashiaḥiyim - Messianic
Matstsoth - Unleavened Bread
messenger - angel*
2838

tehillah - psalm
tehillim - psalms
t’fillen - phylacteries/frontlets
Torah - Teaching, Law
Torot - Teachings, Laws
tsitsit - tassels
Yahuḏah - Judah
Yahuḏi - Jew/Jewish
Yahuḏim - Jews

Yawan - Greece
Yawanite - Greek
Yoḇĕl - Jubilee
Yom - Day
Yom ha’Kippurim - Day of
Atonement Yom
Yom Teruah - Day of Trumpets
* of pagan origin

2839

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Note: These conversions of weights and measures are
based on the best, conservative information available
to us from ancient sources. It isn't always possible to
be precise and some ancient measures definitely vary.
While every effort has been made to provide accurate
modern equivalencies, it should be noted that the
measures listed here vary from one ancient country to
another and from one era to another. Those measures
that apply exclusively to the Renewed Covenant
period are noted by the letters (RC).

WEIGHTS
Before the first coins were minted around 640 BCE,
merchants measured out pieces of silver and gold
according to weight. As a result, terms of weight (such
as sheqel, mina, and kiḵar) were also used to express
amounts of money.
UNIT
qesitah
gĕrah
beqa
pirn
sheqel
mina
kiḵar
talanton (RC)
litra (RC)

EQUAL TO
Unknown monetary unit
1/20th sheqel
10 gĕrahs
1 1/3 beqa
2 beqas
50 sheqels
3000 sheqels

2840

METRIC

IMPERIAL

0.57 g
5.7 g
7.6 g
11.4 g
570 g
34.2 kg
26 - 36 kg
340 g

0.02 oz
0.2 oz
0.27 oz
0.4 oz
1.26 lb
75.4 lb
57 - 80 lb
12 oz

LIQUID MEASURES
The standard liquid measure in Scripture is the bath.
The name "bath" is related to the Hebrew word for
daughter and may represent the capacity of the jars
young women used when carrying water from wells.
Since the bath varied between cultures and periods of
the ancient world, the liquid measures below should be
taken as approximations.
UNIT
log
hin
bath
ḥomer
metretes

EQUAL TO
1/12 hin
1/6 bath
1/10 homer
10 baths

METRIC
0.3 litres
3.8 litres
22.7 litres
227 litres
38-115 litres

IMPERIAL
0.67 pints
1 gallon
6 gallons
60 gallons
10-30 gallons

LENGTHS AND DISTANCES

The standard measurement of length in Scripture is
the ammah, which was based on the length of an
adult's forearm (from the tip of the fingers to the
elbow). This standard varied from place to place
throughout history.
UNIT
etsba
tophah
zereth
ammah
ammah (long)
qaneh
pekus (RC)
fathom (RC)
stadion (RC)
miliyon (RC)

EQUAL TO
1/4 tophah
4 etsba’oth
3 tephahoth
6 tephahoth
7 tephahoth
6 ammah
4 pekun (RC)
400 pekun (RC)
3,200 pekun (RC)
2841

METRIC
1.85 cm
7.4 cm
22.2 cm
44.5 cm
52.1 cm
2.67 m
42 - 48 cm
1.8 m
183 m
1.48 km

IMPERIAL
0.73”
2.92”
8.75”
17.5”
20.5”
8.76 ft
17”-19”
6ft
600 ft
4,854 ft

DRY MEASURES
The kor/homer was originally understood to be the
maximum amount a donkey could carry. The standard
upon which lesser measures are based is the ephah.
Since the ephah varied between the cultures and
periods of the ancient world, the dry measures below
should be taken as approximations.
UNIT
qab
omer
se’ah
ephah
lethek
kor
homer

EQUAL TO
1/18 ephah
1/10 ephah
2 hins
3 se’im
5 ephahs
10 ephahs
10 ephahs

METRIC
1.2 litres
2.2 litres
7.3 litres
22 litres
110 litres
220 litres
220 litres

IMPERIAL
1.3 quarts
2.3 quarts
7.7 quarts
23.3 quarts
25 gallons
50 gallons
50 gallons

PRONUNCIATION GUIDE
a - äh in ärm
ḇ - bh v as in vet
e - eh as in elm
ḏ - dh th as in them
i - ee as in ēel
ĕ- ey as in eight
o - oh as in on
ḡ - gh The ‘ḡ’ is pronounced as
u - oo as in üno
a soft aspirated g sound.
ḥ - (ch) The 'ḥ' and 'ḵ' are pronounced as
ḵ - (kh) the 'ch' in the German composer
Bach, or the Scottish Loch, like a
guttural, aspirated h sound.

2842

HEBREW ALEPH-BET
Below the transliterated English titles of the individual books
of Scripture, the titles have also been written in modern
Hebrew and paleo Hebrew script. The table below is given
to aid in the comparison between the two letter forms:

NAME
Aleph
Bĕt
Gimel
Dalet
Hay
Waw
Zayin
Ḥet
Tet
Yod
Kaph
Lamed
Mem
Nun
Sameḵ
Ayin
Peh
Tsadĕ
Qoph
Resh
Shin
Tau

MODERN
‫א‬
‫ב‬
‫ג‬
‫ד‬
‫ה‬
‫ו‬
‫ז‬
‫ח‬
‫ט‬
‫י‬
‫כ‬
‫ל‬
‫מ‬
‫נ‬
‫ס‬
‫ע‬
‫ּפ‬
‫צ‬
‫ק‬
‫ר‬
‫ש‬
‫ת‬

PALEO
A
B
g
d
h
W
z
X
j
Y
K
L
m
!
s
[
p
C
q
R
v
t

SOUND
Ah, Eh, Ee, Oh, Ooh (Variable)
B as in Bay or V as in Vase
G as in Grey or G (Soft G)
D as in Day or D as in They
H as in Hay
Ooh as in Too or Oh as in Obey
Z as in Zap
H as in Loch or Bach
T as in Tame
Y as in Yay
K as in Kay or K as in Bach
L as in Lay
M as in May
N as in Nay
S as in Say
Ah, Eh, Ee, Oh, Ooh (Variable)
P as in Pay or PH as in Phase
TS as in Its
Q as in Quay
R as in Ray
SH as in Shame or S as in Same
T as in Tame or Th as in They

2843

2844

2845

2846

2847

